

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Tuesday, 7 December 2021

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for coming for today’s session. I urge you to ensure that you follow the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs): COVID-19 is still there and a new variant is spreading faster. When you look at what is happening, you will hear it is already in Uganda. Therefore, we need to be very careful and keep safe. 

Let us have matters of national importance. (Dr Batuwa rose_) Yes, point of procedure?

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Three weeks ago, medical doctors went on strike and they are not in the hospitals. We have been having an impression that Government is working hard to get them back to work. Among the things they asked for are internal allowances, which were passed in the most recent supplementary budget. However, they have minimum demands, which when fulfilled, doctors will get back to work.  

Madam Speaker, it is important that they get back to work in the face of the new variant of COVID-19, whose threat and extent of damage, we have not yet ascertained. Doctors are saying that if their working environment can be secured - they are talking about personal protective equipment like face masks and other protective gear. They should have that and coincidentally, it is also very important to position us amidst the new variant. They are talking of the payment for the interns, the Shs 4 billion that the President pledged for their SACCO, compensation for the 80 doctors who succumbed to COVID-19. 

They are saying that if we can meet these minimum demands, they can get back to work. Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to invite the Leader of Government Business to give us an update about this position on the doctors’ strike amidst the threat that is before us? I beg to submit.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Government side?


2.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, my honourable colleague, for raising that important issue. 
It is true that the medical doctors under the Uganda Medical Association, met with His Excellency the President and they went through the issues that they thought Government should handle. Among them are the ones that you have listed. 

A committee was put in place, chaired by the Prime Minister, who has also written a commitment to ensure that those issues are handled. They came again and said that some of them needed immediate action before they could resume work. Yesterday, we had a discussion about these issues, and the Prime Minister is handling them. We hope that very soon, this matter will be resolved. 

As we wait for these issues to be handled, we continue to say say that you, doctors have done a good job and Government is on your side. It is our appeal to you to continue to work as we continue to handle these issues. I thank you. 

2.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The response by hon. Bahati on behalf of the Government is well appreciated. This is the third week and the way the honourable minister is communicating, it is as though the matters have since become private - between the Prime Minister and the doctors. 

The issues raised are in the public domain. Some of them are budgetary in nature and Parliament is the last in the budget process. Would the minister be kind enough to bring Parliament to speed on those outstanding issues, which we cannot handle as leaders of this country, to make sure that health workers go back to work and we secure the country? They have made this appear as if some of them are so private that we cannot even advise on how to handle this matter. I am not convinced and probably, the minister should divulge more so that we can know. What is it that is not very clear and we need a lot of convincing on? Some of these issues are budgetary and we are the Parliament of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. What I am meant to learn is that part of what we approved in the supplementary is supposed to pay those doctors. Therefore, we need to make sure that the doctors are paid because we are in a critical time. We need these doctors to be paid. Government Chief Whip, you are revising like you are going for an exam. You need to make sure that the doctors are paid and report back to the House. Thank you. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise through a procedural approach, where you presided over last week’s Parliament, and it went on record that you had received confirmation and assurances from the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs that come today, Tuesday, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, would be briefed about the UPDF expeditionary force in Congo.

Today is Tuesday and since reports emerged - it was in November - and we are now in December. What makes matters worse, is where the Government officials particularly, the Government Chief Whip going to the media to tell the country that “We cannot be hurried by Parliament; we shall go to Parliament and inform them as and when we wish to do so.” 

Madam Speaker, when you see this and you know a Member has just been a backbencher with us - (Laughter) - he has just been sharing matters of public concern and has been very passionate about constitutionalism and the rule of law. So, when he loses himself midway, we get concerned. 

Most importantly, are we procedurally right to proceed with the ruling of the Speaker in place and we do not see the minister coming up to tell the country on a matter regarding the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which we all swore to protect and defend? 

In that response what happens to the ruling of the Speaker in this House? From the time I have been here, the Speaker’s ruling can never be in vain. Those who are attempting to make the Speaker’s ruling useless, in vain and a by-the-way are forgetting themselves. They are forgetting the history of this country. 

Can Government come and tell us what is happening to the sons and daughters of this country? What is their mission? We are not enemies in this Parliament and we are ready to support Government but let the constitutional order be held high. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo. As a Member of Parliament, what hon. Ssekikubo is saying is correct. We are duty bound to ask questions and we are entitled to the answers. Sometimes, the answers may be immediate and at times, they may delay. 

As a presiding officer, I would like to assure you that the answer to this question will be availed. In fact, it is an item on the Order Paper and we will have a response to this. I would like you to keep your hope alive that we will have this response. Of course, even if we got it now, we cannot stop what is happening there. 

However, the question we should ask ourselves is; what motivated them, if they went there? There was a bomb blast. Did they go there before? We are going to have a response to that. The minister is coming and it is on the Order Paper today.

2.21
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding a new but very big wave of animal theft in Nakaseke. 

A big number of my people, specifically in the subcounties of Kasangombe, Kapeeka and Ssemuto have lost their animals. In a period of three months, they have stolen more than 1,000 heads of cattle. We have tried to report but all in vain. Animal rearing is one of the main sources of income in my area of Nakaseke but now, my people have become hopeless. We report to police but nothing is done. 

These thieves leave a letter saying that the person who has slaughtered this animal is a Muslim. Sometimes, they leave offals and tell owners that they can eat those ones. Some of the animals are taken alive. 
We are seeking Government intervention – at least to ensure that the hopes of the farmers in Nakaseke are brought back such that they can also have some hope of fighting poverty, given the prevailing economic situation in our country.

My prayer is that let us get some information from any Government official committing that they will ensure that these farmers’ animals are given safety. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Luttamaguzi. Government. People are losing their cows and yet, that is their source of income.

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel for my colleague and the people whom he represents. I think the best way would be to focus on the action. I am going to inform the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs so that a high level team from the police can be sent to the area to do thorough investigations and action is taken on the matter. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you kindly work together with the honourable member and ensure that we get a solution to this? 

MR TAYEBWA: Sure, we always work together.

2.24
MR MICHAEL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the fire that took the people of Entebbe by surprise. 

Last Sunday, 5 December in the evening, Kigungu Landing Site and the island was gutted by fire and over 500 units were destroyed. Property, businesses, fishing nets, blankets and many other things were lost. As I speak, our people have nowhere to sleep. They do not even have food because most of their businesses were destroyed by fire. 

My humble prayer is that urgent relief support be extended to these people in terms of food items, blankets, bed sheets, mattresses and others. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member is asking for food and non-food items to be given to his people. 

2.26
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Entebbe is very near. We usually first do assessment before sending items. So, a few minutes from now, I am going to instruct my office to call the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to send a team on ground to do an assessment. This is a very nearby place and we shall ensure action is taken. We shall also be in touch with hon. Kakembo. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, give me feedback that what Government Chief Whip commits is being done. Please, come to my office and give me feedback. 

2.27
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. In 2018, in Kole District, SAGE beneficiaries, over 500 names were deleted from the pay list. 

When we made a follow up on this, we were advised by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to compile the list of those whose names were deleted, including even photocopying their national identity cards. The Community Development Officers (CDO) of Kole compiled this list and sent it to the Ministry of Gender. At the moment, no response has been given.

Three weeks ago, SAGE officials made another payment. When they went, only 10 per cent of the names of the beneficiaries were found on the list, leaving all those beneficiaries whose names were omitted in tears. You can imagine an elderly person crying. 

As I speak, many of these elderly persons are dying because most of them look at the SAGE benefits as a source of their livelihood. Some of them are very weak. Some are carried on boda bodas to go for this money and when they get there, they find their names missing on the list. 

I would like to pray that the names of these elderly persons be put back on the pay list so that they are paid. These are senior citizens who helped this country a lot. Even us, Members of Parliament, who are here speaking in Parliament were enabled by these elders.


However, when we maltreat them like this and they die as we watch on, it may not be very good for us; they are the people that prayed and did everything for us and this country. I pray, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need a thorough analysis of the list of the beneficiaries of that SAGE and we may need a report from the ministry of gender on who the beneficiaries are, how they were determined and why some people’s names were deleted. Those must be answered.

3.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, you have guided very well. We are going to do that. I would like to inform colleagues that this is not only affecting Kole District. If you get interested in the SAGE programme in your constituencies, you will find that many areas are affected. It is better we share all these issues. However, in the meantime, for the case of Kole District, let us bring a statement to Parliament on Thursday detailing the update and solutions.

2.30
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On Saturday, Kagarama Town Council, Kajara County in Ntungamo District, was hit by a storm, which blew off the roof of one of the structures for Ihunga Polytechnic Institute. Many people’s homes in the villages of Ihunga, Nyamirembe and Kyabinengwa in Ihunga Subcounty were also affected. We lost crops most especially bananas and at the moment, people are wondering what next to do especially the ones in the polytechnic institute. 

Madam Speaker, my first prayer is that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees together with the ministry of education - as they can do - they know how to do their work concerning such disasters - comes to the rescue of the people of Kagarama Town Council and the surrounding villages.

Secondly, I pray that they do not deny those people a chance to reconstruct their roofs back as they did when a similar situation occurred in Kagamba Secondary School some years ago. The ministry started the process and stopped midway and up to now, the people there have never got what they asked for. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, this happened on Saturday and hon. Michael Timuzingu, I know, must be in touch with the CAO and the District Disaster Management Committee to make an assessment, which will be submitted to the OPM so that interventions made are well informed. We are going to follow up on that with him to ensure these people, indeed, get the help they need. Thank you.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the Government Chief Whip is: you know very well that the District Disaster Management Committees conduct needs assessments whenever these disasters hit yet, I have heard you saying that you have again to do another assessment with OPM. 

I am wondering what the relevancy of these District Disaster Management Committees is, if you do not believe in them. I am sure that Ntungamo District Disaster Management Committee has already submitted a report. Why don’t you believe in institutions as the Government?

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, if hon. Nambeshe, the Opposition Chief Whip, was very attentive, he would have noticed that I have already provided an answer to the question he is asking me. 

I said that the District Disaster Committee should do a report and submit it to OPM so that we can base on that to take action. I did not say that OPM is going to do its own assessment. I was thinking in the same line as my honourable colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes but the Opposition whip is only appealing to you to leave the institution to work independently. 

About leaving institutions to work - I remember two months ago, I suggested the creation of a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission - you cannot be running up and down all the time, as the Government Chief Whip. We must have a commission in place to always analyse such issues; it is a constitutional requirement.

If we can have that commission in place, it would help you because you cannot do everything; disasters keep occurring here and there.

2.35  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku):  Thank you. I sympathise with the community where the disaster occurred. However, for the polytechnic school, which is under the ministry of education, I would like to say that it is unfortunate it occurred at the time when the students had just reported. Nevertheless our teams are on the ground. There are others who are liaising with the district to do needs assessment.

I will make sure I add this polytechnic school to the list being handled by the technical team moving down to do a quick assessment and see what we can do to save the situation. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  As a ministry, you need to go there and see what can be done to the school now that the school is open. You need to rescue them very fast.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, what is further perturbing – and the honourable member has just said it to this House - is that some time ago, the same thing happened to Kagarama but to-date, it has never been fully restored. In my mind, as I was seated there, I kind of thought that this Ntungamo District is where the minister of education comes from; how come nothing has come to her attention? Probably, the honourable member is hurrying when the minister is taking charge and is considering a robust response.

Otherwise, for Ntungamo and the Member to be lamenting, yet, the education ministry - what is happening to other areas and other schools where nobody or kin eye is coming from? I am just wondering. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Of course, if there were such issues in other areas, people would come up and speak. The fact that she does not attend to such issues in Ntungamo means she is working on issues in the whole country. (Applause) I do not have to be working on issues affecting Ntungamo because I come from there.  Let us stop that kind of talk and we move on. The school will be worked on.

2.37
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, FORT PORTAL CENTRAL DIVISION, FORT PORTAL CITY): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Government spent a lot of time brainstorming on a solution that should address the household income of this country and they came up with the Parish Model. Parliament appropriated resources that have been sent to local governments.

To my consternation, as I was monitoring in my constituency, I was shocked to find the monies lying on the account.  When I asked the accounting officer of Fort Portal City to explain, he said that this money was sent without guidelines and they cannot spend it because they fear to be implicated and arrested for abuse of office.

This is something that shocked me. How can Government process and send money to the local government without guidelines on how the money should be utilised. I do not know whether this is across the country or it is for Fort Portal only but I thought that it is important that I raise this matter and we see it addressed.

My prayer is that it should be expeditiously addressed because the funds for the second quarter are already idle. It is not utilised and so, what is the whole essence of pushing these resources to the lower levels, yet, they cannot be accessed?

Madam Speaker, this Parliament, the people of Fort Portal Tourism City and I need an explanation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, we need an explanation on how you can send money without guidelines and whether this is affecting the whole country.

2.40
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, one reason I was late for around 10 minutes is that we were in that meeting about the Parish Development Model Inter-government Ministerial Meeting. We resolved that next week, we bring a comprehensive statement to the House on the model.

In the meantime, for this specific matter, please, allow me to raise it with the ministry of finance and the Ministry of Local Government, so that it is worked on. However, we want to bring a comprehensive statement to the House so that it can be debated and you help us to improve on whatever you are going to be doing with the Parish Development Model.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of clarification.
 
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It has become a culture that every time there is any rain in Uganda, the next thing we shall receive here are reports from MPs and a promise to help those people from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness.

The clarification I am seeking is, how many times and for how long will we be handling this matter in piecemeal? When will the scientists –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which matter do you mean?

MS NAMBOOZE: The issue of disaster preparedness.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does anybody control whether it rains or not?

MS NAMBOOZE: That is what I am going to indicate, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you control whether there is going to be a roof blown away?

MS NAMBOOZE: Your honour, if you give me a minute, I will state what I mean.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, my concern is; what is that particular thing we are not doing properly in Uganda that exposes the country to calamity after calamity? 

It would be proper for the Government to come up with a clear plan of working out issues of the environment. Otherwise, every other day, people come here and make complaints. Even me, I will come tomorrow, because there was rain in Mukono and we suffered from the same thing.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be okay –(Interruption)– I will take it.
MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, I appreciate the passion. You are advancing your point, indeed. The disasters are cutting across the country but I would like to inform the House that the Meteorological Department, which is under my ministry periodically forecasts the weather. 

We have the issue of climate change. Where the disasters are occurring, for example, in Bududa area – my uncle is there. It has become almost an annual thing - we have advised on what should be done. People ought to have moved away. Tree planting needs to be intensified. The conservation must be on top of the agenda.

Therefore, leaders, as hon. Nambooze is advancing, it is a message to all of us. We better do it right, you and I. When the Government has also done its part, we shall arrest the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the outcome of the meteorological department 100 per cent correct? The prediction? 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, to our standard, we have tried as a Meteorological Department. It cannot be 100 per cent correct but what I am appealing to the House to do is that the information, which is given – actually, we are even networked with the internal bodies. It gives us some good percentage, which we are not even using.

Madam Speaker, you can predict and say, “There will be heavy rains.” This House has even taken on to say our people –
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last time we discussed disasters in this House, there was a directive to the line minister of disaster to come up with a comprehensive report that this House debates and makes logical conclusions to that effect.

Also, the Committee on Presidential Affairs, was given the task of compiling a nationwide report about disasters in the country. Let the committee report be brought to this House and we discuss it. 

Could it be procedurally right that we hold on for a minute until the committee report is tabled here from the Committee on Presidential Affairs so that we can debate it and make inputs; enrich it and come to the conclusions, instead of handling it haphazardly at this point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Isaiah. We will wait for the report and continue with the debate on disaster.

2.47
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the curriculum that is being taught to our children.

I learnt with shock what our children, particularly the ones of P.6, have been taught especially in science. I came across a past paper of one of the pupils. The question was, “What is the role of Reproductive Health in Uganda?” The answer that this little girl gave, if I may quote is, “If need be, to legalise abortion.”
Madam Speaker, I would like to bring the Constitution to your attention. Article 22(2) says, “No person has a right to terminate life of an unborn child except as may be authorised by law.”

The textbook that I am making reference to is “Integrated Science, Longhorn, Pupils’ Book 6.” and this is what our children are being taught. 

We are about to reopen schools. My worry is that our children –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have a copy of that book so that we are also able to see it?

MS LUCY AKELLO: I just took a picture of the textbook but I can make a copy and table it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to have a look at the book because we may not fully believe what is being said. Of course, that book is not law but the minister in charge of education is here, and she will respond. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: Madam Speaker, my issue with this syllabus is that it is a whole topic on contraceptives being taught to children of 10 and 11 years; issues of tubal ligation, issues of abortion, issues of – (Interjection) Yes, information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give me your prayer? 

MS LUCY AKELLO: My prayer is: can the ministry of education withdraw this textbook and the curriculum so that our children are not taught things, which they are not supposed to be taught? 

Secondly, can we get adequate information regarding this immediately, especially before the schools reopen? Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Lucy Akello, for raising such an important matter, as it affects the future of our children.

The curriculum that the ministry of education was implementing before COVID-19 was the approved curriculum. Secondly, during this COVID-19 period, we were trying to review the curriculum to accommodate the time that these children have lost. However, this has not yet even started the implementation process; it is still an on-going process. The curriculum that is recognised in the Ministry of Education and Sports is the old curriculum. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of textbooks, the issue of materials circulating in the country, I want to make this clear: for any textbooks to be approved for use in school by the children, first of all, it has to go through a process. It must be approved by the National Curriculum Development Centre and it carries our logo - those are the authentic and approved textbooks that we recommend. 

However, in the event that anybody comes up and writes a textbook that has not been approved, we will look at that textbook and immediately withdraw it. As far as I know, Madam Speaker, the textbooks that our children are subjected to, they have to undergo a vigorous process of approval. 

Having said that, we all know that abortion is illegal as per our Constitution. The issue of contraceptives, we cannot discuss. My colleague, hon. Lucy Akello, was very much aware that in 2018, even while I was still in the Ministry of Health, we did not approve that policy. Therefore, if anybody is going behind the ministry of education, using something that has not been approved, I want to make this very clear that we will have to go and get those documents out and really denounce them because they might have not gone through our process of approval.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Moriku, you may not be sure whether it went through a process of approval or not; the best you can do is to go and look at that book and see whether it went through an approval process and report back. If possible, withdraw it from the curriculum. It is not good.

DR MORIKU: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Member rose_) No, I have already given a ruling. Let her go and look at it. Next item.

BILLS 
FIRST READING
THE MARKETS BILL, 2021

2.54
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Markets Bill, 2021” be read for the first time.

The Bill is accompanied by the relevant certificate of financial implications. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Rwabushaija. Is the Bill seconded? It is seconded by hon. Pacuto, hon. Ssemakula, hon. Mbwatekamwa, hon. Dorcas Acen and hon. Lucy Akello. This Bill is referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry in accordance with Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure.  

I am informed that it is supposed to go to the Committee on Local Governments as per Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure. Thank you, hon. Rwabushaija. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS AND CAPABILITIES OF FIRE RESPONSE SERVICES IN UGANDA

2.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, the ministers are not around as they are still in northern Uganda. They communicated and we request that you allow us next week, to present this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, the Ministers of Internal Affairs are in Karamoja. They wrote to the Speaker, asking for an extension of time for when they will present that report but they also said that they were already working on it.

Therefore, we will wait for the report on action taken, not what they are planning to do. You need to inform the ministers that we now need action that has been taken. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF INTERNATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION DAY, 9 DECEMBER 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Ethics and Integrity. 

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Ms Rose Lilly Akello): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a statement on the Commemoration of the International Anti-corruption Day, 2021. 

On 9 December 2021, Uganda will join the rest of the world in commemorating the International Anti-corruption Day, at Kololo Independence Ground. This will be the climax of several activities of the Anti-Corruption Campaign this year 2021, which is organised annually by the Anti-corruption agencies together with other stakeholders.

This day was designated by Resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003 of the United Nations General Assembly as the International Anti-Corruption Day. The day was designated for global observance to promote awareness about corruption, its dangers and how to combat and prevent it. Uganda ratified the convention and is one of the member states that annually undertake activities to commemorate it. 

The Anti-Corruption agencies and their stakeholders usually organise activities over a period of several weeks every year, with the climax on 9 December, to promote public participation in fighting corruption. 

The 2021 International Anti-Corruption Day seeks to highlight the rights and responsibilities of everyone - including states, Government officials, civil servants, law enforcement officers, media representatives, the private sector, civil society, academia, the public and youth - in tackling corruption under the theme, "Promoting Active Citizen Participation in Social Accountability". 

We all know the corrosive impact of corruption on the lives of the poor and the resultant sharp decline in trust the citizens can have in their governments. The objectives of commemorating this day are therefore:
    1) To raise public awareness on issues of corruption, ethics and integrity and enlist their support in the fight against graft. 
    2) To unite efforts of governments, business community, civil society and other sectors in the fight against graft.
    3) To amplify anti-corruption messages in all spheres of the country and encourage the public to demand corruption free services.
    4) To empower the general public to play an oversight role and report corruption. 
    5) To inform the general public about the evils of corruption and; 
    6) To share the achievements, challenges and way forward in the fight against corruption. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda has a number of anti-corruption agencies established by Government to reinforce the fight against corruption. These include the Inspectorate of Government, State House Anti-Corruption Unit, Office of the Auditor-General, the Accountant-General, Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA), Financial Intelligence Authority, Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID) of the Uganda Police Force and many others. 

We have also recently, with the great support of this House, amended the Leadership Code Act, which now provides detailed enforcement procedures and extends the mandate – As the Chair of the Inter-Agency Forum, the Directorate for Ethics and Integrity is mandated to coordinate these agencies in the fight against corruption. 

The achievements of these anti-corruption agencies and include: recovery of public funds with the Inspectorate of Government alone recovering over Shs 2 billion for the period since December 2020. This was money recovered through administrative action and it far exceeded the IG's annual target of Shs 1.5 billion. In addition, the IG recovered Shs 700 million through court orders. 

Other agencies like the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Office of the Auditor-General and State House Anti-Corruption Unit continue to make great strides towards the fight against corruption. The State House Anti-Corruption Unit, for example, conclusively investigated over 10,000 complaints that have a financial worth of Shs 287 billion. Through their interventions in the Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies, a total of Shs 29 billion was recovered. 

The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions has also been successful in making recoveries since December 2020. It has recovered over Shs 300 million and $ 34,000 from concluded corruption cases. In addition, the DPP secured anti-malarial drugs valued at Shs 28 million. The drugs were eventually handed over to Kawempe National Referral Hospital after the DPP made consultations with the Minister of Health on which Government facility should benefit from these drugs. 

The biggest challenge, however, remains the inadequate budgetary provisions and budget cuts to these agencies, which affect the implementation of their planned interventions. 

It is, therefore, my prayer that this House considers addressing the budgetary challenges that have continued to bedevil these agencies to facilitate their mandate to fight corruption, including the Directorate for Ethics and Integrity, which coordinates national efforts against corruption. The directorate alone has a funding gap of over Shs 8.2 billion this financial year.

Otherwise, corruption is out to undermine our growth and prosperity twice over – not only in the act of siphoning resources from their intended purposes but in the long-term effects of services not delivered. For example, vaccines not received, school supplies not delivered, roads never built and other issues. 

Lastly, it is my honour and privilege to extend a warm invitation to you, Madam Speaker, and the Members of this House and indeed, all Ugandans of different walks of life to this year's International Anti–Corruption Day commemoration event at Kololo Independence Grounds on 9 December 2021. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We can open this to a debate for 10 minutes. 

3.06
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Akello for the statement and for the challenges she has highlighted. It is gratifying to see Government still trying its best to come to grips with the scourge of corruption. 

Reports are worrisome. There is a worrying trend of the levels and the propensities of corruption. Without even amending the law, these IGG forms could be a very true pointer if you want to find the corrupt. It tells you to declare your assets and liabilities, those of your spouses, your children, local accounts and foreign accounts, motor vehicles, etcetera and then, you show your incomes, other incomes if you have any. Then they ask you to declare how you acquired those properties and that wealth. If we were to activate that, it would go a long way. 

I would like to thank the efforts being made but if you say the IGG was able to recover Shs 2 billion since December 2020 and now, we are in December 2021, yet the amounts being siphoned are in trillions – Shs 15 trillion and you are now talking about Shs 2 billion - You say the State House Anti-Corruption Unit investigated cases of over Shs 287 billion but you do not show what recovery is being done. Probably, we have too many cooks. Where do they share the mandate and where do they end? You have the State House Anti-Corruption Unit, you have the IGG, the CIID; in fact, the State House Anti-corruption Unit has rendered the IGG a lame duck. All the attention is on that State House Unit; an informal organisation. How can you leave the formal organisation and run to the informal organisation? It is making the IGG’s work look irrelevant. Once you talk about money and funding, these agencies, the minister is lamenting - even the Directorate of Integrity is handicapped because they have no funds.

I was in court this morning - Madam Speaker, once you want to fight corruption, it is a while chain. The JLOs - you cannot choose to facilitate and pay the judges well and other judicial officers but you leave out the prosecutors. The state attorneys are not poorly paid. The efforts to comfort them and promise them better pay are not working out.

The police and the investigating arms of Government are not working because they are handicapped. You cannot investigate cases of billions, yet, you earn a pantry of Shs 300,000. Something must be put on board for all these agencies; you must streamline all these agencies and facilitate them, if you are to make them accountable.

Lastly, I would like to ask the honourable minister, who is going to be the chief walker this time? The last time I checked, it was the President walking all the way, sweating and now, who is going to take the walk? What results did we get out of the last walk? Did we evaluate to see what efforts we got out of that walk? I will be glad, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ssekikubo, I am told the chief walker is going to be your good self. (Laughter)  Members, if you have spoken previously, do not even waste your time because we want everybody to speak.
3.10
MR ROBERT MIGGADE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is not the first time we are commemorating this day. A number of times, the Speaker has been part of this walk.

Despite all that, corruption remains part of our daily routine and it is the biggest number one problem to my party, the NRM. If there was no corruption, a number of our undertakings to the public would be achieved. When money is eaten from a road contract, it affects our party. When shoddy work is done at a school, this affects our party even when it is not the party, which is practicing this corruption.

Anyhow, Madam Speaker, if we are to go by the Transparency International reports, it is true that there has been an improvement. In 2019, Uganda was in position No.142; we are now in No. 138 – (Interjections) - yes, it is a class and a teacher would tell you to work harder. It is our duty, as Government to establish mechanisms of working harder now that we have seen some improvement. 

While in the region, we are not doing well, the Judiciary is one of the arms of Government that in one way or the other, can help us curb this because that is where the corrupt end up; some of the people arrested on corruption cases end up in court. However, in most cases, you see the “small fish” undergoing a number of punishments, yet, the “big fish,” normally find their way out.

It is our duty, as leaders, to help in fighting this corruption because it is a collective responsibility. Corruption starts right from the village to the sub county and to the district councils.

Madam Speaker, we need assistance because a number of times, I have heard that even Parliament is part of it - I do not know whether it is true but I have heard people, including some of our leaders, suggesting that. 

Therefore, it has to be a collective effort and I would be very comfortable that on one of the days, when we are commemorating corruption, we hear that such and such - we should be getting reports that name and shame. Otherwise, this business of hiding behind people where many are not reprimanded will not help us. It is the name-and-shame thing that will help us. We should have punitive measures. The laws provide for them but we do not see action. It is very common to find someone fighting corruption also seeking monetary value to help the corrupt yet such is the person supposed to be fighting it.

Madam Speaker, I propose that we work together with the Executive and the Judiciary to fight corruption as the number one cancer to this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, let us limit the debate to at least two minutes. We will have only five more people.

3.15
MR ISAAC KATENYA (Independent, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that the minister of ethics has addressed a number of issues in addition to mentioning a number of organisations that are involved in the fight against corruption. However, recently, when we moved with hon. Peter Ogwang around the country, in some of the areas especially in my district, we discovered that there is a lot of corruption. Very many chief administrative officers and district engineers have been arrested. 

I would think that if these organisations, which the minister of ethics has mentioned, extended their hand to these districts, corruption would reduce. 

I would think that the trillions of money, which hon. Ssekikubo has just talked about, would be recovered.
 
AS I speak, billions of money, which is being pumped into the districts, almost only 40 or 50 per cent of it is used on the activities it is meant for but the remaining money is swindled by the district officials. 

I would like to request the minister of ethics that as we go to commemorate the day for fighting corruption, you should be in a position to bite the people who encourage it especially at district level. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.17
MR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Madam Speaker, I am the Interim Chair of the African Parliamentary Network Against Corruption (APNAC). 

I rise to thank the minister of ethics for the statement that she has made on behalf of the Government as we prepare to commemorate or mourn the haemorrhage that corruption is causing our societies. 

Madam Speaker, the cancer of corruption spares none of us as individuals, our communities, local governments, ministries, departments, agencies, including the private sector; churches and mosques. 

As Parliament, we have a duty. Often times, we talk as if it is someone else that has to take action against corruption. Honourable colleagues, we are applauded as a country for having one of the best legal and regulatory frameworks. The 1970 Anti- Corruption law is archaic. 

We have a number of legal and regulatory instruments that have been tabled to us as Members of Parliament to look into; the whistle-blower’s Bill, the Access to Information Bill - an appropriate legal regime that is supposed to help us recover property stolen from the public. We are not doing enough as Members of Parliament to address that.

Secondly, we appreciate the efforts of the Government in putting in place a number of structures to fight corruption. These structures are starved – (Member timed out.)




3.20
MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason we celebrate the Anti-corruption Day is basically to articulate the efforts that we have taken as a country to fight corruption and how far we have gone in actually addressing the problem. 

I would propose today a robust approach to fighting corruption. Whereas a colleague had mentioned that we continue this routine declaration of our assets, I want to propose that let the assets declare the owners. How should it work? The IGG should announce, “In June this year, we shall be on Kampala road. All the owners of the said assets on Kampala Road must be there with their documents on how they acquired them.” The same with the bank accounts. The IGG should go to Bank A, ask: “Give me the list of accounts.” Check huge accounts there and then follow backwards. 
Who is the owner of this account? This one works in the Ministry of Works. Sir, is this your account? Yes. How did you accumulate this amount of money?”

Even if the bank accounts are in Dubai or in Europe, we should write to that Government to give us all the lists of bank accounts of Ugandans in Europe. Then we follow them. (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

3.22
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for this statement on the commemoration of International Day for Anti-corruption. 

I would like to implore the honourable minister that it is very gratifying as a country to know that we have gone a step further to be a signatory to the convention. We have also gone a step further to ratify all these in our legal instruments, which is guiding the various Anti-corruption agencies that you listed.

However, I think it is the right time that we move beyond that, to be able to have in-depth analysis, to understand. For the past 18 years when we ratified this convention, how much gains have we made? 

Also, on the other side of losses, how much have we lost? For example, during the period of COVID-19 when the people of Uganda have been in great need, how much have we lost? How have we strengthened the oversight? In terms of the level of transparency, what have we been able to achieve as a country? 

I think, honourable Minister, answering some of these questions honestly as a country, it will help to inform our next course of action. Otherwise, we seem to think that we have done quite a lot. I commend the Government that of course, there are some gains we have registered but once we know, that is when we will know how we can sustain the gains, and also go a step further in addressing the gaps we still have. 

Whatever the case, wherever we are, I still commend the Government. Through you, the minister – (Member timed out.)

3.24
MR ENOS ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to first thank the honourable minister for the statement on the Anti-corruption Day. 

My take on corruption is that as a generation, I think we need to deal with mind-set change. Genuinely, the generation ahead of us, our generation and that below us, we cannot change much regarding fighting corruption. We come here, talk and do that but we never act. 

As the current generation and as a Parliament, we need to deal with mind-set change. Let us legislate to support the young generations below us to change the attitude, one; on appreciating and loving their country - putting their country first. Possibly, we might have a lasting solution to corruption if we put our hands to that. 

Lastly, I also want to make a call to Government. I think it is time also we integrated all agencies that are fighting corruption under one roof so that they can collaborate their actions. Otherwise, when you find the State House Anti-corruption Unit doing this, the IGG doing this and another entity doing that, we end up losing track of what we are fighting at that moment.

Therefore, I implore parliamentarians here and the 11th Parliament that we legislate in integrating these agencies so that we can have a joint fight against corruption. Thank you. 

3.26
MR YOWERI SSEBIKAALI (NRM, Ntwetwe County North, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we commemorate the Anti-corruption Day - I heard the former minister talking about the money we lose through corruption, that once it is recovered, the Parish Development Model can get a lot. When you go to these departments like a DPP, IGG, CIID and Police, the money they are allocated to curb corruption is little.

It is now my appeal that as we appropriate funds to fight corruption from Parliament, these departments and agencies should get what is enough to make sure that they fight corruption and we realise what we need as a country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It is a common cry that we must increase the budget of all those authorities that fight corruption. 
3.27
MR POLYCARP OGWARI /(INDEPENDENT, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of corruption in Uganda, as far as I have tried to assess, is now a song, the way the late Lucky Dube sung. Why have I said so? We have decided to talk, like one of the honourable members says, yet without action. 

We sing corruption, we follow - look at the people who have taken the money. They are arrested and soon they come out. 

Therefore, my kind request is that we create a way of managing corruption probably, yearly. If it means creating a team in Parliament, we have a big number that can help the IGG to fight corruption. For example, one of the cases that we are still investigating in my district is that of a staff who removed two tyres from a Government vehicle in the hospital and put them on his car because he is the one managing the hospital. When we went on with the investigation and after realising that things are becoming very hot, the old tyres were brought back and put on the vehicle and the stones removed. 

At the end of the day, what is going to happen? That is serious corruption. We are investigating and want to find out why. That is why I am saying, let us evaluate and if this year – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I saw somewhere, where they said that the ambulance of Arua Hospital was stolen and sold.

3.29
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her report. Similarly, I would like to thank Government for putting in place a number of institutions to fight corruption. However, I want to urge Government that we need to really up our game, if the future generations are to gain from what we are trying to put in place. I want to address my mind in this way; that to curb corruption, maybe, not to eliminate it but to at least, curb it. The approach to audit should change. We should not focus very much on looking at audited accounts of institutions. We would rather focus on looking at service delivery; what is there in place.

If much money was extended to water, do the people of Uganda actually have the water in place? We should focus on auditing projects in terms of services compared to the money that has been allocated.

The other aspect of audit that should be reviewed or included is; we must begin to audit lifestyles of Ugandans. You cannot be earning Shs 200,000 and you are taking your child to an international school in New Delhi. You cannot be earning Shs 20 million in Parliament here and you are living a life beyond the richest American. We should support the Office of the Auditor-General to audit lifestyles – (Member timed out.)

3.31 
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister, for the statement she gave. Corruption is increasing day and night. In fact, when an honourable colleague was saying, we have improved; I do not see the improvement. This is because two days ago, I had our Minister for Economic Monitoring in my district. We moved together with him and we had a meeting in the district headquarters.

Madam Speaker, I was shocked even as we blame the Government for failing to deliver services to the people, kumbe money is in the local government and people are misusing it. We moved around in all the projects and I was shocked and I cannot even talk about some things here. You find a project where Government has put Shs 600 million, the contractor has taken Shs 400 million and the building is at the beam level, which is worth Shs 100 million. The Government has even sent a machine worth Shs 380 million to be put inside the same structure for our women to deliver but there is nowhere to put the machine. 

Honourable colleagues, I think we need to go back to the ground and study these civil servants very well. Otherwise, at the end of the day, we are the ones to be punished by our voters. I would like to give space to my colleague to give information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chemonges, you have become the Speaker today?  

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I wanted to inform him also that I have been in this Parliament for close to 20 years. Each year, we debate about ending corruption. I am hearing the same words and when we come to the following year, still the same words are repeated. What we need is a tough step forward to make sure that we do not repeat this. If you have been here one year, it makes sense but for us listening to the same words, you become confused. That is the information I wanted to give you that we must find a solution to this tough thing called corruption. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, as an elder has said, hon. Wakikona has been here for 20 years and every year, we are talking about the same thing. Why don’t we come up with tough laws? If somebody has been caught in corruption, if it means removing their property, remove it.

3.35
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many Members have talked about cancer. My colleague, hon. Wakikona, I have been here for about three terms now. We have talked the same things over and over again. Where are the results? That means we are talking without action. Madam Speaker, when we were attacked by Coronavirus, His Excellency the President, spoke and the country listened. I am wondering why he has not spoken about corruption for this country to listen.

This Parliament will talk and other agencies will also talk but to fight corruption, we need to be clear and truthful to ourselves. The President must speak and we must see action. I have given you an example and many things have happened and the President speaks once. The other day, we could not move out of our homes. 

The agencies are many but when you assess what they have done, it is really very little. Hon. Ssekikubo talked about the money recovered; it is very little. We are talking about the laws, which are in place. Okay, we can improve on them but they are in place. In actual sense, we need to see action. 

For instance, why would you reappoint a minister who has been censured before? Let me stop there but we can talk over and over again. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as invited by the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, on Thursday, the President will speak to the nation on corruption. 

3.37
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to comment on corruption.

When a Member of Parliament commented that he has been in this Parliament for 20 years, I felt a bit shy because I could have stayed probably longer than him in this Parliament. I have heard the songs he is talking about. Every year, singing the same song and they rarely change the choir master. The members of the choir remain the same. This is a very serious matter. We have to change our own methods if we are to make an impact in fighting corruption.

First of all, my understanding is that corruption does not have one face. When we talk about corruption, people think misuse; that it is directed to misuse of resources, which you are supposed to manage in the offices where you are assigned responsibility. That is where people generally focus but they forget bigger areas, which are taking more resources. 

Allow me to ask a few questions; where do you place, for example, tribalism, nepotism and favouritism, which are almost normal practices in this country? You know it is with us. We take resources to pay these people. There are very many institutions, there are very many offices, which are being created where we have to pay the personnel running those offices. You know them and we prefer to keep quiet because sometimes, we feel that the authority cannot be challenged. We are making a mistake; the authority needs to be advised on the right thing to do. That is my role and that is the role of this Parliament. We should actually take the courage to say Mr King or Ms Queen, you are naked so that the King or the Queen can check him or herself. That is my role.

We have talked about the leadership code. Who has audited the reports that we get from the leaders? Anybody that is paid a salary from the tax payers account must fill that form and all of us fill those forms. How come we have heard or read of stories where we have ghost staff? Who creates the ghost staff? If you are supposed to fill the forms and tell us what you have - How can you be paid by the Government for those things you have at your house? (Member timed out.)

3.41
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement.

Fighting corruption is not an individual’s responsibility, it requires teamwork. In a country like Uganda, the reason corruption is rampant is because there is no political will to fight it. The day we wake up and make corruption very risky like the Chinese do, you will not see it any more. 

In Uganda, we come and talk about corruption every day but do we walk the talk? Every day, everyone is talking about corruption but do we walk the talk? Even the institutions that are supposed to fight corruption are less facilitated. How do you expect them to do their work? 

You go to institutions like the police and see the way our police as an institution sleep. They sleep like refugees and you expect them to do their obligation? You go to the office of the IGG; they get about Shs 100 million. Yes, it is us who appropriate to such institutions. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If we who do appropriation are not given what we have appropriated for ourselves for committee work - We are not being facilitated as Parliament, which is doing appropriation. That is part of the corruption.

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The majority of the leaders in this country who are supposed to fight this vice of corruption are the most corrupt people. I always look at them when they are joking – (Member timed out.)

3.44
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

I was impressed by the minister in her statement when she enumerated a number of corruption fighting institutions; they are quite a number. Countries that have successfully fought corruption have had a positive conspiracy within the institutions where criminal justice institutions, which are to fight corruption conspire or agree to nip it in the bud. 

In Uganda, it is a complete opposite. I remember the testimony that was given by the predecessor of the current IGG. She was frustrated and complained that whenever she would step on the toes of the big fish, they would run behind the back of His Excellency the President. I imagined that with creation of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you confirm that it was true? That was hearsay.
 
MR NAMBESHE: It was awash in all print and electronic media.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was an allegation and you cannot confirm that. 

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, if I was required to adduce factual evidence – but I cannot challenge your word, so to speak.

In the neighbouring countries, which I may not even mention where they have tried their best to nip corruption in the bud, the silver bullet has been political will. Even where you would see the serious hand of dictatorship in that country, it is benevolent dictatorship. In Tanzania, for example, the late John Pombe Magufuli fought corruption and that is how they delivered that country into a middle income status. 

We blame Adolf Hitler of Nazi Germany for the Holocaust but we have another form of Holocaust in this country whereby you see some of the projects that have been mentioned in the statement; failure to deliver vaccines, failure to build roads or even the roads that have been built like the one of Tororo–Mbale-Soroti had its quality compromised through corruption. The carnage on that road - We lose very many people on that road. In fact, corruption in this nation has caused many more people to die than that Holocaust, which we condemn.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, when you use the microphone without being allowed, that is corruption. (Laughter) When you are paid salary as a Member of Parliament and yet, from the time Parliament started you have not come and you cannot account for that money, that is also corruption. You go to districts, we have equipment that is supposed to be used for working on the roads but the chief administrative officers and the district engineers are hiring them away, that is still corruption. Corruption is not just what we think.

3.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Lilly Akello is one of the fair humans gracing the frontbench. The time I have seen her around this House, she tries to be fair and herself. Reading this statement, you could see the soul of a human dispirited and carrying and I can understand. However, do not give up, honourable minister.

I would like to invite you to do basic things that can make the corrupt rethink their corruption model. One of the simple things you can do is not to hold that function in Kololo for starters. That money that you have been given to hold that function, donate it to the victims of corruption. They are all over the country and we know where they are. If you want to know, I can identify for you some of the victims of the runaway corruption in this country and you donate that money to them. I am sure it is in millions and it can be donated - (Interjections) - let me first help the honourable minister before she loses her spirit on the corrupt. She needs this and I am advising her to donate that money and not hold that Kololo function.

During that function at Kololo, the corrupt will come and mock you. Therefore, do not organise them to assemble around you. They will come and snare at you because they know you are doing nothing. Therefore, as part of contempt for the corrupt, do not hold that function; donate that money because, then, they will know that you are protesting.

Secondly, you need money to do your job. I appreciate it, please, go and make a request, bring it here. How I wish your money came with the supplementary. Instead, the supplementary was riddled with corruption tendencies and you could see that things were not right. Please, go and bring a request for money to help you to do your job.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, this House has handled very many reports from PAC, COSASE and other committees. They are gathering dust with no treasury memoranda coming from the Government on actions taken. Time has come for us to reject a budget until Parliament is furnished with all treasury memoranda. If these reports are indictments of the corrupt and then, we go ahead and send them more money to go and stash it away, it will be an abdication of our duty as Parliament.

Madam Speaker, before we go for the cash, we can start with the basic things. As Parliament, we pass legislations. How much attention do we give to scrutinise the Bills to get rid of the tendencies that will tempt people into corruption; if we abdicate that, first things first.

Very clearly, the minister will not manage this alone. You need the civil society, media and the public. However, the public is impoverished. If you plotted a linear model -(Interjections)- and you put poverty on the vertical and corruption on the horizontal lines respectively, the two are moving in the same direction; the higher the poverty, the higher the rise in corruption. 

That is why the corrupt end up in public offices, like the politicians because they meet an impoverished population, compromise it and overwhelm them. Are we able to lift the lives of the poor people and empower them to shun the corrupt and deny them votes? 

Relatedly, on the Order Paper, Madam Speaker, there is a pending debate for a whole week about the shrinking civic space. The minister wants the participation of civil society and everyone but your same Government is hounding civil society groups that are fighting corruption. Therefore, do you need their help, yet, you are fighting and closing them down illegally?

If you need their support, please, move and be their defender. You want the support of the media but it is hunted. Journalists are beaten and the corrupt are silent about it because the corrupt are powerful.

Madam Speaker, the minister will have everybody’s support. Please, if you do not have support in the Cabinet, protest and leave. We shall receive and embrace you as citizens. Thank you.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT)(Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is one of the topics that should bring the House together – (Interjections) –yes, because I have also been in this House for a while. So, I would like to plead with this august House that if we are looking at corruption, we should have a simplified definition of it.

Let us have that definition in its own simple terms. It could be that someone is reaping from where you have not sown. It could mean that someone is earning more than they are contributing. That will help us see how it applies. Let us start with leadership; let it start with me because we must lead by example, honourable  colleagues. 

Secondly, the issue of corruption is a mind-set as a colleague said and it is a moral sin that has no boundary. When we classify the big and the small, we lose direction on that. A sin is a sin; small or big is wrong. If we go defensive, we go on looking for big and leave the small and we lose it out.
We must go back to our roots; the societal units where you and I came from. The family unit, what are we producing in this country? What are we ushering in the community? Garbage in, garbage out -(Interjections)- I requested that we should start with ourselves and with a societal family unit. What are we ushering in?

If you find corruption starting with your own -  a wife does not know what the man is doing and the man does not know what the wife is doing, and the child is even corrupting the parents - then that is the starting point. Can we go back and rectify our moral fibres?

Then as the Government, whatever instruments are in place, let all us take advantage of them because if, God forbid, my creator came back here at this point, I do not know how many will be saved from the fire; we shall all perish.

Therefore, I would like us, as we are talk about corruption, to resist and start soul searching with ourselves and then we say, “let me do my part then my neighbour will help me do that and the Government in totality, we shall overcome.”

Otherwise, colleagues, if we go with the mentality of pointing at the big and small, we lose it. It is all of us and then, we shall arrest it.  I thank you.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Ms Lilly Akello): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all the colleagues for the contributions they have made. I would like to thank everybody who has said whatever good ideas. As a Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, we are there to work for all the citizens of this country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that corruption, which we have talked about, is a vice that all of us must fight. It is not only the Government; it should be all of us; beginning from the village up to the national level. Corruption goes together with the loss of morals. There is a lot of moral decadence in our country. That is where corruption is beginning from.

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. You stated well that corruption is not only about money. Corruption includes deceiving your own child. Corruption includes deceiving your own wife, in the bedroom, in the family, in the house. Therefore, if we change that mind-set, then the corruption of the money will also be handled. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and all Members. I want to pray that we unite and put our hands together to fight this vice. It is real, it is happening and the blame is for all of us, honourable members. 

All of you are welcome to Kololo on 9 December 2021. I thank my good friend there. He is laughing – the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. As you have said, corruption affects us all in the society. Preventing corruption unlocks the progress towards attaining the sustainable development goals. It helps all of us in terms of creating jobs, achieving the gender equality and securing a wider access to essential services like health, education - we have talked about it - the roads and all those kinds of things. 

Once we agree as a community that we are all going to fight against this vice, then, we will be able to reduce it. As Parliament, we are committed to supporting the institutions that fight corruption. Anytime you need the support of Parliament, we are available for you. We will work together to ensure that we reduce this vice.

We thank you very much and wish you the best of the celebrations. 

STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION ON THE CURRENT STATE OF THE EDUCATION SECTOR

4.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. This statement is moved under Rule 53(1) of the Rules of Procedure. 

To bring you the honourable members to scratch, the Opposition is under constitutional obligation to hold Government in check but also to offer alternatives. We have for the last two months been requesting for the frontbench to come and share with us a situational analysis for our input on this very dicey critical sector to no avail. We were elected to move and offer our thoughts for the House to process and accordingly move to secure this sector.

Education is a key component of social growth, economic development and transformation. However, the COVID-19 pandemic poses serious threats to access of education in Uganda and innovative solutions are needed to support this sector. 

The lockdowns that were instituted to contain the spread of the pandemic disrupted learning all over the sector. Pre-primary institutions were completely closed down while phased learning was undertaken in the primary, secondary, vocational and tertiary institutions between the first and second wave of the pandemic. 

I want to move to make a few comments on key variables that we need to look at to be able to evaluate a way forward for this sector. The first ones are the stalled cohorts. This has adversely affected learning goals and progress of students and pupils. While some learners progressed and eventually, sat for their national examinations, others have stalled in the same classes for two years. 

Consequently, many students are uncertain on whether they are to remain in the same class when classes resume, or will be promoted without completing the curriculum of their respective pre-lockdown classes. 

This has been a cause of anxiety among students, parents and stakeholders. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Education and Sports is silent on how the situation will be addressed, and has failed to offer leadership on the same.

Learning materials
Using funding from Global Partnership for Education, the ministry developed a preparedness and response plan. A facilitation fund equivalent to $14.7 million (approximately Shs 52 billion) was given to facilitate the continuity of learning framework. With this fund, learners in Government schools received free study materials unlike those in private schools. This raised issues of discrimination. 

A supplementary budget of Shs 48 billion for procurement and supply of a second set of study materials for learners during the lockdown was passed on 18 November 2021. The ministry of education intends to use the new set of learning materials to complete the syllabus for each class. 

This procurement is coming just less than six weeks before the learners report back to school. 

Financial support private schools proprietors
The ministry of education before the Committee on Education and Sports presented a paper. Among the highlighted issues was that Government has established a small business recovery fund equivalent to Shs 200 billion to be administered by participating financial institutions across the country to provide concessional credit to businesses affected by COVID-19. He informed the committee that the education sector may also benefit - the word is “may” - from this intervention. 

It should be noted that given the number of schools requiring financial support, the facility is too insufficient to accommodate the respective loan requests.

In the face of this lockdown, which we have called “the confusing status of learners under the lockdown”:
Due to delayed school opening, there is stagnancy in the system. Cohorts of learners who had just begun term one of primary one, two and three in 2020, are still stuck at home 20 months later. These pupils who are estimated at four million in total have not interfaced with a teacher for 84 weeks. 

Cohorts of pupils, whose ages made them qualify for admission in primary one in 2021 estimated that 1.3 million children are also waiting for their first day in class. 

Another cohort is expected of approximately 1.3 million children whose ages will be qualifying them for enrolment into primary one in 2022. 

In total, an estimated six million children of age ready to go to primary one, two and three, as compared to pre-COVlD-19 lockdown capacity of four million learners, in the three lower primary class intake, are waiting for guidance. 

The combined total of real and potential primary one, two and three learners is estimated at six million compared to the pre-lockdown capacity of an estimated four million learners in all schools. Madam Speaker, this alone should make us worried of how schools will cope with additional classroom space, teachers and other related requirements.

The same challenge facing primary one, two, and three of 2020 is also prevailing with senior one and two of the same year. These two classes had only commenced studies for a few weeks when the second lockdown was announced. This also affects the tertiary institutions, where all non-finalists of 2020 had just been few weeks in their special terms/semesters of study, when the second lockdown was announced.

The face of increased teenage pregnancies and uncouth behaviour 

The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted all aspects of life in Uganda, resulting in loss of jobs, disruptions in access to health and social services but no group has felt the effects of the pandemic more than adolescent girls. According to the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) October 2021 statistics, in Uganda, a total of 354,736 teenage pregnancies were registered in 2020, and 196,499 in the first six months of 2021. This poses a vast threat to learning continuity as most of these young mothers may not find it convenient to go back to school once schools reopen.

Idleness coupled with growing physical features have led to learners indulging in bad social habits, including taking alcohol, taking banned drugs, sexual relationships, putting their lives in danger and outright criminality.

Discrepancies in teachers and instructors’ remuneration
Madam Speaker, the COVID-19 pandemic-related lockdown has divided teachers and instructors into categories that require our effort to intervene, as Parliament:

Whereas teachers and non-teaching staff in Government schools still earn their monthly salaries, their counterparts in private institutions are not earning at all. According to a recent memo supplied to the Committee on Education and Sports by the National Private Schools Teacher’s Association (NAPSTA), private institutions employ a total of 350,000 teaching staff. Due to lack of earnings, many are deserting the teaching profession and mainly reverting into informal businesses such as brick laying, selling of chapatti, riding boda bodas, among others. Those that are unable to find alternative sources of income, have completely lost livelihood. In each of the 350,000 teachers if each of them had four dependents, a total of over 1.4 million people are adversely affected by the loss of earning.

Last year, in his address, the President pledged to provide a revolving fund of Shs 20 billion to help private teachers affected by the pandemic. This fund was geared at assisting teachers to diversify their sources of income through establishing enterprises of their own. There has been confusion in the leadership of the various teachers’ associations; therefore, the fund remains a pipe dream.  

Sorry status of schools
Unlike Government schools that largely rely on public funding, private education institutions depend on revenue collected from fees. Due to closure of schools, proprietors of private education institutions are no longer earning. Many have been chocked by loans, forced to close business or convert their premises to other sources of income such as shops and rentals. 
This raises a concern of a looming deficit of education infrastructure in the country. Unfortunately, Government has failed to articulate how it will fill the infrastructure gaps and sustain the teaching profession.

According to Education and Sports Sector basic statistics for 2020/2021, a substantial number of educational institutions in Uganda are privately owned; their collapse will leave a huge gap and dent in the education sector that is bound to last for years. For instance, out of 20,305 primary schools, 8,269 (41 per cent) are privately owned. Out of 2,995 secondary schools, 1,937, which is 165 per cent, are privately owned. Out of the 275 post primary institutions, 143, which is 152 per cent, are privately owned. Out of the 53 universities, 44 which is 83 per cent are privately owned.

For the few private educational institutions soldiering on, these are burdened by overhead costs amidst nil revenues. These include maintenance of building and grounds, security, electricity bills, minimum wages for staff, among others.

The Ministry of Education and Sports in 2020 directed all pre-primary and primary schools resuming operations post-lockdown at the time, that they could only operate either as day or boarding schools eliminating their discretion to offer both. Unfortunately, the guidelines did not restrict schools to their original offering, with the result that learners who attended day schools would shift to boarding schools meaning higher fees in order to remain in school, or transferring to more affordable day schools elsewhere.

Inequalities in the education sector
Madam Speaker, the COVID-19 pandemic has intensified inequalities in the education sector. International schools easily adapted to the new normal and continued with studies online. On the other hand, studies in national schools were crippled by lack of training, electronic gadgets, access to internet, power, capacity and students from deprived households were not able to access education. As a consequence, students in international schools are progressing normally into higher classes while those in national schools are stalled at home. Unfortunately, little effort has been undertaken by the Government to address this inequality.

The ministry of education has not addressed the discrepancy in the school fees charged by public schools, which raises the questions about Government’s regulation of public school fees. 

Madam Speaker, I have provided a discrepancy in one of the Government schools in Buikwe District, which charges Shs 50,000 as school fees and another public school in Kumi District, which charges Shs 210,000 and yet both are Government schools. There is a problem. 


Changes in teacher education policy
In March 2021, the ministry of education, according to its spokesperson, reportedly phased out recruitment of certificate and diploma holder teachers. It is reported that 23 out of 46 Primary Teachers Colleges (PTCs) in Uganda are immediately being phased out, leaving only Core PTCs. The remaining 22 Core PTCs are being converted into constituent colleges of Shimoni University of Education and are to be referred to as Uganda National Institute of Teacher Education (UNITE). All new student teachers will be admitted on only degree programmes.
Diploma and certificate holder teachers together, form a single largest formal employee category in Uganda. The National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2021/2022 puts the total wage bill for Government employees at Shs 5.1 trillion of which Shs 1.45 trillion is for primary and secondary school teachers in various local governments. 

Changing employment terms to the largest employment category goes to the core of the economy, particularly adversely affecting tax revenue. The current in-post teachers employed in both private and public schools deserve fairness and equity in terms of minimum requirements for teaching, promotion, and remuneration. 

Specifically, private school teachers who have spent almost two years with no formal earning are now being required to acquire graduate qualifications. It is a very unfair policy shift. 

The education authorities, including the minister of education, are conspicuously silent regarding post lockdown education policy to guide parents, teachers, and student teachers in teacher training colleges and other learners for adequate planning. 

What will happen to those student teachers who are already found in these colleges who are now hanging? Should they go home as dropouts? What is the transition for them? 

Requiring primary and secondary teachers to possess a degree comes with responsibility to Government to technically and financially support both private and public school in-post teachers to undertake graduate training.

Remuneration of teachers according to the type of subject taught and ability of such teachers to finance their own undergraduate education is an unfair policy to teachers of humanities. Teachers of arts subjects with a significantly lower pay compared to science teachers have no incentive and means of meeting the cost of upgrading their professional training to acquire degrees. 

Our recommendations, finally, public schools should be permitted immediate access to the defined percentage of their releases; the capitation of grants ahead of time to take care of the much needed innovations so that school environment is prepared for teaching and learning. 

This is premised on the fact that whereas quarterly releases of capitation grants has been ongoing during lockdown but withheld pending school reopening, disbursement of these withheld funds will help the school administrators to pay for outstanding bills and also make procurements required to make schools ready to operate. 

During this lockdown, schools have faced many cases of vandalism due to lack of security personnel, dilapidation because of lack of maintenance, and general rundown of school infrastructure and structures. This same capitation grants should be used to procure hand temperature guns, hand washing machines and soap and other sanitary facilities like water tanks, which will be used in the adherence of the COVID-19 SOPs.

A comprehensive resurgence plan for the education sector should immediately be presented to Parliament, indicating the actual dates when schools will be opened for scrutiny and appropriation of required funds undertaken. A general date has been given as 10th. What is the pre-10th situation for schools, is the question we are raising. 

The school inspection programme at local government level should also be revamped and adequately funded to ensure responsive and continued human capital development.

The comprehensive resurgence plan presented to Parliament should include clear policy guidelines on teacher qualification upgrade and how current in-post teachers in private and public schools would be supported to attain the now set minimum academic qualification of a degree.

With the IMF loan equivalent of US$ 1 billion, of which the first tranche of US$ 258 million has been released and with the expected allocation by the end of December, a credit line through UDB should be established to support some of the struggling private schools. For example, all nursery schools are privately owned and yet are of great value to the education structure in the country; they form part of the officialdom in education progression. 

Review the tax policy to offer tax relief to private education institutions for at least a year. This would free resources of indebted institutions towards fulfilling loan obligations, facilitate reinvestment, and attract new investors into the education sector.

On 23 September 2020, the minister responsible for education issued a special directive in a circular to all private schools and institutions of learning, barring them from hiking school fees. A maximum threshold of school fees and relevant requirements to enable parents who are just beginning to find some bit of stabilisation after the lockdown was set. A clear plan on how schools are going to ensure compliance of the same should be provided. Mere pronouncements will not add up.

The Ministry of Education and Sports should officially clarify on the proposed selective increment of salaries for some categories of teachers. This follows the announcement that Cabinet had, on 23 August 2021, approved Shs 4 million as the wage for science teachers, Shs 2 million above the salary of a head teacher thereby causing a rift between science teachers on one part and teachers of humanities on another. This was further emphasised by the President in his address to the teachers on the World Teachers’ Day celebrations on 12 October 2021, at Kololo. 

This proposal of selective salary increment is now threatening to break down school administrations, as lower rank employees are paid significantly better than their supervisors. We support that there is equal remuneration of workers of the same qualifications and experience. For example, graduate science teachers and those of humanities of the same experience should receive the same pay. I beg to move. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. I would like to thank you for the alternative policies that you always give us. I can say, for now, that what is out there is that schools are opening on 10 January 2022 but that is under God's mercy. 

It is not anybody's making that schools were closed; it was out of COVID-19. We would have all loved our children to study but COVID-19 has been a challenge to all of us, not only in Uganda and that should be understood by everybody. 

I also want to thank the President and the Ministry of Education and Sports for offering leadership at that time of closure of schools. I can say I am one of the people who have suffered out of that. My daughter got COVID-19 at school, came back home and everybody was infected. Therefore, leadership was really offered at the right time and we must appreciate that. 

It is also our responsibility as leaders; we need to go out there and mobilise people to do vaccination. Everybody must be vaccinated. This third wave, I am told, is terrible. If the third wave comes, we may end up staying with our children. We really need to mobilise people to be vaccinated and have everybody following SOPs. Minister of Education, do you have something to say?

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for making this statement on the Floor and I also want to thank you for the statement that you have just made. 

Some of the suggestions and the way forward that he has presented are what we are working upon. I would like to say that together – because it is not one person's making, it is not one person's entity; it is a collective responsibility. Together, because it is not one person’s making nor entity but it is a collective responsibility. Together we should be able to ensure that we have a sustainable and safe reopening of schools.

As I conclude, I would like to say yes, as he said at the appropriate time, my ministry will present a statement. However, what is clear is that come 10 January 2022, schools, pre-primary, primary and secondary levels will all reopen and all our children will be at school.

We are much aware as he has said, the tertiary health training institutions and universities are as of now operating quite well. However, we all have to work together to ensure that the huge population of children that are yet to come in January, we sustain the opening of the schools and have them safe. We pledge to work together with all of them so that we have a safe reopening. I thank him and all. Thank you.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Leader of the Opposition, once again I would like to thank you for giving us alternative policies. When you give us these kinds of alternative policies, where there is a gap, we are able to correct and where we can appreciate, we do appreciate whatever is happening. It is not because we cannot do it but when it comes from you, let us fight this together. Politics aside, education for our children is for all. 

The opposition and the ruling Government, let us work together and make sure vaccination is done, SOPs are observed and children go back to school.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, it concerns us as a House especially when people are yearning to be vaccinated, including teachers and the students. However, the much hyped places of vaccines are not there in most of the countryside. Bududa is one of those areas where most people have received the first jab of AstraZeneca and they are waiting for donkey years but do not see the second; the vaccines are not there. 

Madam Speaker, as a matter of procedure as the minister gives us hope, wouldn’t it be procedurally proper for her to give now that there are gaps pertaining to availability of vaccines to come out with a clear school reopening plan? If it is the 10th and by now, most of these places in upcountry do not have vaccines, do we surely have a risk free strategy in schools? Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Whip, this issue was discussed the other day with the Minister of Health and the issue of vaccines was exhaustively discussed and it is being handled. It is unfortunate you were not in and we understand why you were not in. we sympathise with you but it was discussed.
 
BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EAST AFRICAN CRUDE OIL PIPELINE (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the report on this Bill was presented to the House on 24 November 2021 but it was not read. We have two reports. We have the main report and the minority report. I am going to ask the chairperson of the committee to come and give us a summary of the report; just the observations And recommendations and also the same applies on the minority report.

4.32
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (DR Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you for the guidance that since I laid this report here on the Table and indeed, uploaded it to the honourable members, I believe most of them have gone through it and as per your guidance, I am going to give a precedence of our report.

I beg to present a report of the committee on Environment and Natural resources on the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) Special provisions Bill, 2021.

The committee considered the Bill in accordance with Rule 189(c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) (Special Provisions) Bill, 2021 seeks to enable certain provisions of the intergovernmental agreement IGA signed between the Republic of Uganda and United Republic of Tanzania and the host government agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and the East African Crude Oil Pipeline company limited; to facilitate the development and implementation of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) Project in Uganda, to facilitate the development and implementation of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Project in Uganda.

The committee examined the Bill and received written submissions from 20 stakeholders as indicated in the annex to our report. The committee further reviewed relevant documents including sector laws and policies; the host government agreement, the Intergovernmental Agreement, the tariff and transportation agreement, the environmental social impact assessment report and permit, sector agreement, resettlement action plan report, ministerial policy statements and various presentations made to the committee.

Madam Speaker, our committee made general observations and recommendations. Allow me first and foremost to highlight that the Bill is divided into 13 parts and two schedules. Part one of the Bill is the preliminary provision for the commencement of the Bill application and purpose of the Act and interpretation of terms and definitions.
Part two of the Bill provides for the transportation tariff. Part three is on security. Part four covers the title to the petroleum and payments in kind. Part five is on antitrust and other competition related matters. Part six provides for project authorisations. Part seven is on land rights. Part eight provides for national content requirements. Part nine is on insurance and reinsurance. Part 10 handles non interruption of project activities. Part 11 provides for third party access to the project. Part 12 is on decommissioning of the project. Part 13 covers miscellaneous issues. There are two schedules to the Bill, schedule one is on insurance and schedule two is on agreed fiscal regime.

Madam Speaker, allow me not to go clause by clause and give a summary of what is entailed in our report. Clause one is on commencement. This clause of the Bill seeks to grant retrospective commencement of the early project activities in order to ensure that preliminary project activities in order to ensure that preliminary project activities that have taken place since the 01 January 2016, including public works and associated costs undertaken by the investors prior to signing of the agreement are brought under the Bill. 

The committee noted that the total cost of the early project activities is $428,190,000 and that these activities have been listed in Statutory Instrument no.59 of 2020. 

A more detailed analysis of this clause is contained in our report, under paragraph 8(1) on page nine of that report. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

Madam Speaker, clause 2 is on application. The clause provides for application of the Bill and is to the effect that the Bill shall apply to the EACOP project. The committee observed that there was need to clarify that the Bill shall only be applicable to the EACOP project, premised in the Ugandan territory, given the cross border nature of the project. 

In that regard, therefore, the committee recommends that clause 2 be amended to specify that the Bill’s application is limited to the EACOP project in Uganda. 

I want to refer honourable colleagues to page nine, paragraph 8(2) of our main report.

Clause 4 is on interpretation: this is the interpretation clause of the Bill. It defines the key terms used in the Bill. The committee observed that given the technical nature of the EACOP Bill, there is need for the terms to be used to mirror their usage in the host government agreement. 

The committee recommends that the clause stands part of the Bill with amendments to define the terms used throughout the Bill that were not initially defined. 

Honourable colleagues, I want to refer you to paragraph 8(3) on page 10 of our detailed report. 
Clause 5 is on the transportation tariff. This clause of the Bill seeks to set the tariff regime agreed upon by the parties under Article 11(8) of the host government agreement. 

The clause provides for two tariff regimes. The first regime applies to the crude oil from the existing Ugandan oil fields estimated at 1,046 million barrels at a rate of $12.77 per barrel and adjusted each year, starting from the first anniversary of the first commercial delivery of petroleum at the exit point of the EACOP system. 

Upon achieving the milestone of producing 1,046 million barrels, the second transportation tariff shall apply. This new transportation tariff shall be determined for the additional crude oil produced with a guarantee that none of the costs incurred by the pipeline company, prior to the 1,046 million barrels milestone will be considered in the calculation of the new tariff. The tariffs shall be approved by the Petroleum Authority of Uganda. 

My committee observed that the State was already bound by this term, which was meant to ensure that the pipeline operates at the least cost. 
Furthermore, the fixed tariff regime transfers significant risk, like cost escalation and overruns to the project investors and without this clause, the fixed tariff would be unlawful. 

The committee recommends that clause 5 should be amended. The clause seeks to set the tariff and not fix the same. A schedule that lists the components of the breakdown of the tariff be added. 

The transportation tariff is discussed in detail under paragraph 8(4), on page 11 of our main report. 

Clause 6 is on security. This clause of the Bill seeks to operationalise clause 45(4) and (5) of the host government agreement. It proposes that the project company and project participants be permitted to grant security of any description over their shares in the project company and the EACOP project. The security envisioned under the clause is enforceable by lenders.

Clause 6 further, dis-applies section 34 and 74 of the Public Finance Management Act, as well as section 50 of the Petroleum Refining, Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage Act. 

The committee observed that in order to facilitate the full participation of the Uganda National Oil Company, as a shareholder in the I EACOP project, the right to have security taken over its shares in EACOP limited needs to be activated for equal treatment with other shareholders. 

It would, therefore, be rightly put that without dis-applying the above section of the PFMA Article 45(4) and (5) of the host government agreement would not be effective. It is, therefore, on this premise that the committee recommends that clause 6 should stand part of the Bill, with an amendment to require approval of Parliament at every act of borrowing by the project company, which approval shall be given within 14 days. 

Madam Speaker, I refer you to paragraph 8(5) on page 14 of our detailed report. 

Clause 7 is on title to petroleum. This clause of the Bill seeks to give effect to article 11(11)(a) and (i) of have the host government agreement, which requires the Ugandan National Oil Company (UNOC), to hold the legal and the beneficial title to the crude oil arising from the state participating interest under the Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs) and 15 per cent arising from the State participation in EACOP. This is to ensure that UNOC can meet its obligations, including payments of each its cash calls under the PSA, payments of tariff in kind and meeting the advanced tariff requirements under the Tariff and Transportation Agreement (TTA).

The committee observed that it is imperative that a distinction is made between the upstream and midstream shares of Uganda's oil, arising from the PSA on the one hand and arising from its participative interest –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, we got this report two weeks back and we read it. Can you summarise? 

MR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for that guidance. On clause 8, which is payment in kind, the committee recommends that clause 8 stands part of the Bill, however, with amendments to mandate UNOC to submit a copy of the records of the petroleum received and paid in kind to the Minister, Uganda Revenue Authority, the Secretary to the Treasury, the Accountant-General and the Auditor-General and also to guarantee that where payment in kind is made, risk should pass with the title and laws must fall where it is due but not vested on Uganda National Oil Company. 
Madam Speaker, I refer you to paragraph 8(7) - seven on page 18 of our main report.

On clause 9, antitrust and other competition related matters, the committee recognises the need for section 32 and 35(a) of the midstream act whose application would have prevented the effective operation of the EACOP system to be dis-applied in place of the robust anti-competition provision agreed in the HGA.

The committee recommends that this clause stands part of the Bill. I refer you to paragraph 8 on page 20 of our report.

Project authorisations 
The committee observed that this clause does not provide for the impact of gross environment and human rights violation by the project company on the authorisations. 

The committee further noted that clause 10(2) of the Bill undermines section 141 of the National Environment Act and Regulation 18 of the National Environment (Waste Management) Regulations 2020. I refer you to page 21, paragraph 8.8 and 9 of our report. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 10 be amended to provide for the impact of gross human rights and environmental violations compliance with the National Environment Act of 2019 and subsequent regulations as well as setting parameters to determine and specify what amounts to substantial modifications.

Land rights
While the committee was examining this clause, the issue of compensation of project-affected persons arose and the committee noted with concern that the land acquisition for the equal project was commenced but in breach of the principles of prior, prompt and adequate compensation. The committee, therefore, recommends that the clause be subject to Article 26 of the Constitution and the Land Acquisition Act. The implication of this is that the project-affected persons shall have the remedies provided for under the Constitution in case of further breach of this right as well as remedies provided for in the Land Acquisition Act. I refer you to paragraph 9.0 on page 23.

Clause 14 is on principles for developing and implementing national contents plan

The committee recommended that clause 14(4) should be re-drafted to reflect the fact that it refers to annual national content plans for Uganda and clause 14(3)(c) should be deleted. 

Clause 15 is on registration on the national supplier database
This clause provides for registration of Ugandan entities in the National Supplier Database. The committee observed that clause 15 too contravenes the spirit behind the national supplier database and will be abused by project companies. It is inconsistent with section 53(4) of the Petroleum Midstream Storage Act, 2013, which provides that where goods and services are not available in Uganda, they shall, where possible, be provided by a company, which has entered into a joint venture with the Ugandan company.

Due to the aforementioned reason, the committee recommends that clause 15(2) should be deleted. I refer you to page 26, paragraph 9.3 of the report. 

On clause 16, which is on selection of contractors during the construction phase, the committee was concerned that this clause seeks to suspend regulations 9 and 15 of Petroleum Midstream Storage Act National Content Regulations 2016 as far as their application to the EACOP project during the construction phase is concerned. This is because the regulations seek to suspend at the hallmark of the national content in the procurement process in the midstream project. It is, therefore, on this premise that the committee recommends that clause 16(3) be deleted. 

Reserved contracts
The committee recommends that:
    1) Clause 24 stands part of the Bill with amendment to include professional services in order to ensure equality.
    2) The term “professional services” should also be defined under the interpretation clause. 
    3) The committee further recommends that the minister furnishes Parliament with the cost of the reserved contracts. I refer to page 28 of our main report.

Clause 25 is on joint ventures with local partners
The committee’s concern with this clause is that conditions set out in clause 25(2) that Ugandan parties must meet in order to be parties to a joint venture are excessively harsh and restricting. Fulfilling the set-out conditions is equivalent to being capable of supplying the goods, works or services that the project company seeks to procure.

The committee also recognised the need to create an oil and gas incubation fund to promote local entrepreneurs and small and medium enterprises in six months. The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 25 stands part of the Bill with amendments to address the aforementioned concern as referred on page 29 of our report.

Clause 29 is on insurance and reinsurance of the EACOP project

The committee recommends that clause 29 be amended to; incorporate the guarantees of the right to a clean and healthy environment enshrined under section 141 of the National Environment Act.

Clause 30 on non-interruption of the project activities

The committee recognises the importance of the project activities proceeding uninterrupted and recommended that clause 30 stands part of the Bill.
 
Clauses 31 to 34 are on third party access to the pipeline and they are guaranteed under those clauses. The committee took cognisance that these clauses allow third parties to access and export their crude oil through the pipeline. It provides for determination of tariffs to be paid by third parties pursuant to guidelines approved by the Government, which is important in ensuring that crude oil from any future discoveries in Uganda, can easily be commercialised and is, therefore, an incentive for further exploration in the country. 

Clause 35 is on applicable regime for decommissioning

This clause of the Bill seeks to harmonise the Republic of Uganda’s responsibility under the decommissioning plan with that of the United Republic of Tanzania. The committee recommends that clause 35 is an enhancement of the position in the Midstream Act, which only considers decommissioning from a territorial basis. As a result, the committee recommends that clause 35 stands part of the Bill.

Clause 36 is on decommissioning fund 
The clause proposes an establishment of a decommissioning fund. Decommissioning is the responsibility of the project and the purpose of the fund is for monies to be deposited that will cater for the decommissioning. 

The committee noted that that clause requires depositing to the fund within five years after the start of the project. This applies to section 44 of the Midstream Act that requires depositing of the fund, among others, after the half-life of the project. In the instant case, it would be after 10 years. The committee found the position in the Bill to be more favourable as a result and recommends that clause 36 stands part of the Bill with amendment to provide for better operations of the fund.

Clause 38, early project activities 
This clause provides for the early project activities and seeks to bring the activities that were undertaken by the project company to kick-start the EACOP project under the Bill. These include the front-end engineering design study, Environmental Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and land acquisition processes.

As I summarise, the committee noted that the purpose of clause 38 is to ensure that early project activities are fully undertaken under the law. This will enable the activities to benefit from the incentives to the project.

It is on this premise that the committee recommends that clause 38 stands part of the Bill with an amendment to insert a schedule that lists the early project activities; page 37 of our main report.

On import and export 
In order to remove the aforementioned restrictions, there is need to dis-apply sections three and four of the External Trades Act that gives force of law to any restrictions. 

The committee also took cognisance of the fact that customs law of the region is more robust and therefore, it is imperative that the East African Community Customs Management Act of 2004 is referenced. The committee therefore recommends that Clause 39 be amended to apply the East African Community Customs Management Act, 2004. 

On clause 41, transfer of rights and obligations, this clause dis-applies section 25 (5) and (6) of the Mid-stream Act, which contains a different application of the concept of decisive control. 

The clause does not provide for the circumstances the minister can deny approval for the transfer as well as for requirements to provide reasons for the refusal. It is imperative, therefore, that this is specified in the regulations. The committee therefore recommends that the clause stands part of the Bill. 

Clause 42 is on provision of electricity. The committee was informed that the purpose of this clause was to enable the project company receive electricity for the ICO project and construct the required infrastructure without going through the elaborate process of obtaining a license under the Electricity Act of 1999. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 42 be amended to provide that, “Excess associated gas shall be received by the project company at market price” and also delete the phrase, “on terms and conditions to be agreed with the shippers” from Clause 42(b). For details, I refer you to page 40 of our main report.

On fibre optic network, the committee noted that regulatory requirements for the project companies such as having to obtain an additional license outside its core petroleum business in order to provide infrastructure services to the telecom sector could discourage and/or necessarily delay the project company's vision and planned project works. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 43 stands part of the Bill with amendments to ensure that excess fibre optic network is handed over to Government so as to form part of the national fibre backbone infrastructure as opposed to third party access.

Clause 44 - fiscal regime. 
The committee observed that in the fiscal regime provided for under the Bill, several tax exemptions and relief provided were met because of the desire to achieve least costs for the EACOP project.

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 44 stands part of the Bill; page 44 of our main report.

On supremacy of this Act, this clause proposes to give the Bill and the subsequent Act supremacy over other laws, other than the Constitution, on the specific matters dealt with in the EACOP Bill. 

The committee, however, observed that the phrasing of the clause appears to give the Bill blanket supremacy over other laws of the Republic of Uganda, save for the Constitution. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the clause be redrafted to qualify the supremacy of the Bill. This means that the Act takes precedence over all existing laws relating to any matter under this Act and where there is a conflict between this Act and any other, this Act would prevail. 

The report also entails the analysis – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry to put my senior colleague on a procedural matter. 

Madam Speaker, you rightly guided that the chairperson should go to the summary. I think that he should have taken us through the observations and recommendations but it looks like he is already reading the amendments clause by clause, which I thought would come at Committee Stage. I do not know what – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you are reading as if we are at Committee Stage. 

MR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable colleague for her guidance. I just want to say that I was actually concluding – 


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A summary is a summary.
 

MR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I agree. I tried my level best to make a summary of 67 pages. I would like to say that based on the report that I have just submitted, the committee recommends that this Bill be passed with the proposed amendments. I beg to move.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The minor report is going to be read and then, we shall have a debate for 40 minutes.


5.03
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to state from the beginning that from the onset, we support the construction of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline that would help commercialise our nation's unique resource with capacity to transform our society. However, partial to rule 205, we have to present some dissenting opinions based on what we observed. 

Our areas of dissent include the following: the process of scrutinising the Bill. We also observed illegal land acquisition, disclosure of production sharing agreements, scrutiny of the schedules and issues to do with transparency around the viability of the refinery project. 

Our major difference with the majority is fundamentally on the methodology used to scrutinise the Bill. We also observed that the majority recognised this challenge of insufficient information, limited resources to visit and interact with project affected persons, as well as benchmarking in pipeline operating areas. We were rushed and went in to pass this Bill without curing the shortcomings therein. 

The scrutiny of the Bill was strictly limited to presentations and observations made in Kampala. For example, looking at how the project can produce its own electricity in a country with potentially high electricity supply or whether to recommend some shared public facilities between the project and the neighbouring communities, all these were not looked at. 

There was no analytical work undertaken to satisfy ourselves that we were signing on to the best possible alternative in the Bill. In addition, we did not establish experiences of operations of a pipeline in countries where pipeline businesses have taken place. We did not have chance to look at the basics of pipeline businesses. We do not know whether a pipeline, for example, can ordinarily operate for all the 365 days of the year or there are no hours or no moments when there are down times for such a business to operate. 

When we go to the issue of land rights, yes, the majority report has recognised the need to remain in line with Article 26 of our Constitution, but currently, the Project Affected Persons are not yet paid and have been denied the opportunity to use their land as they so wish. Nobody is allowed to use their land for any activity exceeding three months and this has been on since 2018.

We are also not comfortable with the compensation rates of 2018 that have guided the valuation exercise going on now. Very many districts had not updated their compensation lists for 2020 and so, we are wondering what they used to value the land that is going to host the pipeline.

Therefore, the rates needed to be changed and in that way, we are proposing that it should be the principle of prior, prompt and adequate. Otherwise, encumbering private land without paying for it, in a manner prescribed by the Constitution, is wrong. So, much as the majority provide for it, the actions prior, do not suggest so.

Madam Speaker, we recommend that Project Affected Persons be compensated according to the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. We also urge districts to update their respective compensation rates so that the EACOP can use the updated rates to comply with the constitutional requirements.

In addition, under land rights, we observed that there are no provisions for redress in case somebody is not satisfied with the compensation process. Therefore, we recommend that clause 11(4) be renumbered and modified.

Madam Speaker, clause 25 concerning joint ventures with local partners has hard issues. We realise that joint venture with foreign companies is encouraged but does not set standards for the foreign suppliers. The main report has talked about it but did not provide for a change in any statements within the provisions of the Bill.

It is true some of the companies that got contracts were Ugandan registered but largely foreign owned. For example in 2018, of the total contracts given to Uganda companies worth to $27.7 million, $13.3 million, equivalent to 49 per cent, were awarded to Ugandan companies but which are foreign owned.

Therefore, our recommendation is that a clause that compels the minister to make guidelines that protect local companies from being outcompeted by foreign companies on given contracts, be introduced. 

Madam Speaker, we also had an issue with early project activities under clause 38 of the Bill. We were well furnished with the activities, as listed in Table one, concerning the costs that form part of the investment profile of the EACO project. We realised that almost half a billion dollar is already spent on the pipeline. This Parliament is being asked to legitimise costs without an audit on those aggregated costs. 

Therefore, we feel that the committee would have been furnished by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development with facts on how this money has been spent because Shs 265 billion is already spent on land and social work. Much as all that money has been spent, no project affected person has been compensated.

Therefore, we are wondering what that money was used for given the fact that a provision for surveys of land and other pre-front end engineering designs are already catered for. As a committee, we feel that we needed an audit report on the early project activities in order for us to scrutinise the Bill before legitimising these costs.

Madam Speaker, the other contentious issue is on 3.5 and concerns renegotiated production sharing agreements - see Section 5.1.3 of the Oil and Gas Policy. The policy seeks to promote high standards of transparency and accountability in licensing procurement exploration development and production operations, as well as the management of revenues from oil and gas.

However, in scrutinising this Bill, we did not have an assessment of how much of our crude oil will belong to Uganda and this one falls short of the letter and spirit of Rule 129. Therefore, while we understand that there are renegotiated productions sharing agreements but Parliament is not yet furnished about them. We have been referred to the library but we are not sure. We need a confirmation from the minister on these renegotiated production sharing agreements because we feel the oil companies have been given a higher share and since Uganda’s share is in cost recovery, means Uganda having a reduced share per barrel produced. This makes the production sharing agreements that were read to Parliament previously irrelevant until the minister tables the renegotiated ones.

Paragraph 1.5 of the model production sharing agreements define confidentiality to mean only the section on audit but does not define the fiscal regime as being part of confidentiality clauses. Therefore, we feel that the fiscal regime information should be shared especially with the committee scrutinising this Bill.

We also recognise the fact that on 12 August 2020, Uganda signed the IETI transparency procedure as the 56th Member State. The procedure commits signatories to the initiative to publish details of revenues they receive from extractive industries. Therefore, we ought to receive information on the entire extractive industry values chain. Other than hearsay, we are entitled to unlimited access to updated copies of the production sharing agreements with details of the ownership of the oil, to pass through. 

Madam Speaker, as it is now, the secret on how much of the crude oil to be transported will belong to Uganda, is still shielded in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. We, therefore, recommend the Minister responsible for Energy to table copies of the most recent renegotiated production sharing agreements. 

We also had an issue concerning the scrutiny of the schedules. The committee had limited time to review details of schedules. In the limited time available to us, we have noted the following in the schedules of the Bill:

Second Schedule Part B 2(2) 
The fiscal regime considers oil Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs) applicable to favour, not just the project company, but broadly, the project participants as well as the level 1 and 2 contractors. 

A Double Taxation Agreement is a treaty between the countries that helps business domiciled in each of the countries that are party to the treaty to forego payments of Corporate Income Tax and tax on property. We observed that this part of the schedule in the EACOP Bill helps projects participants who are defined to include the pipeline investors, operators, contractors, shippers, finance parties and off-takers to run away without paying Corporate Income Tax after the 10 year exemption period. 

Therefore, we foresee that Government will lose a lot of revenue after the tax exemption when the project is expected to have recovered all its investment costs. We are recommending that the Second schedule Part B should be deleted. 

We are observing that literally even after expiry of the income tax holiday - because we are giving this company a tax holiday of 10 years - Uganda may never possibly tax this company's profit because it is still registered with UK where its headquarters are. We are worried that generally, we shall receive reduced withholding taxes paid by companies in that line. 

We were informed that in 2014, Uganda lost Shs 2.6 billion in withholding tax due to the double taxation with Mauritius. Therefore, we feel that the Uganda and Mauritius example may occur to this company we are contracting after 10 years. 

The report of the majority recognised the danger posed by the UK-Uganda Double Taxation Act and goes ahead to recommend a review of all the 11 active Double Taxation Agreements that Uganda has with other countries, including UK. However, the recommended review without timelines attached potentially leaves an observable tax loophole that should have been tied by the EACOP Bill. 

We disagree with our colleagues in the majority because the opportunity to tie this loophole is upon us now in this Bill. Let us do it. We can close this gap by amending the schedule to demand that by the 11th year of operation, EACOP is a purely Ugandan registered company. It would enable us to close this clearly observable tax escape route early enough. 

Our recommendation is that the company is registered and headquartered in Uganda on the first day of the 11th year of operation. 

Madam Speaker, we had the dissenting item on transparency around the refinery project. Whereas the EACOP Bill is all about the pipeline, an MoU signed between the Government of Uganda and joint venture partners that include Tullow, SINOC and Total on 05 February 2014, provided for both a 60,000 barrels per day for the refinery and crude oil pipeline to the sea. The committee just concentrated on the legality of the pipeline and never had a single session to evaluate the two midstream investments jointly. 

Accordingly, a production schedule that will see the pipeline and refinery share daily input crude oil was supplied with the assumption that the refinery would take on its daily maximum input equivalent to 60,000 barrels per day. 

We, own our own, computed the projected annual share of the crude to be shared into the refinery and pipeline respectively. We have that table, which gives us the following assumptions:

The first oil is expected at the beginning of 2025. We all concur with that. Production shall begin at a daily average of 195,830 barrels per day. The peak is expected between the first and fourth year. 

In the sixth year of production – that is, 2030 being our fair estimate, we foresee that pipeline feedstock will decline by a daily 60,000 barrels per day, which is diverted to the refinery. The calculations must be incorporating the reduction of the oil amount by 60,000 barrels a day. Assuming that there will never be a break down, closer for regular maintenance; that all the 365 days shall be operational. 

We foresee that the project will be profitable after 25 years. That is because there will be reduced amounts of crude oil feeding the pipeline. 

Since we never benchmarked anywhere to estimate numbers of days such as high technical activity that may take place, we have for purposes of this minority report assumed that production will take place in only 320 days. 

We observe that by the eighth year, the refinery would be too thirsty for crude, only taking about those barrels - 77,000 per day - and the numbers continue declining to the extent that by the 10th year, the project may be abandoned, since the daily input may not be sufficient to cover operating and other costs after expiry of the incentives; remember the tax holiday in the EACOP Bill. 

Given the time period given to the committee to scrutinise the Bill, priority was given only to the pipeline and no analytical work was undertaken to look at the entire crude oil production, transportation and processing. 

We, therefore, recommend that the committee be given more time compressing assessment of not just the Bill, but also related policies and laws that would be affected by the passing of this Bill. 

In conclusion, we request you to consider and support the minority report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for the minority report. I will open the debate to the two reports for 40 minutes. Debate is open but where we have controversies on the major report and the minor report, I will request the minister together with the Leader of the Opposition and the Government Chief Whip to reconcile some things, as we debate the report, including the Attorney-General.

Honourable members, if you have nothing to debate on the report, I will put a question. 

5.26  
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources for the comprehensive report that they have presented to the House. I also thank the Members who have presented the minority report to share with us their dissenting views. 

I rise in support of the Bill that will go a long way to see the oil resources that we host in the Bunyoro subregion get to exploitation and we get the benefits that we all anticipate to get from this oil resource. 

I have only one concern that has been raised in the majority report that has also featured in the minority report; this is in relation to clause 11 of the Bill on land acquisition. The majority report has highlighted that in the process of land acquisition, the principles of the law were not adhered to, especially the provision for prior, prompt and adequate acquisition. That means the project-affected persons, who happened to be from Bunyoro subregion, where I come from, are not going to benefit. 

Madam Speaker, it happens that the Bill comes at a time when we are implementing NDP III that focuses on improvement of household income. We know land is a key factor of production. Therefore, when people’s land is taken without adequate compensation, it means they might get a raw deal from the oil; they might get impoverished. 

My concern is that the line ministry should put in place adequate measures to ensure that the project-affected persons are adequately compensated and all measures in respect of these people to have a fair deal in this oil project is catered for and insured. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kisembo. 

5.29
MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank both statements that have been read. They are both okay but we all know that this is a new project in Uganda and it is new ideas that you are going to get in Uganda.

I got the point that my colleague mentioned and it is really touching. We have got a big issue in this project and I personally witnessed it, whereby a local company is not promoted by our Government. Local companies are supposed to be promoted. This money comes from abroad and the local companies are supposed to benefit. However, here is a situation just like she has mentioned it. A foreign company is being brought and registered in Uganda as a local company. At the end of the day, it gets the contract. In 2013/2014, there is an international company called GCC, which displaced a local company and it actually runs up to today.
To my surprise, when I tried to investigate it, it just took over the other local company’s manpower and paid the same amount. So, where are we, if we are protecting the local companies in Uganda to benefit?

Secondly, this concerns taxes. I know of local companies that were closed by the Uganda Revenue Authority because of Shs 20 or 30 million. However, at the end of the day, we all know, we had to tussle with the Tullow Oil to pay the taxes - huge amounts of money. I request that the local companies should be promoted. 

Let URA not kill local companies but promote them. The local companies can pay the Shs 5 million or Shs 20 million, after getting the instead of closing them. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us limit the debate to the principles of the Bill. 

5.32
MS HARRIET BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the committee that has done good work for us, and also, for the minority report.

The minority report had many issues that touched the hearts of my people; the silent voices of the people of Hoima. For example, the issue, which is captured on clause 11, as the land rights. We need to redefine the rights of our people because this project is already on – because in areas of Hoima, Buliisa, and Kikube, compensations have been done but in a vague way for this oil pipeline thing. People have not been paid appropriately and they are complaining.

Two weeks back in Kikube, there was a demonstration. People were banned from using their land because the land was meant to be used for the pipeline, which people have not been adequately paid for. I pray that much as we are looking at the majority report, which I also support as a member of the NRM, the minority report still has big issues, which are actually people-centred. 

The other issue is on clause 15 about registration on the national supplier database. Madam Speaker, we all know that stakeholder or community involvement is very crucial and critical. Hoima District, where I come from, for example, has already had the airport contracts. We have had the refinery, which is ongoing. However, we were surprised that most of our local companies even when they are registered on the National Supplier Database, do not get the contracts. It is our prayer that we should not only write it in ink as it is stated here, but we go ahead – what is threatening is on clause 15 about the issue that they should open and that at times, we may get from foreign companies.

Madam Speaker, I fear that even if they are saying that the foreign companies get contracts or subcontracts, it may not work out because that is not what is happening. What is happening is that most of the companies are foreign and there is no community participation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Most of these things are operational and they will be dealt with. 

5.35
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. Specifically, on the recommendations on section 10, which clearly brings out the environmental issues, which the Bill had actually left out. I would like to thank you very much for your effort. 

However, I would like to draw your attention to section 7.

You could have left out something, which I think is important to look out for. Section 7 talks about the title to petroleum notwithstanding the provision of any law, the Ugandan participants shall hold the legal and beneficial ownership. 

When we give the legal and beneficial ownership to UNOC, we are actually giving them too much, beyond what they should have. My suggestion is that we retain legal ownership because they are just trustees on this oil; they are acting on behalf of the Government. The moment we give them beneficial ownership, we are actually giving them leeway to do whatever they want with this oil.

Under section 10, in the same respect; the amendment to make the permission and verification, I suggest that we make it mandatory or we have a section that requires the disposal of this particular oil to be verified and actually a permit issued by the authority or any other entity that will be in charge. When you leave it open, you are also leaving it to misuse.

Lastly, in Section 29(3) the project company shall, subject to subsection 4, effect and maintain a relation to EACOP project for purposes of Section 10(6)(b) of the Petroleum Act, the insurances set out in Schedule one to the Act, which shall be fully be reinsured with the insurers, each with acceptable credit rating in accordance with this Act. However, this acceptable credit rating has not been well highlighted or it is not part of the schedules. If we do not specify the credit rating, we are actually making sections 5 and 6 redundant and allowing the project company to take out the insurance monies which would be good if we can retain them within our economy. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.38
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for giving us a very good report.

We are aware that as we speak today, the price of petrol rose to Shs 4600 per litre. Our hope is that when we develop this Bill on ground, that is where we are going to rely. 

The funny part is, when our people heard that Uganda had an agreement with Tanzania to transport this crude oil for refining, the belief is that Uganda is giving away this to Tanzania, which is not the case.

The committee has clearly indicated the shares, the agreement and other things. What is remaining is to sensitise the people. As leaders, we need to talk to our people and we need to avail this document to our people so that they are aware of what we are doing in this august House.  

Secondly, we had a fear when our colleagues from the eastern region were expressing concern in this august House that there are some threats – we have some holes and tunnels that cause depression in the area. People’s minds ran to the issue of oil extraction.

Therefore, in these Bills, we need to also know how this oil is going to be transported from Uganda to the point of refinery so that our fears are allayed. This is because as a lay person who is not an engineer, Madam Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, I need to make a correction. What is happening in the Eastern Uganda or Teso and Ngora specifically is not out of oil. Do not mix the tunnel there with the oil pipe.

5.40
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work they have done and I also thank the movers of the minority report which looks minor but has a lot of ingredients. 

Oil, if not well handled, can be a very big disaster for this country. I got a chance, in the ninth Parliament, to move with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when he was the Chairperson of the Finance Committee. We went to various oil areas in Farmington in the USA, in Nigeria and so many other places. 

In those areas, what is very important is the law we are making now; this Bill. Should we make the Bill into the law and it does not capture the local content or it is not interlinked with other policies, as the minority report is saying, it might reach somewhere and become a disaster for us.

My plea, Madam Speaker, is that you do not subject this Bill to a vote at this moment but like you earlier guided, the two parties should sit together, internalise the missing gaps, capture what is missing so that we can improve on it and then subject it to a vote. Otherwise, it might be a disaster for the people of Bunyoro and Ugandans if we pass it the way it is in that context. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, the two parties, as I told you - That is why they are not here; they are doing reconciliation.

5.43
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This law seeks to ensure that Ugandan citizens benefit as far as the local content is concerned but the way the Bill stands right now, I do not see Ugandan citizens benefiting from this project. 

This Bill seeks to extend tax holidays to tier one and tier two companies while doing this work. When that happens, that means that the only work Ugandan people can do is just casual labour. 

We should not enact a law, especially in regard to oil, that seeks to alienate the citizens of this country. The people of Uganda have been waiting and they are waiting to see how they are going to benefit from oil and anything attached to oil. 

This Bill also seeks to make this law supreme above all the laws of this country. I do not understand the rationale behind this supremacy. There should never be a law in this country that seeks to be supreme above another law. All the laws should be looked at equally.

Finally, this law seeks to come up with transport tariffs and they have pegged a yearly increment percentage of 2 per cent. I do not understand the rationale of 2 per cent. Is it the inflation rate? Are you looking at the interbank charges rates from the countries where these investors are coming from? We seek to understand how you pegged the two per cent before we accept to put it in the law. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.46
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the two presenters for the reports. We have endeavoured to look for the agreements from the library that we should consider as we look through this Bill, to no avail.

AS we speak, none of these people has looked at the production agreements. No one here has seen the production agreements, yet, we are going to pass the Bill into law. I think this is unfair.

Madam Speaker, land issues end up in riots. We are passing a Bill to construct a pipeline that is going to carry something very inflammable. From the riots, we shall get problems of a fire if land issues are not handled well.

The Bill is not transparent. We already know that we are supposed to have 30 per cent local content; it has been passed but it is not highlighted clearly in the Bill. Even the 15 per cent that is being sent to the Government is very small. Why 15 per cent? None of us here can answer that question.

5.48
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at section 38 on early project activities in the minority report - hon. Kaaya talked about the details of costs of approximately Shs 556 billion spent on land and social issues that were never explained to the committee. As we fight corruption in our country, let the details of Shs 556 billion be presented in the committee before we go any further.

Secondly, the committee was not given enough time according to the minority report. My humble appeal is that at least we give out another 30 days to these committees because the committee never benchmarked other countries where this pipeline is being run. This means we are rushing to pass a law which has never been in our country.

Thirdly, renegotiated production sharing-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I would like to make a correction to the effect that nobody is rushing. This Bill was read in the House and the committee was given 45 days as per the rules and it has to come back and be either passed or not. Nobody is rushing to say like somebody has an interest; no. we are acting as per the rules.
  
MR ENOSI ASIIMWE:  Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether we are moving in the right direction when the honourable minister who moved the motion is not in the House and yet, we are debating -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We have all these ministers here. They are here for this Bill.

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: But the particular minister is not here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am the one who sent the minister out. We have all the ministers here; there is a minister of state there, he is taking notes. Can you finish?

MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I was finishing with renegotiated production sharing agreements. The minister of energy should table copies of these negotiated production sharing agreements because the oil and gas policy of Uganda provides for openness and access to information as a fundamental right. We need to know the details of these agreements for us to pass a law, which favours of every Ugandan. Thank you, Madam, Speaker.
 
5.52
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a comment on the content on page 24 of the main report – see paragraph nine. The statement I am reading here has disturbed me a bit. It states - and if you may allow me to read it verbatim: “The committee appreciates that this provision guarantees security of tenure of the land for the project company and ensures that the project can proceed without interruptions given the nature of the project and the sensitivity in regard to profitability associated with any stoppage of operations.”

Madam Speaker, there is nothing so important as compared to forcing a Ugandan out of their indigenous land. I happen to have been in the Constituent Assembly when we entrenched this provision of prompt, prior and adequate compensation; I was there. If, at this moment, we are talking about compulsory acquisition of land before we have amended the Constitution, there is something wrong going on. The minister must first clarify to us, when did we amend the Constitution to allow compulsory acquisition of land?

When we were campaigning or mobilising the country for removal of the age limit, there were two Bills brought before Parliament. One was the Constitutional amendment for land and the age limit one. We know that the land one has been pending; can it be brought so that we can now handle the bull by the horn?

Madam Speaker, I am very upset about this and when you talk about production sharing agreements, all the partners must have control over all the cost elements. You are an accountant, Madam Speaker, and you know that one cannot adequately share such information unless you are in control of the cost element. 

If the main shareholder, who is not Ugandan, is going to be in control of all the cost elements, how shall I be sure of the final cost that has been arrived at, which is going to have an impact in the end profit that we are supposed to share in? That is where Ugandans should focus their mind because they will hype the figure, make the cost so high so that there will not be any profit for Ugandans to share in.

I was a member of that Adhoc committee and I took time to study the agreement. I took time, on your behalf, to understand where we were being cheated. We have just been talking about corruption, this is high-level corruption where we negotiate poorly so that Ugandans are exploited and we have nobody to blame. 


Madam Speaker, I would like us to focus on that. I pray that the chairperson of the committee and the mover of the minority report actually analyse the cost element that will constitute the total costs, will now give us the final profit – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to look at the issue of the cost sharing and avoidance of exploitation. 

5.56
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this wonderful opportunity. I thank the committee for considering this Bill and reporting back to Parliament. I want to say the President is on spot working hard to transform Uganda through petroleum. That could mean he wants us to get money from our resources. However, honourable members, this, to me, could be the most important and critical Bill I could have ever received in my tenure here as a Member of Parliament. Therefore, if we do not pay keen attention to it, we are bound to mortgage all our oil resources, and there will be nothing to this country for health service delivery, education or anything. The only remedy available would be to continue borrowing and we will indebt our citizens with very hurtful taxes. 

Why am I saying this? The EACOP project has been domiciled in UK. Right now, Uganda has a Double Taxation Agreement with the UK. That means that in calculating profits from this project, even costs incurred in UK and other places where Uganda has Double Tax Agreements would be considered. That has a risk of wiping away the profits, which we are going to tax and we have not paid keen attention to.

This company is not even legally registered in this country while Tanzania allowed it to be resident there so that they can – (Member timed out.)
5.58
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I associate myself with the report from the Shadow Minister for Environment. I need to add that in this project, the major issue has been left out and needs to be highlighted. If it involves transporting oil, a major element is missing - to do with the metering. How much shall we determine how much oil has moved before we look onto the issues of sharing? From the point of drilling, how shall we determine that such an amount of oil has moved and therefore, we can talk about sharing – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is information from the senior member. He has been in Energy and my presumption is for you to measure it in barrels to know how much is being produced.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  When we read this - first of all, we are discussing the road to transport oil, that is, a pipe. Then, there are laws, which talk about production sharing, which were passed some time back. They are existing – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were not in the 10th Parliament. The laws were passed then. What the honourable minister is saying – now, you are talking about the pipeline where the oil will pass. He is saying that the other laws were made in the 10th Parliament. You were not there.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was trying to say that we look at them differently. There are others also but for these, there is abundance in describing about meters and calibrations. Therefore, the moment it comes from the wellhead, it is all measured. When it takes any route even to the refinery, it is measured through meters. When it is being taken outside, the meters are variable. You cannot do anything in the oil industry without using meters to look at how much you have produced. Thank you.

MR KIWANUKA: Thank you. As I wind up, the minister fell short of directing us to a specific provision, which deals with the metering. As we are handling this Bill, among the issues, which we should consider to be very important is that to do with metering. If it is missing in the Bill, we should send it back to be reviewed. Thank you.

6.02
MR JOHN-BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is common knowledge that when God created natural resources, amongst them, He included a man and a woman - human beings. In fact, if you are ranking natural resources in order of preference - if you were to give preferential treatment in that order, you start with human beings. However, that the Bill was being processed without even according Members breathing space to interact with the project affected persons in the Albertine Graben in its own is an omission of the highest order, so to speak. 

On benchmarking, maybe one would reason with the justification of financial constraints but honestly, making a visit, at least one to listen to the plight of these Banyoro vulnerable people - can you imagine they are even denying them a right to their land? 

Article 26 of the Constitution is crystal clear on prior fair and prompt compensation. This infringement on the rights of the people must be condemned by all right thinking Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, I take issue with local content. You realise that I am head-over heels with the minority report because it has brought this out very clearly. Remember the report, which was released in 2019. It mentioned adversely, some of the national companies, our local companies are registered Ugandan companies but foreign owned; majority of them.

Instead of this Bill empowering our local people to also compete favourably in this oil and gas, it is the complete opposite. Actually, it is marginalising the local ones giving preferential treatment to foreign companies. 

This is a very unfair law and therefore, I concur with the plea of the minority report that more time should be accorded to the committee to give a surgery to this issue.

Production sharing agreements are not one set. 
There is the initial one, which has been mutilated through amendments but there is this new one, which is termed “renegotiated production sharing agreement”. This House deserves a copy and actually, the line minister should dispense it to this House. We ought to have unlimited access to this copy; the renegotiated production sharing agreement. What are you trying to hide? If you go to the library, even the one, which was tabled before Members, the copy has never been availed to Members.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, about the refinery, transparency was denied to the committee on matters of refinery. A lot more focus was concentrated on the pipeline but little has been said in this report about the production, transportation and the processing of the crude oil. One would even wonder about this pipeline. At first, I was deluded and I thought even when oil has been exhausted here and we have our refinery, we would still import crude oil through the same pipeline but it is far from the truth. 

This pipeline is only an exit route for crude oil from Uganda. It will never help us to import in the future when this reserve is exhausted.

6.07
MS JANE PACUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam speaker. I thank the minister and the chairperson, for this report. I rise to support the Bill. Oil production, transportation and use, globally, begins with signing a lot of agreements, such as the production sharing agreement, transportation and tariff agreement, and the joint operation agreements. I look at this Bill as one that is trying to align us to this agreement so that we can operationalise the use of this resource in this country. 

I want to particularly support clause 8, which I see as a way that is trying to address the defects in the Public Finance Management Act, which fortunately, is with us in Parliament here. I believe it will soon be processed through this House, whereby in the public finance management agreement, to me, it is an omission, where payment can only be done in cash. However, here is a Bill that is providing for payment in kind and with oil, businesses all over the world, some payments are done in kind and so, should we as Members of Parliament allow this clause to pass so that where we cannot meet all our payments in cash, we can as well pay with crude oil.

Madam Speaker, when you go to clause 11 – (Mr Ssasaga rose_) - yes, I feel for Ugandans that the project-affected persons are not paid in time but this is not unique to only the crude oil transportation – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssasaga, when you were debating, nobody interrupted you. 

MS PACUTO: Madam Speaker, just like it happened with the construction of roads and construction of irrigation schemes, as Members of this Parliament should support this but we urge Government to respond quickly by paying the project-affected persons. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable ministers, as we debate this, you must take into consideration the issue of the Project-Affected Persons. The Project-Affected Persons is an issue be it in the construction of roads and this one is a pipeline road and everybody knows that you have the money and these people must be compensated.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, this Bill is a facilitator for all our requirements - to tell the companies that we have agreed on what we are supposed to do, to pay our people and they know that they are now in business. That is when they are taking it serious and implementing final investment decision to work if this one passes now, tomorrow, people will be paid.

6.11
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The two minutes on a matter critical as oil, I understand the difficulties. This Bill in itself – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you know why I have given you two minutes? At least, you walked out from here and went and had lunch and came back. As for me, I have been sitting here from two o’clock.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I will wait for the amendment stage, then, we can see how to streamline a few of these issues. I will just talk about two issues. This Bill attempts to take precedence and override all the existing laws. There are critical matters on the environment as well as sharing on the land rights. I would like the honourable minister to outline those areas – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, are you listening? Hon. Migadde, leave my minister to concentrate.

MR SSEKIKUBO: To point out the defects in the existing laws, which particular laws are being overridden by this Bill? It attempts to amend other existing laws without saying so and we are at a loss.

Madam Speaker, you are aware the oil is coming from the Albertine Graben, which is a hotbed of the flora and fauna, our natural environment, which is critical for tourism and tourism can outlive this oil. Once this oil is exhausted, there will be a country and the tourism can always propel this country. It is the most durable resource we can harness. 

I would like us not to move by a blanket submission like this. Can the honourable minister outline for us the particular clauses, where there are defects and the lacuna so that we can use this law if it is working across and it is crosscutting? Let us have them as we commence on the debate. 

6.14
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, hon. Otaala, for the good report he has presented to the House. I also stand to support the majority report. 

In a country like Uganda, where we need employment opportunities for young people, we need direct foreign investments for this country to grow and develop. Infrastructure development is going to even give us an opportunity to explore more oil. It will be an opportunity for this country to discover oil that has not been discovered, if we have the infrastructure in place. 

It is important that Parliament supports this Bill and we pass it. Of course, there is no Bill that will come without challenges. We have to agree as Parliament to sort out the challenges and then pass this Bill so that the young people in this country get jobs and so that there is clean movement of the product that we are going to explore, because if we do not have the pipeline then we have been struggling for nothing. 

I support the Bill and the majority report. I only request that the challenges be sorted out but I strongly support the Bill. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What hon. Silwany is saying is that he supports the majority report. However, the challenges that have been identified by the minority report like the compensation of the PAPs must be resolved.  - No, you are not going to derail me.

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are a number of issues that have been raised. I will start with the land; this Bill is in line with the Land Act. If you go back to the actual Bill, the opening clause says this is done in line with the Land Act of this country. Therefore, all the submissions are in line with the Land Act of this country.

In addition, many issues, which have been raised here are implementation details. We are dwelling so much on the implementation and we are not addressing the principles of the Bill which we have here. I would actually request the House to go back to the principles of the Bill which is before us, as highlighted by the chair of the committee and we discuss those in the House. The operations details can be provided later. 

I noted that taxation and then companies - You see, taxation goals are provided for in a different Act and we cannot bring taxation to comprehensively be catered for in this Act. This Act is specific; it is for the road to take the oil from where we are producing it to where we are going to sell it – (Interruption) No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister continue with what he is submitting. 
 
MR OKAASAI: The local content has got a law and it is provided for in this Bill that we are discussing. This august House actually passed the Local Content Act and this law is quoting it and it is in line with the law which was passed by this Parliament. It may not be this very Parliament but it was passed by Parliament – (Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my friend, hon. Opolot, is that the Local Content Act was never assented to by the President. It is among those Bills that are supposed to be brought back to this House. We do not have that law yet because it has not yet come back.

MR OKAASAI: Thank you very much for that information; I take note of it. We will debate it at an appropriate time; we should not actually debate it now, because it would be pre-emptying the Bill which is coming on local content. 

Regarding the cost element – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, if you want the Bill to come back, do it as per rule 235 and we will handle it in this House. For now, we are looking at the pipeline.

MR OKAASAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding the allegation that EACOP is not registered in Uganda, EACOP company is registered in Uganda and we can provide you with its registration number in this country. The technical persons could provide me with that registration number. 

Metering is one of the key strengths of the EACOP pipe. The petroleum is going to be metered from where it is starting to move; from here to Tanga. For the committee which was taken to the site, they will actually tell you where there is mile zero for the movement of the petroleum products. It is not from the production well. (Interruption)
 MR SSASAGA: Thank you, honourable minister. I got the privilege to visit these countries where they produce oil while on the finance committee. If we go to Nigeria, they had serious issues with the pipeline. 

The floor meters you talk of were faulty and they would be manipulated according to the way they want the oil to flow until they had to move away from the pipeline. They had to put refineries within their own country because they wanted to cut on the cost. 

So, if you are talking about the floor metre being the solution and you want to assure this House that since you have the floor metres, they will be put, who will be there to monitor them? Those monitoring them, what is their intent? They might cause them to be faulty, they can record less oil going out and yet they are taking large volumes. 

Honourable minister, it may not be very right for a committee processing this national law to do with the pipeline that is very pertinent for us to never have visited those areas to see how the pipelines work, what challenges they face, how they rectify them and so on.

I think it would be very unfortunate to pass such a law even when the committee has never had the chance of visiting those areas so that they can compare and get the best practices in Nigeria, the USA so that the law can be good for us. 

The information I am giving the minister is that what he is presenting could be misinformation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually, what you are giving the House is dis-information. (Laughter)

MR OKAASAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am actually wondering what you are proposing. Metering is one way of doing it and monitoring it so when you say metering is not the right way to go, propose an alternative that we can consider – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, can you conclude? (Interjections) Hon. Okasai, can you conclude? (Member rose_) No, you sit, you will give your own information. Hon. Okasai, can you continue?

MR OKASAI: Let me continue on the supremacy of the law. It is not that this law is supreme in all aspects but in regards to the pipeline, it is – and do not read in between the lines. It is not about in everything; it is about the pipeline; it is specific to the pipeline -(Interjections)- please, do not take me back to -(Interruption)

MR OGUZU: Section 8(1)(A) provides that the company can make transactions without formal certification. Now, you are saying that there will be a meter yet the law is says that there even without formal certification of that meter, transactions can go on. How are we going to guarantee all these processes of transportation and metering if there is no formal certification through our known entities? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Honourable minister and the House, metering is very critical whether you want it or not. We are coming in at the tail end; we do not have to invent the wheel. A situation happened that there are wells in South Sudan but they export their oil through Sudan.

Between 2017/2018, there was a shutdown of the oil wells and production and the controversy arose when South Sudan and Sudan found that Sudan was cheating South Sudan on the metering. It caused the closure of those oil wells and exports until the matter was rectified and there was a joint metering process that was agreed upon.

Therefore, mere putting there a meter is not a guarantee, and we saw it and it has been happening around. It is only fair that you are holding a public office or responsibility to put together these loose ends. It is for your advantage and the country. You do not have to carry it and say, “No and no.” 

MR OKASAI: Thank you for that information but there is a provision under section 98 of the Petroleum Exploration and Production Act, 2013, which provides for the minister to -(Interjections)- this is midstream. This is going to happen midstream and this transportation is midstream. It is not the end of it or downstream. Therefore, there is a provision for a minister to be looking at it.
 
Regarding the renegotiated agreements, we have endeavoured to put them in the library; please, take the trouble to read them. Check for the renegotiated agreements in the library. These should form the main questions that have been asked but most of the questions, which were raised are operational questions, and which have been responded to. Therefore, I submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, honourable minister. Chairperson of the committee, do you have anything to say?

DR OTALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to allay the fears of my honourable colleagues that I have distilled about four issues that kept on coming up; namely, the land acquisitions process, the local content, metering and the supremacy of this Bill. 

I found that I needed to clarify and indeed, you rightly guided that in respect to land acquisition, visiting the project affected persons (PAPs) is more of an administrative matter. Our committee considered it as an operational matter and we said that at any time, as a committee, we shall be able to visit the project affected persons. However, we took note of the fact that the land acquisition process had to start. 

Anyhow, one issue that I would like to highlight is that once this Bill is passed, it is going to unlock the monies for compensating the project affected persons. We, as a committee, are going to follow up and as a matter of information; I would like to assure the House that right now that we took this as an administrative matter and not a legal matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I am the Chairperson of the House. I put the question that the Bill entitled, The East African Crude Oil Pipeline (Special Provision) Bill, 2021” be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 December, 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)











