
Tuesday, 17 December 2013 

Parliament met at 9.19 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this special sitting. This year has been a difficult year for this House. We have received bodies of our colleagues in and out, every month of the year. The year has not been easy but as we draw to a close, we keep praying that this trend should change; that we can see a better time in the future. 

We have lost hon. Sam Njuba, the Chairman of the Forum for Democratic Change. He was a member of this House and he was a minister but today, we sit here to honour him. Let us do just that. Thank you very much. 

(Entrance of the late hon. Sam Njuba)

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

Laying of wreaths 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE SAMUEL NJUBA KALEGA, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, KYADONDO EAST

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we receive the motion, let me recognise the people I can see from here in the distinguished members’ gallery. There is hon. Mugisha Muntu, President General of the Forum for Democratic Change; I have hon. John Livingstone Okello-Okello, former Member of Parliament for Chwa County, Kitgum District. On the technical bench behind me, I have the family members and the widow of the deceased. Please join me in recognising their presence. 
I also have a condolence message from hon. John Nasasira, Minister, which is addressed to the family. I will be passing it to the family. 

9.33
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba. 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of hon. Sam Kalega Njuba, Chairman of the Forum for Democratic Change and former Member of Parliament representing Kyadondo East, Wakiso District, which occurred on Friday, 13 December 2013 at Nsambya Hospital; 

AND WHEREAS the late Sam Kalega Njuba died aged 72 years having been born on 22 February 1941 in Kalega Maggwa, Gayaza to Rev. Canon Malaki Musoke Njuba and Nantege Njuba;

AND WHEREAS the late Sam Kalega Njuba started school at Nyenga Primary School in Mukono District for one year in 1947 to 1948, transferred to Mpuumu Primary School in 1949, then to Kadongo Gayaza Boys School in 1951 and to Mbale Senior Secondary School where he completed his A ‘Level; 

NOTING THAT because of his tireless quest for knowledge, the late Sam Kalega Njuba later joined the University of Dar es salaam where he studied law and thereafter briefly worked at the East African Airways before he went for future studies at Queen’s University, Northern Ireland in the United Kingdom; 

FURTHER NOTING THAT the late Sam Kalega Njuba, upon his return from the United Kingdom worked as a lecturer at Makerere University and many of his students have become outstanding and prominent public figures in Uganda; 

RECOGNISING THAT the late Sam Kalega Njuba joined active politics in 1980 and joined the bush war in February 1981 thereby being part of the National Resistance Army that ousted the then regime; 

AWARE THAT the late Sam Kalega Njuba was appointed Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs in charge of setting up a constitutional commission to draft the Constitution which was the basis of the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution and he was also elected Constituent Assembly delegate and represented his people up to 2001 after choosing to retire but he came back to Parliament representing the same constituency in 2006; 

REALISING THAT due to his political maturity, even after retreating to the Opposition, he was a voice of restraint and moderation and he preached reconciliation and he always created a middle line path to peaceful resolution of conflicts; 

COGNISANT THAT the late Sam Kalega Njuba was a modest hardworking and diligent legislator with a memorable political career who served his country with dedication and distinction, he was an accomplished legal practitioner, a distinguished legislator, a Government minister that oversaw the making of the 1995 Constitution; a revered Deputy president and later party chairman of the FDC; a golfer and above all, a lifelong fearless  freedom fighter and of course a father and a family man; the late Sam Kalega Njuba loved and served his country beyond the call of duty; 

NOW THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to his family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Sam Kalega Njuba.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late Sam Kalega Njuba to this country.
    3. That it collectively prays that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace. I beg to move.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Crispus Kiyonga, Member for Kyadondo East, Member for Kasilo, Member for Busia Municipality, Member for Kumi and Member for Katerera. UPDF and hon. Juuko have also seconded the motion. Please, you can now speak to you motion.

9.38
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, on behalf of the Government of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family and to the party to which the late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba belonged – the Forum for Democratic Change – and to all the people of Uganda on the passing of the late.

The late Njuba was born on 22 February 1941 in Gayaza, Wakiso to Rev. Canon Malaki Musoke Njuba and Nantege Njuba. He attended Nyenga Primary School in Mukono District, Mpuumu Primary School and Kadongo-Gayaza Boys School for his primary education. He went to Shimoni and Kyambogo Teachers’ Colleges to pursue a teaching career. He, however, returned to do his A’ Level education in Mbale Secondary School. He went to Dar es Salaam University, which was then part of the University of East Africa, where he graduated with a degree in law in 1961.

While in Dar es Salaam he met other Ugandan students – (Interjection) – 1968, I beg your pardon. While in Dar es Salaam he met other Ugandan students such as Yoweri Museveni, Edward Ssekandi, Benjamin Odoki, Joseph Mulwanyamuli Ssemwogerere, Eriya Kategaya, James Wapakhabulo and many others. These were later to influence the political course of Uganda’s history.

Njuba went on to do a Masters degree from the Queen’s University in Belfast, Northern Ireland and after that he came back to work at Makerere as a lecturer in the law school – that is where I met him for the first time as a law student. The law he had studied would later shape his input in legislation and the Constitution-making process for this country.

He began his career as a lecturer at Makerere University before being appointed Chief Magistrate Buganda Road Court in 1973. He then went into private legal practice under the firm Sam K. Njuba and Co. Advocates from 1973 to 1980. It is from this time that he also served as President of the Uganda Law Society. From 1981 to 1983, he worked as the secretary of the external committee of the National Resistance Movement, during which he coordinated NRM recruitment in Nairobi – he was among those who were active in recruiting young men and women to join the struggle.

From 1983 to 1986, he moved on to the University of Papua New Guinea where he worked as a senior lecturer and coordinator of magisterial studies at the faculty of law. It is there that he met people like Prof. Balibaseka Bukenya whom he persuaded and recruited to join NRM and support the struggle. 

Njuba joined active politics in 1980 at the urging of President Museveni who had rescued him from prison in 1979. In the 1980 elections, he campaigned for the Uganda Patriotic Movement led by Yoweri Museveni. When the NRM/NRA under Yoweri Museveni launched the bush war in February 1981, Njuba went to Nairobi where he became part of the external wing. Life in Nairobi was harsh and risky for Njuba and other colleagues. With no money and frequent arrests in his case, Njuba had to devise various means to survive. During that time many of his colleagues had been arrested, the most notable one being Mzee Balaki Kirya who was actually arrested and handed back to Milton Obote, having served five years of detention from 1966 to 1971. He served another four years until 1986 in detention without trial. But Njuba managed to escape because he would hide or whenever he was arrested, great effort was made to ensure that he was not handed back.

When the struggle triumphed in 1986, he became Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs up to 1994 and in 1989 he became a member of the National Resistance Council. He also represented Kyadondo East in the Constituent Assembly from 1994 to 1995 during the Constitution-making process. He went on to represent the same constituency in Parliament from 1996 to 2001 – with a break I had mentioned earlier – when he retired from elective politics.

As Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the late Njuba was in charge of setting up the Constitutional Commission which made the draft Constitution which was the basis of debate by the Constituent Assembly in the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. Dr Higiro Semajege, who unfortunately passed away on exactly the same date as the late Sam Njuba, was the secretary of that commission.

Njuba will be remembered for raising an objection to the inclusion in the draft Constitution of the provision establishing the National Council of State because although it had received majority support in the Constituent Assembly, it had not received the two-thirds majority that was required and therefore it had not passed. And it was therefore amended.

Njuba was a member of the 1994 Constituent Assembly that enacted the 1995 Constitution, representing Kyadondo East constituency and he was later elected to Parliament where he served until 2011.

In the Constituent Assembly, Njuba remained neutral in some of the contentious debates, including the debate on federo because he was essentially a republican and believed in a unitary state. In 2001, he left the Movement and joined the Elect Kiiza Besigye Taskforce –(Interjection)– Yes, I will be making amendments as I go along; so, please take note of them.

In 2001, he left the Movement and joined the Elect Kiiza Besigye Taskforce ahead of the general elections, going on to play a major role in the formation of the Reform Agenda and later, the Forum for Democratic Change in 2005. He served as Executive Coordinator of FDC before becoming party Chairman. After having chosen not to get elected in 2001 for the Kyadondo East Constituency, he again retired to join private legal practice. 

He has been an influential figure in the FDC and was actively involved in campaigning for hon. Nandala-Mafabi in the November 2012 party elections. As the FDC party Chairman, Njuba was instrumental in resolving the differences in the party arising from the November 2012 presidential elections. I beg your indulgence colleagues for the amendments I am making as I move on. (Laughter) 

He was, during the last FDC national delegates’ conference, unveiled as the party National Chairman, a position he has died holding. 

He spent his years as a practising lawyer defending individuals especially Opposition politicians arrested during demonstrations. Quite often the late Njuba would be seen at the Kasangati Magistrates Court offering free legal services to the local residents. Njuba was considered one of the most revered elders in the FDC.

Njuba is survived by a wife, Gertrude, and a number of children. The late Njuba once said he wanted his epitaph to read as follows: “Here lies an advocate and gentleman who put off his professional armour to liberate his country and once this was done he returned to his profession.”

Again I would like, Mr Speaker, to beg the indulgence of colleagues for the amendments I have made to the written presentation I had and the many omissions I have left out because of course I know a great deal more about professor. I called him Professor - I gave him the code name Professor during the struggle and that is what he used. I will have occasion to give these out, hopefully soon. May the Good Lord rest the soul of my brother and friend, the late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba, in eternal peace. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We have a condolence message from Web Advocates signed by hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende. We also have, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, the hon. Mayor of Masaka Municipality. He has come to join us. Please join me in welcoming him. Mr Afaayo Kayemba is also here. He has come to join us. Hon. Salamu Musumba, Chairperson Kamuli District is also here. Hon. Lydia Wanyoto is here and I think that is hon. Victoria Ssekitoleko, former Minister for Agriculture and hon. Susan Nakawuki, Member of the East African Legislative Assembly. Thank you.

9.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I stand here to second the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Sam Kalega Njuba. Before that I want to make some amendments to the motion which was moved by the Prime Minister where he said, in paragraph 2, “…after 1941 in Kalega Maggwa.” That should be deleted. It is just in Gayaza. Also, in the third paragraph, “after Mbale SSS, he went to Makerere College School.” These are the corrections I wanted to put across.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, on behalf of the Opposition, Bugisu Cooperative Union, my family and all peace-loving Ugandans, I bring our condolences to the bereaved family, the Buganda Kingdom and the people of Uganda, on the loss of a great son of this country. 

We have assembled here today to pay tribute to a patriot born to this country Uganda, the late Sam Kalega Njuba, for the services he heartedly rendered to our country. Ugandans, both young and old, are today mourning the passing of a great politician and a principled lawyer who fought so hard for what he believed in. Reflections will be made on his life that resonate his contributions as an accomplished legislator, politician, academician, advocate and parent. 

The late Sam Kalega Njuba was a man of character, very principled and very determined to stand his ground to express and defend his conscience even when it cost him the opportunity of the day. And that is why he left the Movement - on principle - in 2001. There are politicians who sell their souls for a few coins of silver. There are lawyers who are busy amassing wealth in a crooked manner but not the late Sam Kalega Njuba. 

As far as his professional career is concerned, the late Sam Njuba worked as a senior lecturer at Makerere University, 1969 to 1972; served as a Chief Magistrate, Buganda Road Court in 1972; was voted the President of the Uganda Law Society, 1978 to 1979 and has since been a celebrated advocate with Sam K Njuba and Company from 1994 to date. 

The late Sam Njuba truly served as secretary, External Committee of the National Resistance Movement; Member of the National Resistance Council and delegate of the Constituent Assembly representing the people of Kyadondo East leading to the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. He was the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Member of Parliament for Kyadondo East in the Sixth and Eighth Parliaments; Vice-Chairman of Reform Agenda and later, National Chairman of Forum for Democratic Change, a post he has held at the time of his death. 

All of us agree that the late Sam Njuba cultivated a reputation of a man who cared for entrenchment of peace and democracy in the country. It was on this basis that he fell out with the regime which had gone against the rule of law and democracy. I happened to have worked with the Chairman in the formation of the Reform Agenda where I was the secretary of economic affairs during the hard times when our leader, Dr Kizza Besigye, was in exile. We always looked to him as a parent for guidance. He always inspired us with his profound experience of law, unity and development and I want to quote some of the encouraging words that he used to say. He always said, “We are on the right side of history and the country looks onto us.”

He applied both his political clout and professionalism to build the Reform Agenda and later linked up with the PAFO members and convincingly won the hearts of PAFO members to join hands to form the Forum for Democratic Change.

The late of course exhibited high leadership qualities of a true democrat and a national leader. This clearly shows that if he had wanted pleasantries from the NRM, he would have got them but he stood for the rights, freedoms and equality for the people of Uganda.

The late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba shared with us values of development, reconciliation, peace, unity, rule of law and democracy. Within the prism of these values, we appreciate him.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I recall that after Dr Kiiza Besigye was rigged of the 2006 Presidential Elections, which has also been confirmed by press reports of today quoting Gen. David Sejusa, the late Sam Kalega Njuba reasoned that it would be wise for Dr Kiiza Besigye to be in Parliament as the Leader of the Opposition, where he thought, Dr Kiiza Besigye would meaningfully advocate for the rule of law and good governance. The late therefore offered to step down from his seat in Kyadondo East County so that Dr Kiiza Besigye would take it up and come to Parliament as the Leader of Opposition.

As a true patriot, he diligently advocated for freedom of expression, participation in good governance, solidarity in the times of joy and adversity, dignity and respect, justice, sense of fairness, equality of persons, respect of age, integrity, community mobilisation and self-determination. These were exhibited in the legal services he offered to this country and especially to the disadvantaged citizens of Uganda, which the Prime Minister has also talked about.

The late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba truly manifested these principles in his life and each of them was a centre of departure from the ruling regime that he helped to bring to power in 1986. Unlike the self-proclaimed patriots in Government who continue to live contrary to the cardinal rules of patriotism, the late lived as a true patriot. Of course this is envisaged in his struggle against the Government’s on-going efforts to restrict movement of political leaders, brutal attacks by security organs on peaceful demonstrations of citizens with dissenting views, illegal detention of citizens in police cells and prisons as well as the strong manifested desire to overthrow the authority regardless of the rule of law and constitutionalism.

The words and advise of Thomas Paine are thus worth noting that, “The duty of a patriot is to protect his country from its Government”. The late Sam Kalega Njuba indeed continuously executed this duty as an advocate and a legislator through the peaceful means - through being a founding member of the FDC that advocates for one people, one Uganda. He advocated for electoral reforms so as to have a free and fair election, delivered freedom to captives illegally detained and tried in Kangaroo courts.

As I said, the late Sam Kalega Njuba was a true patriot who cherished the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that he passionately contributed to its formation during the Constituent Assembly.

Mr Speaker, allow me make a small correction in the Prime Minister’s Statement on page 3, where he talks about his point of departure from the NRM – see the second paragraph – where he says that the late has been an influential figure in the FDC and that he was actively involved in campaigning for hon. Nandala-Mabafi in the November 2012 Party elections.

Mr Speaker, this confirms that the NRM really participated in the internal elections of FDC; distorting information. This is because, as far as I know, the late Sam Njuba never campaigned for me; he even never campaigned for anybody else because he was the chairman of the party. So, with such a statement, Mr Prime Minister, you are bringing discontent in the political party that you don’t belong to –(Interjections)– yes, because I don’t know how you got the information that he campaigned for me –(Interjections)– so, you have accepted the information –(Interjections)  whoever gave it to you –(Interjections)  you  put it on record.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the country is faced with many problems today, for example, corruption, injustice, inequality, abuse of human rights and the lack of respect for the rule of law. I want to remind all Ugandans that all these are just time bombs. The example of Kasokoso is just an ice-burg and so, it is important that we all come to a roundtable and discuss issues that affect all Ugandans in a national dialogue.

The late has gone ahead of us, but leaves us with the values that he so cherished. We commit to continue with the struggles so as to accomplish the dream he shared with us of One Uganda; One People. Of course, the late Sam Kalega is in the class of the Mandelas and that is why he had to go at the same time with Mandela.

I want to thank the family of the late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba, the people of Kyadndo East and all Ugandans who gave us the opportunity to work with him. Mr Speaker and honourable members, we shall dearly miss him because we loved him so much. We know that it is a one-way traffic and we shall definitely follow him. However, while still here, we shall make sure his legacy remains turning. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for your statement in seconding the motion. Honourable members, let me announce in advance that the Rt hon. Speaker will be joining us and when she comes in I will give her an opportunity to lay a wreath. That is why you see us positioning a chair for her. I have a condolence message from the Government Chief Whip, hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba, which I will be passing on to the family.

Hon. Members, the family has requested that this House should rise at 11 O’clock. That gives us only 55 minutes, which we need to share properly. The family would like the body to leave this place by 11 O’clock. 

The motion is that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Sam Kalega Njuba; that it takes cognizance of the services rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba to the country; and that it collectively prays that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace. Hon. Members, that is the motion that I propose for your debate. How are we going to share the time? I will start with Gen. Tumwine. 

10.09
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker and the family of the late Njuba, on behalf of the UPDF and on my own behalf, I stand to add my voice in support of the motion and to express our condolences to the family that we have been associated with since the NRM struggle started. 

First, let me thank God who has made it possible for us who are still alive to give a deserving send off to one of our great Ugandans who deserve it, the late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba. 

Secondly, let me thank all those that in one way or another benefitted, gained, were helped by the late Njuba or who helped him to make his life better or made a contribution. I am one of those who benefitted from his support and from his national service. I first knew him as a freedom fighter and as a selfless person and let me take this opportunity to say that for the first time - I will put this on record - when we were preparing for the Kabamba attack, the vehicle I and Brigadier Lutaaya used to do reconnaissance on the route we were supposed to take on where we kept our food belonged to the late Sam Njuba and as a matter of fact, while on the way because the roads were terrible, the engine fell out and we had to lift it and put it back and fix it by our simple means and we finally brought it as it was and handed it to him. We do not know what happened after that but that journey that started with that vehicle is the journey that has brought us this far. It is that journey that made him go to exile like many of the other freedom fighters and while he went to exile, his wife, Gertrude, joined us in the bush. The family has been associated with the struggle from then up to now and the contribution made when he was in exile was immense as a member of the external committee. He did quite a lot and he should be remembered for it.

The late Sam Njuba was a determined freedom fighter, a patriot, a democrat, a steadfast and calm player who remained the same Njuba who you met yesterday and would meet tomorrow and he would be the same person. I consulted him on many occasions when I was Army Commander and Minister of State for Defence, when he was the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, on both legal and professional matters and he would give his advice as humbly, as simply and as professionally as very few sometimes do. 

He was somebody who was approachable at any time and he would give you his advice and would make his statement whenever he spoke both as a member of the NRC when we were here and when he came back as Member of Parliament for Kyadondo, and he would never take political capital for the sake of it. He would say what he said because he believed in it and he was convinced about it. 

The late Sam Njuba’s whole family was associated with us to the extent that one of the daughters was married to one of our late comrades – the late Frank Guma - and has continued to be part of our UPDF family. He was a rare politician that even if you disagreed, and I am saying this with a lot of confidence that up to the time I last discussed with him political matters, he would be the same. 

He would give the same advice, the same conviction; the same criticism because many people fear criticism and when you say it, he would give you criticism that would convince you about the reasons for telling you whatever he would tell you.  I want to honour him for that and to encourage many people to learn from that example. 

As somebody senior and older in age, he had a saying, “Mwana wange, genda mpola” literally meaning go slow on some of these things. He is one of those people who would take time and I think that is a quality that we all deserve to learn and emulate and I have no doubt that all those who have worked with him; all those who have shared experience in political or legal life have seen something to learn from him and that is why I thank God that he has been given a deserving send off. 

We have an old man in my village who says that a man does not become a man every day; a man becomes a man only once. You need to do it only one day and people will know that so and so is a man. But the late hon. Sam Njuba had many days in his history in which you could say he was a man and that is what I would like to advise; that if we did our part, each one according to his own opportunity, that little part can play a very big role and he played his part. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

10:16
LT. COL SARAH MPABWA (UPDF Representative): Mr Speaker, I stand here to support the motion on this day. I first heard of the late Sam Njuba of course as husband to afande Gertrude. Later on in 1986, I got to know him as the father to Stella Njuba Guma. I had the opportunity as a young soldier, staying with the late Guma to always accompany him to Makerere University to court Stella and we always joked wondering what would happen if the affair did not yield good results because afande Njuba - the two of them - would kill us and I am glad that it ended well.  

I knew of him as the father to Norah, the Guild President then and I got to know the late Sam Njuba in the Eighth Parliament as a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I never called him anything but Mzee or papa Njuba because that is how I knew him; that is how I associated with him. He was a father figure to me. This was an old man with great wit and humour, very humble, very patient and it was difficult not to respect him because he respected everybody regardless of class or stature. He mentored me in the legal committee. I almost went into law school because he kept encouraging me to do so. Maybe I will honour his wishes at a later date. Papa - the honourable with a twinkle in his eye because he had a lot of mischief under his sleeves to make a difficult moment light. 

I remember one day we had a hair-raising take off when we travelled together for committee work from Johannesburg. We had been given the last two seats at the very end of the plane with him. I was in the aisle and he was at the far end and it was a very bad take off. I looked at him and he kind of took a relaxed pose, closed his eyes as if taking a leisure nap. I closed my eyes and started praying. But he was so relaxed in his demeanour. For that hair-raising 20 minutes, as I prayed and thought if the plane went down, the next person that I would be found with my hands clutched would be papa Njuba. The plane stabilised and we landed safely. When we came out he said, I saw you praying and the prayers brought us safe. I asked him what he was doing and he said he was supporting me in prayer. (Laughter) 

He was very calm; I noted his collected dignified manner even in the face of danger. I respected him more so for that. We had promised each other that I would visit him and we eat the chicken. I will remember him with a lot of respect. To you his family, may the Lord comfort you. Rest in peace papa. 

10.22
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker and honourable members, hon. Sam Kalega Njuba has died a frustrated person. Frustrated because he envisioned a country where disputes would not be resolved by teargas, by battling citizens on the streets of Kampala – and that is why he abandoned his career to join the struggle that brought this government to power. In fact like Mandela did at one time when disobedience was being met by guns, the last time we spoke about politics in this country, hon. Njuba had started thinking of a second armed struggle to rescue this country from a group that has made it their business to brutalise citizens in order for them to continue holding on to power. 

I know the history will be said by the others but I thought it is important for this Parliament to note that that is the state in which hon. Sam Kalega Njuba died. I am glad some of his comrades, like Dr Crispus Kiyonga and others went to see him in hospital at Nsambya; I suspect he might have shared with them those sentiments. 

I am a direct beneficiary of the principled stand hon. Sam Kalega Njuba took when his body was still full of energy and life. He knew when to retire and unlike other elders; he was a man to be taken by his words. If he said I am retiring, he meant it. Probably if he didn’t, I would never have been a member of the Ninth Parliament. There are elders in this country who have made pledges and even written them down in multiple numbers in their manifestos, that I will be serving the last term, I will be retiring – only for them to turn around and eat their own words. 

Hon. Sam Kalega Njuba was an elder; if you cannot take an elder by his words, then what can you do? At one time I had a bitter debate with the Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi on radio and he told me, “Ssemujju, you were not properly brought up” and I told him when we have people – I will not tell which people – but if you have people like those I mentioned on radio, you certainly will have young people behave the way they are behaving because there are very few examples to pick from elders. 

On behalf of the people of Kyadondo East, I want to thank the family of hon. Sam Kalega Njuba for sharing this person with us. He left monumental features in our constituency – It is because of his work that we have tapped water in the towns of Kireka and Bweyogerere. He was a nationalist but he also cared for his region, village and constituency. He never focused all his energies on meeting only local and constituency issues like many of us do. 


A lot of the history of hon. Sam Kalega Njuba has been shared with us and I want to challenge the elders who are still part of the NRM to remember the agreements that you entered into with the various groups that joined that struggle. 

I was reminded last evening of the agreements you signed with Prof. Yusuf Lule in Nairobi. He could never have joined this struggle just to install an emperor – more or less setting up the scene that we had during the colonial days that for everything to happen, people must make endless pilgrimages to State House Entebbe, even for simple disputes. All must go to Rwakitura in buses, mini buses and trucks. 

Hon. Sam Kalega Njuba fought, sacrificed, and abandoned his career to contribute to a country where institutions would be respected, where the rule of law would be respected and that is why I said in my opening remarks that he has died a frustrated person. He has endlessly spoken about Uganda the one that made him fight; the one that made him abandon his career because unlike many colleagues of his who went to fight in the bush, who did not have flourishing careers, his was flourishing. He had the opportunity to teach at Makerere and several other universities. He therefore did not join this struggle merely because he was motivated by material gains. 

So, as we pay tribute to hon. Sam Kalega Njuba, I want to reiterate a prayer I made earlier to the elders who are still part of the NRM – hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Crispus Kiyonga and especially those who worked with hon. Njuba in the external wing to remember the many meetings that you had; the many agreements you entered into; the kind of the country that you envisaged and promised us the young people. And as we send him off, for you to begin reflecting on those promises; that is the best gift you can give to this country as we remember hon. Sam Kalega Njuba. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. Let me take this time to deal with the matter that I raised earlier. But let me recognise the presence, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, of hon. Bernard Mulengani of EALA, hon. Joyce Mpanga and hon. Charles Oleny who have come to join us. Please welcome them. (Applause)

I will now allow the Rt Hon. Speaker to lay the wreath and also after the Speaker, we shall have the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus and the Conservative Party. We started early and so, there were some difficulties in coordinating some of these things. 

(Laying of wreaths)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The time is tight so let us shorten our speeches.

10.32
MRS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to add my voice in supporting the motion and on behalf of the people of Wakiso District, I express our sincere condolences to the family, to the FDC party and to the people of Uganda. 

I have known the late hon. Sam Njuba as a father, a leader and a man of humility and honesty; soft-spoken but very serious and determined. I remember meeting him in 2001 when I had gone to consult him about the politics of our area when I wanted to contest. I saw him as a person who wanted others to also work with him. He has been so kind and exemplary that we all ought to emulate him. I knew him as a person who was never antagonistic.

Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that when we embraced multi-partism, Njuba has appreciated and tolerated everyone. He has not been antagonistic at all and he has been able to bring us all together, especially in our constituency of Kyadondo East. 

We have a problem of illegal land evictions but Mr Njuba has been counsel to many. He has even offered free legal services to many of our poor people, especially in Kyadondo East. The people of Kyadondo East are going to miss him just as all of us are going to miss him. He has been very supportive and like my brother has said, he has brought a lot of development in our area. And the people of Kyadondo East look at the late hon. Njuba as the “Mandela” of that area. He has been a person who wanted to see peace in our areas. Like it has been said, I do not believe that he will rest in peace if we do not consider the peace of the country. But I honestly pray that we do our best as leaders of this country to have a peaceful Uganda.

I know that hon. Njuba has always wanted us leaders to be together. Much as he has been an FDC leader, he has been a person of all people whom he respected.

Mr Speaker, I will conclude by thanking the people of Kyadondo East for having given the late an opportunity to represent them. I also thank President Museveni for having given him a chance to be a minister and the FDC party for making him party chairperson. All these gave him a chance to serve. May his soul rest in peace.

10.36 
MRS SAFIA JUUKO (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, I would like to say that the late hon. Njuba has been one of my maternal uncles. He was a friend of my father and indeed my mother has told me to tell you that their clan has lost a very great man. He has been a very loving and respectful uncle. He is one person who would leave a seat even for juniors like us during functions. 

In politics, I can describe him as a humble and a very intelligent politician who has been a model to the upcoming politicians. He has been one of those unique men with the capacity to think beyond the confines of their party and what the future should be.

To me, like the US President said about Nelson Mandela, the late Njuba will be counted among those men in this country who have shaped the history of Uganda. I say this because of the contribution he made to the Constitution-making process, which brought the 1995 Constitution. We all know that this document – the 1995 Constitution – was accepted by a majority of Ugandans from all political parties and even non-politicians.

Like one philosopher called Aristotle emphasised, constitutionalism is one of the pillars of good governance. And indeed my uncle made a contribution towards building this pillar because for the last 18 years, this document has not been challenged or amended. The message I have for you as politicians and members of Parliament is that let us uphold his Constitution and the rule of law in this country.

Late hon. Sam Njuba, we will miss your wise counsel; may the Almighty God rest your soul in eternal peace.

10.39
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. The country today witnesses what we may describe as “double tragedy” where we are sending off two former members of this House but two members that have been very important and to whom as a person, I have been closely associated with. Hon. Sam Njuba mediated what appeared as a conflict when I intended to stand in Busiro East. FDC had a candidate and DP had a candidate. In one meeting which he chaired, he advised us to choose the best from amongst ourselves. We looked at ourselves and each of us considered himself the best and he said, “Both of you are  the best. Choose one of you.” (Laughter) - And we chose one of us. 

I handled an election petition with him in Masaka; he was  the lead counsel. One day, we travelled together and within those two and a half hours in his car, he called me three names and gave me three titles: the first, his son; the second, his brother; and the third, his boss. And I asked, “What do you have for those three descriptions?” He said, “You are my son because you and your sisters went to school with my children.” He had another answer for being his son - because I am married to his friend’s daughter. “Why should I be your brother?” I asked.  He said, “Because we married from the same clan.” “And why should I be your boss?”  he said, “Because you are the Kabaka’s minister.” He was a man with a great sense of humility. 

He has been described as a principled man and I have spoken on this Floor before that the art of being a good guest is in knowing when to leave. He knew when to leave the stage. 

Hon. Njuba was an all-rounder. He served this country professionally, politically and socially. As a professional, he taught law at the bar, at the bench and in the classroom. As a politician, he taught us how to practice politics - and principled politics. I am sure he is one of those we must miss - of necessity. It is a culture amongst the Baganda that when someone dies you do not go digging but it is practice today that when some people, die we go to dig. The reason is simple: we have no words to talk about them. 

He was a calm man. His calmness is comparable to one man I have talked about in this House before and that is the hon. Amama Mbabazi; not because he refers to me as his uncle but he is calm. (Laughter)

And finally, Mr Speaker, the death of hon. Njuba has brought us together and that is why you see the Prime Minister moving this motion and the Leader of the Opposition seconding it. This time there is no dispute as to who owns the dead man. (Laughter)– But the same way death brings us together is the same way life should bring us together –(Applause). Nobody should be compelled; nobody should be bribed in this country; nobody should be conscripted into the company of another if we are to practice mature politics in this country.

My dad, my brother; I do not want to say the other word which he used in humility. May I wish your soul eternal peace.

10.43
MR PHILLIP WAFYLA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My condolences to the family of the late Sam Njuba. I have known Sam since the 80s when we were in UPM and I have worked with him for the last nine years in FDC. Sam was a true leader, a unifier and a revolutionary. Revolutionaries fight for ideas. There are some sham revolutionaries who fight for material gain. Once they have got material gain, the revolution ends. Sam was not like that. In the epitaph that the Prime Minister talked about that Sam wanted on his grave, he had died before the revolution was completed because we are still struggling to liberate Uganda. 

I will talk about Sam in an aspect which is not familiar to most of us in this august House. Sam was a Rotarian. I have been a Rotarian since 1992 and in Rotary, we have our motto: Service above self. We also have what we call the four way test. If you are a leader, if you are doing anything, if you want to say something or you are thinking about it, ask yourself: Is it the truth? And Sam was always for truth. Ask yourself a second question: Is it fair to all concerned? And Sam was always fair to all concerned. Ask yourself a third question: Will it build good will and better friendships? And Sam always tried to build good will and better friendships. And finally ask yourself: Is what I am saying or doing or thinking about going to be beneficial to all concerned? And Sam always tried to do that. 

The last action Sam did for my party FDC was to reconcile us. The hon. Prime Minister said Sam was partisan in that election. He was not. He did not have a side. We did not even know how he voted. (Interjection) – Yes, much obliged. But Sam put up a reconciliation commission. They gave him a report and he left his bed - he was sick - and he came to Najjanakumbi to present that report and he offered advice to us. He said he was in pain and he left. 

Later, I was on the committee of elders and we went to visit Sam at his home. Again, he left his bed. He gave us advice - legal, political and human advice - and we followed that advice which has helped us to come together and solve those problems. That was Sam. My party will miss Sam. We are going to miss his leadership skills. He was moderate, calm and a unifier but his time has come. He is gone and we shall miss him forever. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please join me in welcoming hon. Baguma Isoke and hon. Yonna Kanyomozi who have joined us in this mourning.

10.49
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sam was a good soul who did a lot of good for this country. Today on behalf of my family and the people of Ndorwa West, I join you, Gertrude and the family and the FDC party in appreciating him for the contribution he made to the liberation of this country and the contribution he has made to the building of the Forum for Democratic Change Party.

Many people know the late hon. Sam Kalega in many ways, but he has been known as a son of a Reverend and a Canon. In the Anglican faith, to be a Canon means you are in a special place. And so, to be a son of a Canon and you don’t behave like a son of Canon is to bring shame to your father. But hon. Sam Kalega behaved truly as a son of a Canon. We have seen so many children of Canons and Bishops who you cannot think of as children of such holy people because they do contrary to what their daddies are doing.

But above all, the late Sam Kalega Njuba was a selfless man. As many people have said, he always offered service above self. He made tremendous contributions to the liberation of this country but you could hardly hear him talk about those contributions. You have just heard what Gen. Elly Tumwine said about him that he offered his car to transport the first people who started the liberation war. But you could never hear the late talk about what he did in the liberation of this country. He never drummed his trumpet and this is an important lesson to all of us to learn. There are so many people who every time you meet them want to remind you of what they did for this country. So, it is important that we let what we do to others be known by others but also make sure that we don’t drum our own trumpet.

Mr Speaker, the late made a tremendous contribution to the Forum for Democratic Change Party. The late had the capacity to let it go and move on. When he left his colleagues in the NRM, he moved on and you would never hear him campaign about the weaknesses and the problems affecting the party. There are so many people who leave their parties but they continue to be stuck in what they left behind. But for the late, he moved to build the FDC and that should be an encouragement to all of us that once you take a stand, please move on. I want to say, thank you, hon. Sam Kalega Njuba and to wish you eternal peace.

10.52
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My heart goes to Mama Gertrude Njuba and the family. And on my behalf and that of my family and clan, I want to convey our deep feelings of sorrow and sympathy to the family of the late hon. SK, as we used to call him.

My first encounter with the late hon. Sam Njuba was in 1980 as you have heard from hon. Wafula Ogutu. Many of us belonged to the political party then called the UPM. This encounter was on telephone immediately after the elections of 1980. I had won a seat in Kasese in a constituency then called Kasese North, which combined the areas of Busongora South and Busongora North today but so much trouble had taken place in the district. A standby candidate of the DP, the late Veto Muhindo, had been killed. All the other three DP candidates had been disqualified via radio messages after being formerly nominated. So, even when I won, I rang Mzee Bidandi Ssali who was our Secretary General and said I wanted help because I wanted to petition. But Mr Bidandi Ssali asked, “To petition? The people who petition are the ones who loose. Why do you want to petition?” and I said that these dirty and regrettable tragic incidences that had happened in Kasese needed to be brought to fore. So, if I didn’t petition how would these be known? We argued for some time on the telephone and Mr Ssali felt he wouldn’t convince me. He referred me to a lawyer called Sam Njuba, who he said was a good lawyer. So, he said: “Can I ask him to call you?” And within five minutes the late here called me on phone, introduced himself and I said to him that I wanted to petition.

We somehow argued until he cooled me after which he said that he was talking as a lawyer and that his professional advice was that I couldn’t petition. That was my first encounter with the late hon. Sam Njuba. Subsequently, we met in one of the external committees – he was one of our leaders and the Rt hon. Prime Minister has said it here. But I also want to agree with those brothers and sisters who have said that the late Sam Njuba was a calm man. But not just calm but also a very thoughtful man. Each time you asked him something, he would not have a ready answer for you; he would take a few moments to think through before giving you an answer. I saw that in him in the external committee as one of our leaders. I saw that in him in the Cabinet and elsewhere. And when my young brother hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju came to replace the late, I told him “you are now my son and so you should listen to me” and I keep telling him this. He has not yet quite listened to me – I said to him that my brother was a calm man, you need to also be calm, hon. Semujju, so that you can be persuasive and help to make the country better. So, the late was a calm man and very thoughtful and indeed a patriot.

I worked closely with Ms Gertrude Njuba, his wife, particularly at the Movement Secretariat as we prepared this country to transit from the Movement System to a multiparty. And as God would have it, eventually, a nephew of mine got married to a daughter of Gertrude and Sam. So, we still have that very close link.

Yes, I saw the late not on his recent admission to hospital about three or so months ago when he was admitted to Nsambya Hospital. He had had surgery on his intestines because he had had an obstruction. I was rushing to some place in DRC and I was told that my friend was in the hospital. It was at night but I branched to Nsambya and found him calm sleeping. So, I told the daughters not to wake him up but he had already heard my voice and so he woke up. We chatted for quite a while before I left him only to learn recently while I was in Nairobi that Sam had left us. God gives; God takes away. Comrade SK is gone. His mark on Uganda’s progressive politics cannot be erased and I want to assure Sam that we, your brothers and fellow historicals as we are sometimes described, will continue to strive to make our country better. May the Almighty rest the soul of SK in eternal peace. I thank you.

10.59
MR TANNA SANJAY (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. Honourable colleagues have said it all about the late hon. Sam Njuba but I remember vividly as a child, I interacted with his children and while we went home, he used to portray that figure of a very big guy. I met him when we came here to Parliament again and the image that I had of him then changed drastically. He was this amiable person who was extremely willing to give you advice and time and again, we used to joke especially when there were riots within Kampala and you would find time and again members of the Opposition on the street and I would meet him and ask him; what are you doing here you are supposed to be down there and he would tell me, “That is not my style of doing things.”

He was extremely decisive, he knew what he wanted, he knew how to get it and his advice to me then was that I stand in a very sensitive position and the way I portray myself and carry myself determines a lot because I don’t only represent the people of Tororo Municipality but Uganda and the particular community that I belong to and he said that whatever I say on the Floor of Parliament - I remember I said something that was extremely critical one time and we met outside there and he said, you could have passed on the same message but in a more subtle manner. So, I agree with hon. Kiyonga and hon. Ssemujju who said that he was a calm and collected gentleman, extremely knowledgeable and I agree with hon. Kiyonga when he says that his mark on the progressive politics of this country cannot be erased and it is a challenge for us. 

When you hear that in 1979-1980 hon. Kiyonga, hon. Tumwine and the rest went and started on something that they knew would yield results - they came forward, yielded results, somewhere in between he then realised that this is not what he stood for, he crossed and joined the Opposition and therefore, it gives you an insight into the character of the person that as a youth, as the young generation that is now taking over from that generation, are we doing even a tenth of what they did then? Are we in position to do what they did then and these questions, I leave to the young generation for us to reflect upon and pray that we get the inspiration and energy to do some of the things that they did. We, the youth, today are quick to destroy whatever has been built but we don’t take time to reflect upon the energy, the time and the input that these gentlemen have put in to build the little we have and we are supposed to build upon what they have built so far.   

I would like to pass my condolences to the family, pass my maximum respect to hon. Sam Njuba and pray to the Almighty that his soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you. 

11.03
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A story is told of a man who went to visit a cemetery and on one of the graves he found an epitaph which read: “Here lies a good lawyer” and the man was extremely distressed. He felt that in that grave they had buried two people; the good man and the lawyer. Mr Speaker, today we are extremely distressed, even more distressed because in that casket lies three people. In it is a good man, there is also a good lawyer and there is also a very good politician in the same casket. Mr Speaker, you can appreciate the dilemma and the pain that we have as part of this big family – the FDC. Here lies a good lawyer who fought for justice for all, who offered pro bono services to so many people, who went about the police cells in this country searching for the poor who would be rounded up by operatives in the night in the cities of Kampala, Wakiso and wherever. He went round searching for them and when he couldn’t even get some of them, he would apply for habeas corpus. Here is a good lawyer. 

Today, we are talking about lawyers who ask: is there a good case? That is what you lawyers are asking and sometimes you find yourself asking what happened to the ethics of this profession. What happened to the morals of this profession where people will find a good case in supporting a man who sacrificed children; a good case in giving terrible advice to a government or to anybody? 

Mr Speaker, here lies a good politician. This politician we have been told was part of the people who delivered the original NRM. When we read the mustard seed of course we don’t get his name there. History in this country has been rewritten but I am glad that the mover of the motion has tried to rectify this anomaly and try to bring back hon. Sam Kalega Njuba as one those who really brought in the National Resistance Movement that we are talking about today. But I am also told by the family yesterday that the late himself has written a book that the family will hope to launch someday. I am praying that that will bring back the real truth about the role of this gentleman, the politician who lies before us. But also, to all of you historicals who know this great man and the role he played, what happened to you when he was being teargased in Kansangati those days? What happened in your minds? Do you think that is the right way you should treat yourselves because we have been with hon. Njuba in the trenches of Kansangati. He is chased out of police stations, he is not allowed to access his clients and he is a historical who played a very important role. Mr Speaker, I need answers to those questions.

As the Forum for Democratic Change, we want to applaud these good politicians because as he lies here, only yesterday 16th December, we celebrated the lives we should have been celebrating or rather, the FDC marked its ninth birthday. We would have been celebrating but as fate would have it, we had him there lying in state. His vision and dreams for this country are embodied in our aspirations as the FDC and we are struggling on our feet but again I want to ask: hon. Njuba wanted political space so that he would freely express himself; I want to ask everybody here, now that we have the Public Order Management Act, actually people have called it “the Political Order Management Act” that you intend to surely finish up the political space, wouldn’t Government want to rethink this type of attitude in light of the fact that you are all paying tribute to hon. Sam Njuba? Don’t you think that as a country we should rethink the way we manage dissent in this nation if not for the sake of this country that we will all move together and have some harmony which everyone has said hon. Sam Njuba represented?

Lastly, hon. Sam Njuba delivered the Constitution. I want to state for the record that one of the things that hurt him a lot was when we lifted the presidential term limits. This country honestly needs good politicians. I think we have many politicians but we just don’t have many good politicians. I am hoping that we, at the end of the day, will emulate hon. Sam Kalega Njuba and be good politicians who will put Uganda ahead of all our other interests and deliver freedom, justice and democracy that our country needs.

Finally, I had the privilege to work as the Secretary General of the Forum for Democratic Change when hon. Sam Njuba was the party chairman and even at the formative stages. I have had the privilege to be mentored by hon. Sam Kalega Njuba, to sit under his wise council. I would like to appreciate the people of Wakiso, the Njuba family for giving us their father and their son. I also had the privilege of being with him here in Parliament. The FDC appreciates, Uganda appreciates, humanity appreciates. Mr Chairman, fair thee well. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

11.10
MS FEMIAR WADADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for honouring the invitation to come and pay tribute to our dear one. Last week we paid tribute to Mandela and we were fighting with Mandela’s shoes - to find who really fits in them. Today, we find a perfect match; it is hon. Njuba. 

Hon. Njuba was our chairman, he steered our party meetings diligently, taking us through the day without feeling the pinch of the seat. He was full of jokes; he was humane and loving. His wife said yesterday that any stranger that came to their home was welcome and automatically became their relative. But this was possible because he had a good wife. Most of us women, once we do not approve of someone in our home then that person will not even have food to eat. Even if they are the parents of our husband, they will leave but this woman was good. 

Mr Speaker, on this note, I want to thank his wife for being a good wife; for looking after Njuba and his relatives; taking him through his life until death has done them part. It is hard to replace a person once lost. And as a party, we do not know who will become our chairperson to take our party forward. We have lost him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

11.12
MR GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to join in the sympathies of this great man. On 10 May 1984, I was four days old in Port Moresby – most of you do not know where Port Moresby, it is in Papua New Guinea. I was shopping in a supermarket, and I saw someone walking next to me. He greeted me in Luganda and in those days, we were in fear. I walked to the front and he followed me; he greeted me again in Luganda. So I said, “What do you want with me?” Eventually, we came to have a very long and healthy period with the late Sam Njuba. He persisted. After two weeks, he started talking to me about this thing – the people in the bush, and I hated it. I told him, “I cannot support people who have killed all my friends in Kakiri.” He persisted and we split and for the next six months, we did not talk peaceably because I could not support those who were killing people in Kakiri. (Laughter)

Subsequently, he convinced me and I dragged my feet and that was at the time when these people were about to come here to Kampala – (Laughter). But the most important point that I want to make is that this man was a great fighter; he was a great person who convinced all of us and if there is any place for those who fought in the bush, then this man has a place – (Applause) – a big place. But that big place, I have not seen. 

I hear people go abroad for antenatal care; this is just to check the abdomen to find out whether the foetus is growing and they fly back. Here is a man who was suffering with abdominal cancer, but everybody was sleeping; the big people were sleeping. I do not know how many people went to visit him in Nsambya. You could see that people do not remember at all; or we all carry luggage but we do not know what it contains and maybe my good father carried that luggage.

This man was extremely truthful; he said what he meant and kept to it. During the constitutional making, he said, “You have smuggled in decentralisation, in the Constitution draft there was federal.” They intimidated him but he refused to bow; a very truthful man. Hypocrisy was very far from him and I think that is why he had a lot of trouble with the people that he used to dine with. If you said something and changed it – I do not know if hypocrisy brings out my meaning - “Munanfuusi”, in Luganda, which means hypocrisy. And I think because of that he had to move quickly to where he was celebrated yesterday. 

Anybody who has been a freedom fighter fights for the rights of the people. This man fought for the rights of the people; whether they are were a minority or a majority; he always fought for the rights of people. Let me tell you that this country now needs to take that important example to give rights to everybody; to enjoy the freedoms for which he fought. (Applause)

This man convinced me to go into politics with another late friend of mine – James Wapakhabulo. I was never a politician and I wanted to enjoy my medical practice but he convinced me by saying, “This is the time to join hands and develop this country.” This man had a heart for Uganda – most people do not have a heart for Uganda. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I want to emphasise one important thing. if we have anything to learn from the late hon. Njuba – and we particularly in the political arena of today – let us learn the truth; let us stop hypocrisy; let us stop fighting other people’s rights and remove all these terrible things we have in Kampala today. We shall have given him a wonderful send-off. (Applause)

My full sympathies go to the bereaved family, to the people of Kyadondo, those in Wakiso and Buganda – he participated for a lot of time in Buganda issues. But most of all, my sympathies go to all Ugandans because we have lost a hero; you did not give him a medal but we have lost a hero. (Interjection) - You did? Very good. A fellow fighter says they did and so I am now very happy. May hon. Sam Njuba’s soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

11.22
DR EDWARD MAKUBUYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this to go on record during this parliamentary send-off of hon. Sam Kalega Njuba. Many people have spoken a lot about him and I agree with the positive things that have been said about him. May I add a few details? Hon. Njuba was my teacher at the faculty of law. Teachers must teach and they should not just go through the motions of teaching; hon. Sam Njuba taught substance of law and methodology of law – lawyers must keep time; we preach it and yet few really do it. But he kept time. Lawyers must be analytical, thorough and thoughtful; he was all those. 

Hon. Njuba was a proper officer of the Courts of Judicature. Lawyers must carry out their clients’ instructions because they are supposed to be paid by their clients. But above all lawyers must remain officers of the court, helping it to render justice and not obstructing it. And hon. Sam Njuba was a proper officer of the Courts of Judicature.

So, we celebrate his legacy as a law teacher and as a legal practitioner. Yes, the fact is that hon. Sam Njuba was president of the Uganda Law Society; sometimes it is easy but his time was very difficult because it was under the Amin regime. And the challenge that he left with us is how to practise professionalism under pressure. Professionalism is easy when the going is okay but under pressure – (Laughter) - in hon. Sam Njuba’s tactful professionalism even under the highest pressure of the Amin’s regime.

I was also happy to work under him as a member of the Uganda Constitutional Commission and these things which are being talked about here – smuggling this and the other –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am just wondering how the Hansard will capture that. (Laughter)

DR MAKUBUYA: So, Mr Speaker, there is a village called Luvuvu in a parish called Kangave, in a sub county called Makuliita in Luweero and obviously in Katikamu South. But I would like to bring this out that between 1982 and 1985 there was a liberation struggle in the jungles of Luweero and Mrs Gertrude Njuba commanded a contingent of NRA troops for some years from that village called Luvuvu. And even the UNLA soldiers in Bombo finally found out where the serious fire was coming from. They attacked Luvuvu but Mrs Gertrude Njuba, being the good commander that she was, evacuated the place. (Applause) And the UNLA had no victory that day. So I salute Mrs Gertrude Njuba for this historical role in the struggle. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I thank God and the NRM, who have made this send-off possible. Short memory is very dangerous –(Laughter)– but we the people of Luwero know that this peace which Uganda is enjoying today; this peace under which we can have this peaceful and dignified send-off and this peace under which many of us can talk freely - let us talk responsibly because there was actually a struggle and it is that struggle which led to this peace. 

So, I salute the Njuba family for their role in this struggle and I send my condolences to the family and to the people of Uganda generally on this big loss. And I bring the condolences from the people of Katikamu South. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and supported by the Leader of the Opposition that this Parliament pays tribute to hon. Sam Kalega Njuba. May his soul rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a service at midday. The family had allowed us to stop at half past - it is now two minutes only to that time - to allow the casket to be moved to the church for the service. I had already picked the Member for Bunyole and I had picked hon. Rugunda. Please use one minute each.

11.30
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, in 1974 my mother produced a boy and my father named him Njuba. We were too young then to ask why he had named our brother Njuba. When we grew up, our father showed us a bull in his kraal and he said, “My children, in 1930 I borrowed money - Shs100 - in order to pay my fees in P6. I want you to get money and add it to that bull so that we can go and pay the debt which I incurred in the 1930s.” We did not understand at that time where we were going to pay the debts but soon he told us.

My father had been brought up by the late Rev. Njuba where he served - I will not say as a houseboy but as one of the young men - in the home. While he served him, he earned money to pay his fees but the money he earned could not pay fees so he borrowed money from Rev. Njuba. The money we came to pay - we brought gifts, not even paying a debt to the late Sam Njuba in recognition of the money which his father had lent my father while he worked at his home. That is how I am called Lumala, a name which is not from Bunyole. That has been our bond as a family. It is so painful but if the people of the 1930s could do that; if Rev. Njuba had not looked after my father, I would not be a Member of Parliament today. What are we doing in order to emulate what our forefathers did in order to leave a peaceful country that will be revered? May Sam Njuba rest in peace. (Applause) 

11.32 
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in paying tribute to this fallen patriot. I came to know Sam Njuba around the 80s, especially when we worked closely together in the external mission of the National Resistance Movement. Sam Njuba was one of the founder members of the National Resistance Movement in 1981. He made very significant contribution especially in mobilisation, recruitment and other related political work and in fact in the external mission he was the secretary of the National Resistance Movement. 

In June 1981 Sam Njuba, Matthew Rukikaire and myself accompanied the Chairman of the High Command, Yoweri Museveni, to the Libyan Jamahiriya because that country did offer support to our struggle and especially in training the cadres of the movement and the fighters. In the House there are quite a number who benefitted from that training which was organised by ndugu Njuba. In front of me is my brother hon. Jack Sabiiti, a graduate of that training. (Laughter) So really, Sam Njuba made enormous contribution in founding the Movement, working for it and providing leadership. 

Secondly, Sam Njuba’s family: while Sam Njuba was organising the external mission, Gertrude Njuba as we heard from my brother Khiddu Makubuya, was on the frontline commanding the forces fighting for freedom: one family, the wife on the frontline and the husband mobilising, recruiting and giving support. It was really an exemplary type of family and it has remained an exemplary family in supporting liberation, in supporting struggle and in ensuring that Uganda is freed.

Thirdly, it was not a surprise that after liberation, Sam Njuba was appointed Minister for Constitutional Affairs because this man definitely was a strong democrat, a strong patriot, a strong freedom fighter. And the very fact that Sam Njuba on his very own volition said, “By the way time has come and I will now join a different party,” was a mere expression of his conviction and his freedom in democracy and multiparty politics. 

In fact, Mr Speaker, one of the credible people that gave respectability to opposition politics without any doubt was Sam Njuba. Therefore, the departure of Sam Njuba has robbed the opposition politics, the National Resistance Movement, and the country of a great patriot, a great freedom fighter and definitely one of the best sons that Uganda has produced. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have a condolence message from the Interparty Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) signed by hon. Nsubuga. I have a condolence message from the Speaker, signed by the Speaker herself. There is no time now to go through this. I have a condolence message from the Parliamentary Savings and Credit Cooperative Society signed by hon. Kasamba Matthias the Chairperson. I have a message from the East African Legislative Assembly signed by the Speaker of that assembly and I also have a condolence message from the Conservative Party. 

In the gallery, we have Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo, former Member of Parliament for Agago and former Leader of the Opposition. 

Hon. Members, the motion is that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Sam Kalega Njuba; that it takes cognisance of the service rendered and contributions made by the late hon. Sam Kalega Njuba to the country; that it collectively prays that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

(Exit of hon. Sam Kalega Njuba)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, today is one of those difficult days when this Parliament is witnessing a strange history. We have received one body twice in this House on not so long ago; today we received two bodies in one day broken into two special sittings. We have another body coming into this House as soon as this one leaves. That is so sad to the country and both these people have come as people connected in their activities of the liberation of this country, they died on the same day and have been brought to this Parliament on the same day. God should be saying something but for us it sets a strange history that this House is recognising. So, honourable members, as we pay respect to the late hon. Sam Njuba, we have another dignified member who has also fallen and whose body will be coming in soon and there will be a special sitting this afternoon. So, please come back and we pay our last respects. House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock of today.

(House rose at 11.45 a.m. and adjourned until 2.00 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.37 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah presiding_)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I communicated earlier this morning, in this House, though in a separate sitting, today, we stand at a very difficult moment when we have got to receive two bodies on one day. It is challenging experience for this House. But that is the nature of things at the moment. So, we just have to deal with it.

I have been advised that the body has to leave Kampala today for the village for its final resting place. That means this House should rise by 4.00 O’clock. The latest I can stretch and for which I will have to seek consent of the family will be 4.30p.m. Otherwise, I am not sure whether I will even get to that because the distance is long and the family would like to leave early. So, let us just try to respect time. We tried it last time but it did not work very well because while many Members wanted to contribute, the Members on the Floor always took as much time as they needed and by the time we realised it, there was no time left for the other Members, which was not very good. 

Therefore, let us regulate the time. I will not limit on the time but when I raise my hand, just try to wind up so that we can share this little time in giving tribute to our fallen colleague. Thank you.

(Entrance of the hon. Dr Higiro Ssemajege.)

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

Laying of Wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. DR FESTO HIGIRO SSEMAJEGE, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, LWEMIYAGA COUNTY, SEMBABULE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members. Before we receive the motion, let me announce to the House condolence messages from different people. The first and to the family is from the Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. It is addressed to the family and we will pass it on to the family at an appropriate time.

We have another from the Government Chief Whip, hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba. We will also pass this on to the family. The third is from Web Advocates and Solicitors, signed by hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende. It is also addressed to family and will as well be passed on to it later.

Let me also take this opportunity to recognise the presence of the following in the gallery: There is the hon. Baguma Isoke, hon. John Livingstone Okello-Okello, hon. Gad Gasatura, hon. Joyce Mpanga, hon. John Ntimba, hon. James Kubeketerya, hon. Peter Mutuluza and hon. Silver Bahande. I will get details about the ones I cannot recognise from far because the distance is quite long. Please, my apologies for failing to recognise you from far. As soon as I get the details about the rest, I will announce their presence.

2.53
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this House to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege: 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief, the sad news of the demise of the hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege, aged 79 years, who succumbed to Cancer on Friday, 13 December 2013 at Bugolobi Medical Centre, Kampala;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Dr Ssemajege was a former Deputy Speaker of the Buganda Lukiiko and a former Constituent Assembly Delegate representing Lwemiyaga County;

AWARE that the late hon. Dr Ssemajege was a highly qualified and experienced Economist who held a Doctor of Philosophy in Economics from the University of Southern California in the USA, with wide experience in the fields of planning and industrial development;

FURTHER AWARE that the late hon. Dr Ssemajege was a patriotic person who stood for the common good of the people, the right to promote unity among the Banyarwanda and that in the 1950s, he founded the Abadahemuka Association, which was popular for preaching unity to enhance cultural values among the Banyarwanda;

RECOGNISING that the late Dr Ssemajege once served the country and the world at large, in several capacities, for example, as a consultant to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Consultant to the African Union, then the Organisation of African Unity; Secretary to the Constitutional Review Commission in Uganda; Chairman of the Committee on National Economy in Parliament of Uganda; Member of Parliament and as I said before, Deputy Speaker of Buganda Lukiiko;

APPRECIATING that the late hon. Dr Semajege was a straight forward, unifying, hardworking and diligent legislator and a highly respected elder in Ugandan-Banyarwanda Community and in Buganda and Uganda at large; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of the hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late Dr Ssemajege.
    3. It collectively prays to the Almighty God to rest the hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege’s soul in eternal peace.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded by the Member for Masaka Municipality, whom I am informed stands in for the Leader of the Opposition now. That is a big promotion. Also seconded by the hon. Member for Lwemiyaga; the hon. Member for Busiro East; hon. Member for Sembabule District; and hon. Member for Katerera County. So, would you like to speak to your motion, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

2.53
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, it is with sadness that we are gathered here once again today for the second time to pay homage to one of our former colleagues in the House, the late Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege. 

The late Dr Higiro Ssemajege was born in Rwanda in 1934 and went to Kigezi High School. Thereafter, he joined Makerere University where he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts Degree in 1948. He later went to pursue a Masters and Doctorate in the University of California Los Angeles United States of America. 

The late Ssemajege has been a highly qualified and experienced Economist. He held a PhD in Economics from the University of Southern California; he had wide experience in the fields of planning and industrial development and has worked as a consultant for the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the African Union now, formerly known as the Organisation of African Unity. 

The late hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege joined this House after NRM had taken power in 1986 and at the expansion of the National Resistance Council (NRC), and during the promulgation of the Constitution, he became a Member of the Constituent Assembly as a delegate representing Lwemiyaga Constituency, then Greater Masaka District. 

He played a very big role in the formation of the Constitution having been the Secretary of the Constitutional Review Commission. It was during this time that he articulated the issues of the Banyarwanda thus leading to a formal recognition by the Constitution of Banyarwanda as one of Uganda’s ethnic groups. He advocated for unity of his people as opposed to doing too much politicking based on sectarianism. 

Dr Ssemajege began his journey to promote unity among the Banyarwanda in the 1950s when we founded together with the late Mzee Haji Gashegu the Abadahemuka Association, which was popular for preaching unity. 

The late Dr Ssemajege was very instrumental in linking the Kingdom of Buganda and King Rudahigwa in Rwanda; he was among the group of people who fought the deposition of King Rudahigwa from the throne. Despite King Rudahigwa’s deposition from the throne, he steered efforts at linking the deposed king to the Buganda Kingdom. The Kingdom of Buganda gave the deposed King of Rwanda residence in Mengo and this marked the journey of a long relationship between Mengo and the Royal Family in Rwanda. 

The late Dr Higiro Ssemajege, had education in Uganda; his education was facilitated by the Mengo establishment through the Christian Missionaries who were in Uganda then. The late Dr Higiro Ssemajege did his best to protect the rights of exiled Rwandese in Uganda. He, together with one James Kangaho, sued the Government of Uganda, which at the time had mooted ideas of extraditing Rwandan exiles from Uganda. Indeed, his efforts paid off as he won the case against the Government on extradition of the Rwandan exiles in Uganda. 

He was at the forefront of enhancing cultural values among Banyarwanda and promoting unity among all the people. Despite his busy schedule, he always found time to teach about the history of Rwanda and why they should remain united. 

He also served as the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy in Parliament of Uganda given his vast knowledge and experience attained in the field of Economics at school and in practice. 

The late Dr Ssemajege served as Secretary to the Constitutional Review Commission with Justice Benjamin Odoki as its chair. The Constitutional Review Commission was very instrumental in gathering views across the country on which the 1995 Constitution was based in its promulgation. The late Dr Ssemajege’s role as Secretary in collecting these views cannot be over stated. 

Mr Speaker, the late Dr Ssemajege was one of those few non-Baganda who managed to serve the Kingdom of Buganda in a very powerful position next to that of the Katikkiro and Speaker of Lukiiko. The late Dr Ssemajege, was a Lukiiko member who served as Deputy Speaker of the Buganda Lukiiko. He followed in the footsteps of the Owe’ekitiibwa Daudi Ocheng, Owe’ekitiibwa Omal Mandela and others who have served Buganda Government. 

I would like, on behalf of the rest of Ugandans to take this opportunity to register our thanks to the Buganda Kingdom for this gesture towards uniting the people of Uganda. (Applause)

As a published author, he wrote numerous publications on economic strategies for stimulating economic growth in Africa. 
He leaves a wife, 11 children and 12 grand children. He was a great family man and as you heard, a great community leader. 

The late Dr Ssemajege, was, at the time of his demise, also a non-Executive Director of FINA Bank in Uganda. It is clear from the above that the 79 years he has lived, he used them profitably to serve not only his family, not only his community but Uganda as a whole. 

May the Almighty rest the soul of the deceased in eternal peace. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Hon. Members, this is a special motion and you can see that the people who are going to second it include the Leader of the Opposition.

Hon. Sam Otada will represent the Independents and hon. Ssekikubo, Member for Lwemiyaga – and if you notice where he is sitting, which has caused a bit of a stir, at this moment, because of the special nature of the discussions we are having, the honourable Member has liberty to sit where he is seated. (Laughter) And there are other attendant special circumstances, which qualify the Member to sit where he is sitting: one of them being that he is a seconder of the motion, which is a special motion. Secondly, the deceased has occupied the place where he normally sits. (Laughter) So, the honourable member can sit where he is sitting without any problem and it is free sitting. Let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition.

3.07
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, I appreciate the temporary promotion amidst the mourning, from the Leader of the Opposition, to rise and second the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege. 

Mr Speaker, I had the honour of serving with the late for over five years and I think the Leader of the Opposition thought it wise that I speak about a person I personally knew and closely worked with. He sent his condolences and went to attend the burialof the late hon. Sam Njuba:

“Hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege was no doubt a nationalist, who put the country and its people first. He was a pillar of unity and lived a dignified life that enabled him serve in various respectable positions as ably stated by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in his motion. He diligently served the world, Africa, Uganda and Buganda Kingdom with one heart and love. He was a unifying factor, looking beyond tribe. He never believed in divide and rule but rather he envisioned an empowered and self-sustaining human race.

Hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege cherished cultural values and this he preached and practised. He championed unity in diversity that promoted and ensured the common good of the people of Uganda.

Lying before us today is a gentleman with enormous contribution to the field of economic development, particularly, referring to his 1968 thesis entitled, ‘Planning Institutional Change for Economic Growth: A Study of the Effect of Public Institutions in the rise of Indigenous Entrepreneurs in East Africa.’

Our fallen colleague cherished the role of public institutions that are used to promote economic growth and indigenous entrepreneurs. As we honour his legacy this afternoon, it is a moment we should take to reflect on the state of our public institutions under the NRM leadership.

Mr Speaker, we may ask ourselves: Do we have functioning and respectable public institutions living to his dream? What is the functionality of our public institutions towards serving the citizens of Uganda? What are the goals of public institutions; are they promoting indigenous entrepreneurs or killing them? In the memory of Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege, I would like to call upon the NRM Government to recognise the role of public institutions and build them so that they can promote indigenous entrepreneurship across the country for economic growth that is private-sector driven.

Mr Speaker, the late Dr Festo Higiro Semajege’s thesis that I mentioned about presents a wealth of vital knowledge on changing public institutions to promote indigenous entrepreneurship. The NRM regime could strongly find the much-desired answers to reverse the glaring gaps in building functioning public institutions that promote the economic growth of the indigenous people. We would like to challenge Government to build and run institutions that empower and promote the indigenous entrepreneurships benefitting all the citizens of Uganda. 

Today, we are here to mourn Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege; may we first pause for a moment and ask ourselves: Do we reflect what he represented and stood for? The late Dr Ssemajege served with distinction and today, although the sparkle in his eyes is gone and his smile faded, we would like him to rest assured that some of us will work to achieve his wish – to see a better country with economic growth that is indigenous and led and enjoyed by all children and great grand children of Uganda. 

Dr Higiro Ssemajege, you gave your best and you now await your crown; your sweat was not in vain. The struggle will continue and we will live to always be inspired by your dedicated, unwavering pure service for Uganda’s economic growth and for posterity. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace.” Signed by Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.15
MR SAM AMOOTI-OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion that has been very ably moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and seconded by my brother representing the Leader of the Opposition.

May I take this opportunity to convey my heartfelt condolences on behalf of my colleagues who sit this side as independent Members of Parliament. And on behalf of the people of my constituency and family, I convey condolences to the family of the deceased, Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege. I also convey condolences to the Kingdom of Buganda, the people of Lwemiyaga and the country at large for the loss of a true gallant son of Africa.

I first heard of Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege during the CA debate. There was a very sticky matter in regard to the inclusion of a tribe called the Banyarwanda in the Constitution of Uganda and he featured very prominently. I had special interest in this matter because the constituency, which I have represented for all this time has a large section of the Banyarwanda in the area of Masindi Port and Kitwara and all these places and we are neighbours on the Nakasongola side so, we were very interested in this matter. 

I want to congratulate him for persuading the House at that time and for carrying the day when surely, he made a great case that everybody accepted and that community, which is indeed, our own community, was included. I think this was an act of being visionary because today, as we speak, we are now talking about one community- the East African Community- of which Rwanda as a country is part and parcel. I think this was an act of being very visionary many years back. So, I salute him in a very special way in that regard.

I was also interested in him because he was one of those who were highly educated and highly qualified. He exhibited a very high pedigree of human intellect especially on matters of trade, economics and remember, this was a time when the country was just coming from the doldrums of a very deep economic recession where our GDP was at all times low and we needed brains such as his to help us put together fiscal policies, and policies that could take this country to another level as we sought to regain our economic standing.

Now, on the issue of Cancer, Mr Speaker, of course, we have noticed that today, the two sittings bring before us two distinguished citizens who have succumbed to this Cancer phenomenon. But I think it is not always Dooms Day. I want to salute Government. Something is being done at the Cancer Institute and I want to encourage the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Government that we can do more. Ndugu Rugunda, something is being done and I think that should be really registered on the Floor of this House. It still continues to be a challenge, of course, and this again causes us to continue thinking about what we can do in light of this challenge. 

Now, the unity of the Banyarwanda as he really thought about was quite visionary because as you can imagine, many years later, around 1994, you all remember what happened in Rwanda. If only many people followed him in regard to his strong mobilisation that we need unity, we would not have had a situation such as that. So, you can imagine the calibre of the person that we have lost. He was somebody who was seeing ahead and trying to avert something instead of just coming to fire-brigade a situation that has gone bad.

I want to also praise his Pan-African standing because, Mr Speaker, this vision of the African people of having one continent, 54 states, as they are right now, moving as one and having people such as Dr Festo Ssemajege consulting at that level that Africa has to move as a block not these petty, tribal and colonial boundaries that held us hostage for a long time - may I also register my gratitude for his consultancy at that level, in a Parliament where I serve; where you, hon. Members, sent me to represent you. I would like to say that this is also a loss in our Pan-African circles.

I want to end by saluting him. Mr Speaker, when many people become very highly educated to the level of a PhD like he held, many of them tend to be very theoretical. But I want to salute him because in the area of trade and in the area of Economics, I understand that he is one of our big investors as even at the time of his demise. In the district of Mityana, he had investments there. He was not only theoretical in terms of being very knowledgeable about these theoretical things but he translated that into practice and I am sure a number of people can partake of that. Also that stereotype of our intellectuals just being theoretical and not practical has been broken because it was becoming a norm that, “You professors, you teach us but you also show us what you teach.” So, this is the gentleman lying before us, who has helped us to break that stereotype.

To the children, obviously, for us in this House, we have always had these sessions like even today; it is never easy. I want to commend a book that I read for this puzzle called death, which has always been a big puzzle for us. You read Pastor Richard Sigmund’s book about this death phenomenon. It is a very difficult book to read. I have not finished reading it myself. I reached midway and it is a bit scary but it brings to perspective the aspect of death. I want to assure you that up to this point, personally, I do not fear Mr Death that much. It is a good book that I want to commend to you. Please, read it. It may help. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I beg to second the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Member for Lwemiyaga. That is the final seconder of the motion; then we open the debate.

3.23
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion as moved by the Leader of Government Business and seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and my colleague, hon. Sam Otada, the Leader of the Independents. 

I stand to pay tribute to the deceased Dr Higiro Ssemajege Festo. The passing on of Dr Higiro is a shock to those of us who knew him at a personal level, to the family and to the country at large. Dr Higiro, I want all of us to concur, was such a handsome, very elegant and princely man; and indeed, that is how he behaved and treated himself. 

Mr Speaker, in Lwemiyaga, it is a fact that even before the UPE programme was started by Government, the late, on each and every visit to Lwemiyaga, would go with iron sheets at the back of his pickup meaning that he was promoting education in Lwemiyaga. And since his time, not even I, have matched his zeal towards education. 

When I look back, this is how he came to be a man. How he studied, how he progressed. Not like nowadays where people have short cuts to education. His was on merit in the 1940s up to when he was able to acquire a Doctor of Philosophy in Economics and he was well accomplished in that field.

Mr Speaker, Dr Higiro loved his nationality as a Munyarwanda. He never got shy of that fact. Many in our days and even then, kind of took it with stigma but he stood out. He loved his nationality but most importantly, he blended well with the Baganda here and was a true Muganda. When most people fear to talk about Federo, Dr Higiro talked about Federo in this country and he was loyal to the king and never flinched from giving out his ideas though at that time, they were a bit not that popular. But he stood his ground and, of course, we who saw him cherished him. He never forsook the Kabaka and during the time that the current Kabaka of Buganda visited Mawogola, he was the one who led him throughout Kabula then Mawogola on that tour. So, he is fondly remembered for his commitment and for being what he was, being a man during the day and even at night. He never changed at any single point. 

Mr Speaker, Dr Higiro, had sons and daughters and there is no doubt about that but I fondly remember him picking on me. I was by then at Makerere University between 1992 to 1995 but many times, I would go with him. As a student, he encouraged me to go with him in our Mitsubishi single cabin, addressing meetings and rallies in Lwemiyaga. That was real grooming and I remember in the course of our travel, because there used to be a driver, I would sit in between and he would sit near the door. I would fall asleep but waking up I would find my head in his chest. He never pushed my head away because, indeed, he was a parent and that is how we used to travel to Lwemiyaga in and out and addressing those very meetings. 

So, when people talk about grooming, he was indeed not only talking but he did groom the Ssekikubos of this world. (Applause) I know wherever he is, he is happy. He is proud that he has left one in his shoes and I know he must be happy. His efforts were not in vain. 

Indeed, at that time, we formed the Makerere University students association different from MUMADISA – MUMADISA was the wider grouping of students from Masaka but we formed SEMUSA (Sembabule Makerere University Students Association) and he was our patron and as far as I recall, he is the only one, despite the fact that we had several leaders then, who could blend with the students of Sembabule. Now, he lies here. 

Unfortunately, Dr Higiro cannot speak for himself. Only we who are alive can speak for him but I beg to seek your indulgence because if I do not say this, I feel I would be cheating him. Hon. Members, in Sembabule, we usually have very difficult politics but on the eve of Christmas, the whole group of the Banyarwanda community was ferried from Lwemiyaga and carried to some place to a big and prominent person’s place. The essence of that meeting was, “You Banyarwanda, you are like the Bahima. Why don’t you support a muhima instead of Ssekikubo?” He was bitter. He denounced it; he moved around the constituency and the district denouncing such dirty politics. (Applause) He said, “You man, you are dangerous, you are about to cause a genocide in this country. Why don’t you allow people to mix freely with others but each time you are tagging them as Banyarwanda, and you head them for even such divisive politics.” And he stood out and it is partly because of that that I was able to overcome that election and since then, I have never looked back. (Applause) Please, understand the Sembabule we are talking about. It was not an easy time for him; he moved out. 

He was in the NRC but during the Sixth Parliament - I cannot say he lost - he was destroyed and this goes to the front bench and members of this side; let us not destroy each other because at that time, when the President met him, he intimated that, “You know, Dr Higiro and Sam Kutesa, you are all senior cadres. I will appoint any of you minister” and that worked hard on him. They had to make sure that they destroy him so that one person remains for the appointment. It is terrible! He never lost and probably, if it was not by that, today, he would be here in this House because by then, I had agreed to take my seat as a passenger. He was leading well. I only came in to avenge the malicious destruction they caused him by non-entities. He was a man with a PhD but they somehow created somebody to come so that they could defeat him and only one person remained to be appointed minister. 

So, Mr Speaker, I want to say to Members that appointment to ministerial positions can always come and go but do not destroy each other. Do not fight to catch the appointing authority’s eye and in process, you make us lose such valuable gifts that God has given to this country. 

By then, the Electoral Commission, really – you are talking of rigging now. In 1996, they made sure hon. Ssemajege did not come back to Parliament through state machinery. What had he done? Was he a rebel? It is only his son Ssekikubo that can be taken as a rebel –(Laughter)– was he a rebel then to be destroyed? Up to now, I look back and I cannot find answers. As early as 1996 and you say one has to be destroyed? Anyhow, I am glad that we have come this far. He stood by me and at one time, he was confronted, “We know you Ssemajege, you are the one funding Ssekikubo.” 

They waylaid us, actually, so that they could blow us off and carry away the money. They didn’t know that I was carrying election and campaign materials; they thought the baggage I was carrying from doctor was a baggage of money. Therefore, they set to hunt us down up to Lwemiyaga to recover that money. It cannot be easy in Ssembabule but he rests with his head high. I tell you, I would not be here. 

That is why when people say, “We are mentoring”- what mentoring are you talking about? Why don’t you pick a few lessons from him? And I am glad that by God’s Grace, I am here. Otherwise, I would not be here with my three colleagues seated over there. I think that resilience we have is part of Dr Higiro’s resilience and we should maintain it. He never forsook us. I was a Member of Parliament earning well but he used to call me for tea and say, “No, I must buy you tea.”

What more can I say? To the family, rest assured you are bred of a man and may you rise up to emulate him. Vaster, you never got tired of us; you did not get tired of us because at times, mothers and wives get tired of non-biological children at home but we used to come home and you could not get tired of us. It is only that these days we have been dizzy; the system can make you dizzy but I still look up to you as a family. I will never leave you as a family; we shall keep together. 

For the people of Uganda, you had a man who led a deserved life. For the people of Lwemiyaga, I am standing here to pay tribute on your behalf; and to the late, you must be proud because your efforts were not in vain and never shall I retreat from your ideals. I shall move forward! 

I thank you and may the Almighty God grant your life all the blessings there is in Heaven. May your children grow up; may your examples shine; may those looking at you now see that you served your purpose; you served God; you served your family; you served your kingdom and your country. May the Almighty God rest your soul in eternal peace! (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is from the seconders of the motion. We have fairy limited time. So, others keep your contributions brief before I impose some timeframe on the Members’ contributions. 

3.38
MS HANIFA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Sembabule District and the people of Lwemiyaga County, and in particular, Obutusi Sub County, I join my colleagues in supporting this motion to pay tribute to one of us, Dr Higiro Ssemajege. 

I came to know Dr Higiro during the time of Constituent Assembly, before my colleague hon. Ssekikubo came on board. He was not only a visionary leader but he was naturally a peacemaker. I was in the Constituency Assembly with the late Dr Ssemajege, hon. Kutesa and hon. Sejusa and we were a formidable team; we worked together. 

I was young and they all referred to me as the only sister and a queen. At that time, I was coming from the airlines industry and indeed, he was proud to belong to the team. 

The late hon. Ssemajege represented Lwemiyaga Constituency and he was part of the team that ensured that Sembabule became a district. Not only that, as the Prime Minister said, I can testify that he cherished cultural values. During our time in the CA, he stood his ground to ensure that all tribes were included in the Constitution. He did not give up on the effort to ensure that Sembabule indeed, belonged to the Kingdom of Buganda. That is how Sembabule become one of the districts deemed to belong to Buganda. He fought for what is known as “Ebyaffe”. He fought for what rightly belonged to Buganda and for that, I pay tribute to him and his efforts. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the kingdom of Buganda for choosing him as a Speaker. It was not by default. Hon. Ssemajege remained a unifying factor despite the difficult times and the politicking in Sembabule. He embraced all of us and he never belonged to any camp. He was very developmental. He ensured that our area, as the first political leader from Lwemiyaga County – he worked to ensure that it was developed; and I am glad he has left it at a stage that no one regrets. He struggled to bring water; he fought for the pastoralists – he was an all-round person. 

Mr Speaker, he was a reconciliatory centre; anybody who had problems, he would come in to ensure that he brings us together. He was also incorruptible. He lived beyond himself; he was an elder that we all looked up to. He had a big heart. Everyone looked up to him. I want to assure the family that hon. Dr Ssemajege has departed, but his legacy and deeds are still cherished by our people. 

My heart goes out to you all; to the people of Sembabule District; to the Kingdom of Buganda; to the Government. He ensured that Lwemiyaga County remained 98 percent and above, NRM stronghold; he never looked back. He was never disgruntled at all. He served the kingdom with all his heart. 

Dr Ssemajege, thank you for mentoring us, thank you for being there for us; we promise to work together with my colleagues and the rest of the leaders to emulate the spirit of unification and to work as a team. May your soul rest in eternal peace. Fair thee well, Dr Ssemajege. 

3.43
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Members, today is a really sad day on our side as Members of Parliament. Since morning, up to this time, we have been mourning colleagues; not just colleagues, but also special people in this country. 

From the time we learnt about the death of these two colleagues, including Dr Festo Higiro, we started a debate: who were these people? It was clear that the two colleagues, particularly Dr Higiro were very good people. We were wondering why God is taking good people from the public life, at the helm of leadership of this country and leaving bad people. (Laughter)

Well, I think God is also tired of living with bad people; He wants good people around Him. That is why He has chosen to take the likes of hon. Sam Njuba and Dr Higiro. We have no control over God’s programme, but we beseech Him, that if He would accept a replacement, certainly, we would have done it. 

I learnt much of him through my great friend, hon. Sekikubo. For purposes of our identity, we are currently referring to him as “His Excellency.” He has said it all that he fought a man who was trying to divide the voters of Lwemiyaga that “You do not need to vote Ssekikubo because he is a Muganda; instead, vote so-and-so because he is a Muhima and very close to you.” I found that man as a true nationalist; there are very few people like him. I studied Political Science; those factors come into play but for purposes of uniting this country and the place he comes from, like Lwemiyaga, he wanted his leadership to be one that believes in the existence of the Banyarwanda but also the co-existence of the Banyarwanda in Uganda. And, therefore, when they go to vote, they should be able to cast a vote for a competent leader. And he saw competence in my good friend, ‘His Excellency’ Theodore Ssekikubo. (Laughter) I believe – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When were these changes made in his title of “honourable member of Parliament”?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, for our identity – the group of four – we saw a need to have leadership and no wonder that today, you recognise the power in what we stand for and you said that he should be a seconder of the motion. And I would gladly seek your indulgence that you continue doing the same and we are ready to provide good leadership to this country.  

I did some research on what Dr Ssemajege stood for; he stood for the co-existence of the Banyarwanda in Uganda when my dear colleague said that he fought for the inclusion of the clause that provided for the tribe of the Banyarwanda in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It is well documented; he did his research and made a thorough presentation during the CA. I want to commend him that at that time, he could stand and defend his tribe. There are some people in this country when you refer to them as Rwandese, hell breaks loose – they will arrest journalists and even forget that actually, Dr Ssemajege liberated them by including their tribe in the Constitution. And I call upon all Ugandans that wherever a national of the Rwandese origin is standing in your constituency, please - they were liberated and are part of our Constitution.

As he chaired the Committee on National Economy, he believed in the country borrowing less and even emphasised that even when we have to borrow, we have to borrow for strategic sectors like education, infrastructure and health. And even when we choose to borrow for those sectors, we must account for the borrowed funds – not to borrow to take tea, coffee and sausages in offices as it is the phrase these days championed by some of the people sitting in –(Laughter)

Dr Ssemajege fought strongly for the Kingdom of Buganda; he was a Rwandese who believed that he is a musajja wa Kabaka –(Applause)– and that is why he decided to fight for the needs of the people of Buganda. The people of Buganda were calling for Federo and he did not hesitate to join their demand. I am borrowing a leaf from him as a Mukiga in Bunyoro – the people of Bunyoro have demands and I will stand by the spirit Dr Ssemajege stood for; recognising that when you choose to lead people in a particular place, you do not trivialise yourself but rather transcend your tribe and ethnicity.
 
And he was never a thief in public affairs; trace it anywhere. As the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, you cannot say that he was ever bribed to pass a loan. It was always on merit. But today, you can see what is happening in Parliament, a report comes up with allegations of bribery but that was not the case during his life. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it is my duty to defend the integrity of this House even at the point of appearing rude. You do not make such statements in this House in the presence of the Members who are working diligently for this country. Please, it does not augur well being a Member of the House yourself.

3.54
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion of paying tribute to the late hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege and also thank God for the good life of the late. I would like to thank the family of the late Ssemajege for having stood with him during his life. It is very painful when you learn that you have Cancer because it is a very unique disease in that it is very expensive and stressing. And whatever he went through, I want to thank those who stood with him during the stressing time.

I thank the Minister of Health for whatever is being done to rehabilitate the Cancer Institute, taking into account the problems Ugandans are going through – there is no medicine and people do not have money. I have gone through a very difficult time when I was looking after my brother who had Cancer of the Oesophagus and I know what it means taking care of a Cancer patient.

Therefore, my appeal to Government is that whatever is being done, let it be done expeditiously so that we save lives and save our people from going through a lot of pain. There is no medicine as you are aware; we have seen some people stealing Government drugs and are left scot-free. I appeal to Government to seriously look into that so that our people can benefit from the little that we have.

I thank everybody. Today has not been an easy day because since morning, we are mourning the great sons of this country. I thank the late for having been loyal to the Kabaka of Buganda and for having loved this country. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.57
MR GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. When hon. Ssekikubo said that the late was handsome, I also looked at myself and I am handsome. (Laughter) And it is not because I am here but generally, we Banyarwanda are handsome and beautiful. That is why if you move around, most of our sisters, daughters and relatives have been married to different tribes. 

Mr Speaker, when you read the history of the Banyarwanda, according to what the Prime Minister said, sincerely, the late and my father have a similar relation. My father walked with his mother from Rwanda up to Uganda and the journey was not simple. 

I do not know whether Mr Prime Minister you know the meaning of the word “obudahemuka”- that kind of values is why this man you see here managed to go through hardships to the extent of becoming a Kabaka’s officer- omukungu wa Ssabassajja. That is why Ssewungu is a Member of Parliament in an area in Buganda.

By the way, as hon. Ssekikubo said, it is very common in Uganda for people to think that every Munyarwanda must be an NRM member. I am DP and I am a Munyarwanda and that is what my father was. But when I was contesting, I got a similar problem. In a big area where more Banyarwanda are found, they were told, “You vote Ssewungu and he will move a motion in Parliament and support that you be sent out of Uganda.” Then I told them, “You people, a Munyarwanda is entering Parliament; how will he move a motion to see you being sent out of Uganda?” And at that polling station, where my tribesmen live, I got 16 votes. So, I can imagine hon. Ssekikubo’s situation. (Laughter) But of course, that kind of value instilled in us at birth - 

As hon. Tinkasiimire has said, many Banyarwanda are inside this House, in Uganda, in big offices but they do not want to tell the truth as to who they are. I normally tell them that they are Japanese. The history is only one. We know how Japan grew: it came from scratch and it is one of the richest countries now. The Banyarwanda were very poor when they came - they had nothing! But they settled, the Kabaka gave them land and they got to the level of being doctors and they are now MPs. And at one time, I will be the President of this country. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, this is the second time I am making this statement. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when you are in Cabinet think about the creation of a council of elders in this country. Hon. Ssemajege, the late hon. Sam Njuba and so many others would have been dying as members of the council of elders, the way they have it in South Africa - Desmond Tutu. But every day, you just hear about nteraenkoni, mpaenkoni, mpaenkoni, mpaenkoni. With that kind of politics, we cannot move.  (Laughter) You need the council of elders. They will advise you. Leave alone your presidential advisors but a council of elders, once it helps a leader, you will understand. That is why this big man was used by the Kabaka. 

So, Mr Speaker, let me conclude by thanking the Kabaka of Buganda for having accepted a “mukopi” and making him his “mukungu”- I hope I am correct hon. Sseggona – moreover, a Deputy Speaker of the Lukiiko. That was credible. Sabassajja awangaale! Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, Members keep it brief.

4.01
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I said earlier in this House that it is a double tragedy for this House today to mourn two gallant sons of this country, more so, in the league of hon. Dr Festo Ssemajege. 

Mr Speaker, I had the occasion to work with the deceased for seven years in the kingdom. I was the minister responsible for the Lukiiko, combined with information and cabinet affairs.  The hon. Dr Ssemajege was first a member of the Lukiiko and then the Deputy Speaker and, of course, Speaker of that great institution. We used to combine in cabinet - because we did not have Opposition like it is here and in the entire cabinet, it is only Dr Ssemajege who referred to me as his son, me being the youngest member in that cabinet. He was a gifted man. He combined the royalism, education and loyalty to the king to serve the king better.

One thing that has not been mentioned about the late hon. Dr Ssemajege is that he grew up in the palace. His father was a great friend to the late Sir Edward Muteesa. They were great friends and they were close. He is not simply loyal; he was a royal as well and he was trained and mentored to be a leader. You know, in this country, the biggest problem has been having leaders by accident and that has been tragic, and will continue to be tragic if that continues to happen. Most of the wounds that we are nursing today is because we have leadership by accident. Leaders are trained to be leaders. Dr Ssemajege was able to train and mentor as well as nurture some of us – hon. Matthias Mpuuga and I went through his hands. 

Dr Ssemajege was a kind and generous person. I counted in a space of two years he did host me for lunch six times. One day, he did host me at Grand Imperial with my wife and when I introduced my wife I said, “Please, meet my beautiful wife.” And he said, “I have known my young daughter. One day, you will meet a beautiful wife in form of my wife.” That was his wife, and I agree. I concede to what Dr Rugunda said. It was a knock out. 

Like me and many of us, he was a federalist and he would not hide his feelings. He was a straight man. Dr Ssemajege was committed, diligent and above all, an intelligent man but I must say he was a great man; he was a good man. I would ordinarily not stand here to support this motion if he did not deserve my support – because he trained me to be straight and look people in their faces and tell them, “You are absolutely wrong.”

He was a peacemaker, as hon. Kawooya said. Even in the face of turbulence and oppression - I remember in the year 2009, when we were under attack, when we were being oppressed left, right and centre from the Central Government, which is powerful and repressive - we were seated in a meeting and he remained calm. I asked him, “How do you remain calm in the face of oppression?” He said, “I can tell you. God fights just wars. This is going to come to an end.” 

Those were words of an elderly statesman. It is for this reason that many people stand to own him. If you told the Banyarwanda today that he was not one of them, they would kill you. But if you came to us and said he was not a Muganda, I would fight because we believe he was one of us. 

To the family, your father leaves a challenge. He had a legacy, he had a name. He served and you stand on that foundation. And that poses a challenge to you. For his loyal service to the king, we honour him! 

I remember cracking a joke with him one day by calling him Festus and he said, “I am not Festus because my father did not know that name Festus. I am Festo.” So, he remained true to his origin. He believed in indigenous entrepreneurship and he was not petty. He would allow people to express themselves not like most times around people and you see them flying around the sky. He said, “My son, never be petty; leave small things for small men, great things for great men.” He was a great man.

Another thing that has not been mentioned about him is that he was very instrumental in the formation of “Omubaano” and when I asked him about the “Omubaano”, he said it is living together. It is an association of the Banyarwanda people and he promoted unity. He worked for Uganda. It may be true – and I am using the word cautiously – it may be true that he was a Munyarwanda. We never knew him as such. In the kingdom, we knew him as a Muganda and I still know him as such but we knew him above all, as a Ugandan. 

Mr Speaker, it is not true that he was one of the few non-Baganda serving the king; he was actually one of the many but he was on top of the list of those serving the Kingdom of Buganda and the King. 

Secondly, I am asking this question for the second time standing here: Dr Ssemajege died in a private health facility, why? We are a government; we can afford everything. Why would one of our own die in a small private facility? I am asking this question because people are losing confidence in our health system as a government. I visited Mulago Hospital two weeks back and I saw people lying on the floor. This Government, which I am serving, has been around for the last close to 28 years now and moving on to 30; what have we added onto Mulago Hospital as a complex apart from the small maintenance of sending a few drugs?

Mr Speaker, I represent Busiro East Constituency in Wakiso and the referral hospital of this district is in Entebbe. Recently, I heard part of the complex is about to be taken over by somebody’s compound. There is a small health facility in Wakiso, which does not even have 10 beds; why? And I say, this must stop! This death, which is bringing us together - we should still come together without death. We have been informed that Dr Ssemajege was brutalised by his own system and that reminds me of Karl Marx saying that the state is a monster, which feeds on its own virtues. 

Why do we eat up ourselves? Why do we beat each other? Why do you shoot and kill us? Why do you beat us? Why do you teargas us? Why can’t you talk to us? And maybe, as a show of gratitude, again, I will refer to the Prime Minister. I think as an old man, he has seen great sense and wisdom, which I will applaud him for, in promoting dialogue because if we do not promote dialogue today, it is a time bomb. You fought your wars, we shall fight ours and that is dangerous to this generation and many other generations. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, to His Majesty the King, we want to thank the King for giving us such a brilliant and great man and we know and pray that you will bring more great men whether from the family of Dr Ssemajege or from elsewhere and in Buganda, we can only say, “Gutusinze ayi Ssabasajja.” When someone like this one dies in Buganda, we plead guilty because we owe a duty to the King to take care of his men and indeed, his great man. 

Mzee, as I referred to him, I wish you a peaceful journey to your Creator. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the family is not comfortable now about the time we are extending and I had been generous. I thought Members would use time economically but we have not heeded to the Speaker’s call. I am going to cut this short to allow the family travel but I am going to do that by allowing – Please, bear with the family. I am going to allow the Member for Mityana North one minute, the member for Kanungu one minute, the Member for Ntungamo one minute and hon. Rugunda two minutes. 

4.12
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The late hon. Dr Higiro Ssemajege owns a radio station in Mityana District, Radio Sun, where he offered free airtime for the development of Mityana to the Church of Uganda, to the Catholic Church, two hours every week to the NRM Government and to me. I have an hour every Sunday on this particular radio. 

Dr Ssemajege had very many stakes in my constituency. He employs a lot of people especially in Kikulu Parish but actually, the first person who called me was the LCI chairman of one of my villages when they heard about the death of the late hon. Dr Ssemajege. 

Mr Speaker, at this rate that the elders are going, I am scared but –(Member timed out.)

4.13
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to pay tribute to the important befallen son of Uganda. It is really unfortunate the way our important people are going but I know and believe as a Christian, I know that, for instance, in Ecclesiastes 6: 10, it says that everything that happens was already determined long ago and we all know that you cannot do or argue anything with somebody who is stronger than you. And so, I would like to encourage the family to keep in mind that for all of us, God has already determined our journey on the time we have to go and so, we cannot argue. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the government very much. Members have talked about it but there are many Cancer programmes going on in our villages – (Member timed out_) 

4.14
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hope you will consider my one minute in this struggle –(Laughter)– I bring condolences to the family from Ntungamo District because the late had many relatives in Ntungamo and, Mr Speaker, much as you have given me one minute, but I have lost an OB and in the morning, I also lost another OB because I worked with them in the NRC. 

A lot has been said and since we do not have time, I just want to tell people that hon. Ssemajege had a big heart and was hardworking. Much as he took Economics, he was a farmer and I benefited from his farming. It is very rare for a Mutuusi-Munyarwanda to do crop farming; they do only cattle-keeping but he was a good farmer and I used to benefit. Every weekend, he would go and bring me a bunch of bogoya – (Member timed out_)

4.16
THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to pay tribute to our departed elder in the aforesaid motion. The departed elder inspired many young people and I was one of the beneficiaries of his inspiration because he used to spend a lot of time with young people and we were fascinated by this elegant man with a PhD from the University of California. We did not have many PhDs at that time; so, he was an inspiration. 

Secondly, it is true he was an elegant man, and this elegancy came to the climax when Dr Higiro married Miss Uganda –(Applause)– the High Kanyarutoke. This was a big innovation. 

The next point is that this man has been a very proud Munyarwanda; very proud Ugandan and a very proud African. He typifies the balkanisation of Africa. And by insisting that Banyarwanda should be recognised in Ugandan Constitution, he was actually breaking the chain of balkanising Africa and saying all Africans should be free – the continent is ours. No wonder, when he brought the idea, he captured the support of the Movement and other groups in the Constituent Assembly; the whole country supported him. 

My last comment is that our departed brother was a very humble man. He did not blow up because he had a PhD; he remained humble; he remained an inspirer. The last time I had a meeting with him – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that: “Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Festo Higiro Ssemajege; that it takes cognisance of the services rendered and the contribution made by the late hon. Dr Festo Higiro Ssemajege; that it collectively prays that the Almighty God grants him eternal peace.”

I put the question to the motion.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have a condolence message from hon. John Nasasira to the family and he has attached something to it. 

The East African Community Anthem (One Stanza)

The National Anthem (Three Stanzas)

(Exit of hon. Festo Higiro Ssemajege)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have come to the end of a difficult day but we should remember this day. God is telling Uganda something, God is telling this Parliament something; we should go and reflect on the events of today and see what changes we can make as individuals in our lives and the contributions we can make to change the face of this country, for its better future. I thank you for sitting this long. 

This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.25 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 18 December 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
