
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA


Wednesday, 8 December 2021

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRPERSON

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to today’s sitting and thank you for your commitment in the day-to-day sittings. I know it is not an easy thing; that is why I thank you very much.

I would like to remind the chairpersons of committees who were given Bills to process that they should be able to present the Bills, especially those whose time has expired. We need these Bills to be processed and brought to the House for consideration. Some chairpersons got the Bills and sat with them. Nobody is reporting, nobody is asking for an extension. We need to be seen to work. If you just stay with the Bill and you are not coming back to the House to either seek for an extension or to report on how far you have gone, then there is a big problem. We are going to act on the chairpersons who are not reporting back. 

Yesterday, we adjourned the House when we were at Committee Stage. We will continue today. However, we have some items that will come before that. 

We also selected a team to go and harmonise the clauses that were in the minority report vis-a-vis the major report. That committee should be able to report back to the House. 

Let us have matters of national importance.

2.17
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In your communication, you mentioned that chairpersons who were given Bills are not reporting back as required. 

Madam Speaker, it is not only the Bills but there are motions which were sent to committees and those motions had timelines. There was a motion that was tabled by the honourable Member of Parliament for Kyankwanzi in respect to the fate of private schools that had petitioned Parliament to be assisted ahead of the reopening of schools in early January. That motion had timelines; there are things that were supposed to be done in November, which has already passed. We are now in December and we do not know the fate of this motion. 

Therefore, as chairpersons report on the Bills, I request that also these motions that had timelines, specifically that one of private schools, be attended to so that schools can be able to reopen in January. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I am aware we have your motion on education that is supposed to be brought to the House. That will be brought. 

We also have committees that we gave motions to be processed. Kindly process these motions and bring them to the House. Most of these motions have timelines. By now, if you cannot bring back a response from the committee then there is a problem. 

I also would like to inform the House that tomorrow there will be lighting of the Christmas tree in the Catholic Church and it will be headed by Bishop Eciru of Soroti Diocese. You are all most welcome. 

2.20
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on your communication. 

You have communicated and told committee chairpersons to work and ensure that they have concluded the work. Madam Speaker, I would like you to re-echo this matter because you find that some of the committees are stuck. Members cannot go to do benchmarking even internally and therefore, they cannot come up with conclusions on reports. For some things, they need to go and see them physically. You find that Members come to me and tell me, honourable commissioner, we do not have the budget to go and do this. Members get stuck. 

I think, Madam Speaker, that you have to come out clearly and speak strongly to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to facilitate committees of Parliament. This is the only way the committees of Parliament will be able to do oversight work. 

We shall not be having any business here if Government is doing activities and there is no oversight. One of the reasons the committees have been slow is because they are being under facilitated; they cannot move to go even to the nearby village. You find a committee is getting a budget of Shs 30 million. This cannot even do a small visit to go and look at something that Government is implementing. How will they report? They cannot just sit in office and in the committee room and come up with conclusions. 

This is something where you, Madam Speaker, must come out very strongly, the way you have been doing so that we push the ministry to ensure that Parliament is facilitated. You had started it and I pray that you continue and push them until Parliament is facilitated to do its mandate. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Silwany. As the honourable has said, we do work for the Executive and if you cannot facilitate us to do the work for you then why are we here? You need Bills and these reports but you are not facilitating Parliament. What do you expect of us? You need to help us to help you. 


2.23
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall that the Executive had undertaken to work around to ensure that committees of this House can do their work. There is a tendency for the Front Bench to come and respond casually so that the matter is hushed and then two weeks later, there is no action. 

I would like to advise that since there was an undertaking by the Executive that this matter would be addressed, they should come back to this House and tell us how far they have gone. This is an issue that was raised by this House concerning the release of finances to Parliament to be able to do its work. 

I have also been made to understand that even the Judiciary is suffering and since they are not here, nobody can speak for them. Even the Judiciary’s work has been affected because the budget cuts have affected them badly. 

This is a matter that calls for mutual respect among the three arms of Government. I think that there must be a strong commitment this time – not just a casual one - and then it is backed up by action. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we need to hear from Government. 

2.24
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Madam Speaker, just to emphasize the point hon. Silwany has raised that at the moment, we are unable to travel with the budget of Shs 30 million for the whole committee. I think the only thing you can do is to take just a few Members, which may not be acceptable to other Members as well. And we had been promised a statement on that, as to what is happening sometime in the first quarter. So we have been waiting to hear what will happen. 

However, Madam Speaker, I am rising in relation to your communication, regarding Bills and motions that have been referred to committees. In the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have a Bill - the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Bill, 2021 - which was referred to us and we adhered to the deadline for reporting, which is the ninth and it is tomorrow. 

However, this Bill has some certain sticky areas. The committee has to agree with the Ministry of Finance before we can present our report. And in today's meeting, the ministry found it advisable or plausible that it is not really withdrawing, but that first, we put a halt on processing the Bill, and then wait to hear from them, and that they are going to consult with their stakeholders. 

We tried to ask how much time-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwanuka, can you put that in writing and come and lay it on the Table? It is this House that gave you the Bill, please come back and report officially in the House. 

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, what I am trying to do is to seek extension over the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not like that, not from my Communication. 

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: I have already written to your Office, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Come or bring and read it here. It will be on the Order Paper tomorrow. You will come and read it and the House will later give you an extension or not.

2.27
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam speaker. I want to thank hon. Solomon Silwany for the issue he has raised, which also affects the performance of ministries because it was a general budget suppression, whereby ministries suffered 40 per cent. My own ministry suffered actually 41 per cent. So, I think this is a matter that the Government, through the Minister of Finance, has to again go through to see the possible adjustments to make to ensure that necessary facilitation is available not only to Parliament, because parliamentary committees work with ministries. 

If I have a Bill I am processing, I am under pressure to make sure that my members of the committee have gone in the field to appreciate what we are presenting. So, what I am saying is that, yes, I agree with the submission. I am going to inform the Leader of Government Business. This is one of the items that can actually be discussed at that level, to see how we can facilitate ourselves to serve the people of Uganda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And Dr Ruth, you don't have to compare Parliament with the ministries. The issues of Parliament are really very different from the ministries but we are grateful you're going to handle it. Thank you so much.

We will expect to get a report back in the House on that issue next Tuesday. Dr Ruth, we expect a report on that issue on Tuesday next week on how far you have gone on that issue.

MS NANKABIRWA: From the Leader of Government Business, Madam Speaker.

2.29
MR OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. For over three months now, Gulu City Council and Omoro District Council are not able to function effectively due to serious financial challenges, particularly with their local revenue. These challenges are not because there is no local revenue, but because Parliament appropriated the local revenue budget for Gulu City, far less than what the City Council approved and is able to generate, while for Omoro District, Parliament never appropriated local revenue. 

Madam Speaker, Gulu City Council approved a local revenue budget of about Shs 3 billion for Financial Year 2021/2022. Unfortunately, Parliament appropriated only Shs 400 million as local revenue for the city, less than what the council approved by about Shs 2.6 billion. By 30 November 2021, Gulu City had already generated about Shs 1.8 billion, far above what was approved by Parliament by almost Shs 1.4 billion.

Much as Gulu City is doing great to generate more revenue, the city cannot now carry on critical functions; the fact that the Shs 400 million appropriated by Parliament got exhausted. The city has written several letters to the Ministry of Finance about the need for a supplementary budget to enable them to use what they have raised and in line with their budget. 

Madam Speaker, the Omoro District Council approved a budget of Shs 518,438,000 as local revenue for Financial Year 2021/2022. Unfortunately, Parliament never appropriated any amount of local revenue for Omoro District. 

From the start of the financial year to this day, Madam Speaker, Omoro so far generated over Shs 200 million, which is lying redundant on their account due to the omission by Parliament. These entities are not asking Parliament for any additional money but simply requesting you to allow them use what they have been able to generate and in line with their budget.

Madam Speaker, the delay to always act on matters coming from local governments does not only affect the morale to work effectively and generate local revenue, but also paralyses service delivery. It is, therefore, my prayer that in line with section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, this Parliament compels the Minister of Finance to expeditiously prepare and present to Parliament, a supplementary budget to enable these entities operate effectively. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government, of course, mindful of a document or instrument that was sent by PS/ST to all accounting officers to ensure that the NTR is first put to a consolidated account - So we should act, we should expect a response in line with that.

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable, for raising this important issue.

The honourable member has raised this matter and also provided a solution. However, I would advise that the best way to move on this one is to request your district or city to ask for a supplementary through the Minister of Finance, then after, they will bring the supplementary schedule two then it will be processed by Parliament. That is the easiest way because we must stick to the Public Finance Management Act, and that is the route that you should take. 

Therefore, if you can ask the accounting officer to put in a request, then it will be processed by the Minister of Finance immediately. Thank you

MR OJARA MAPENDUZI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that. But just to clarify, honourable Minister, Gulu City wrote the first letter on the 20th of August to the Ministry of Finance, requesting for a supplementary with details of the information you need. The second letter was written on 19 October and the third on 23 November. You can imagine, three months down the road, the city is not able to function. How long does it take for the ministry to act on such a request? Thank you very much.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable minister, can you just follow it up with the minister and find out if the letters were received then report back to the House. If they were received, what happened?

Mr bahati: Okay, I will do that. Honourable member, if you can be available tomorrow, we could actually accompany you to the Minister of Finance to follow up on that matter. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you.


2.35
Mr roland ndyomugenyi (INDEPENDENT, Rukiga County, Rukiga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of urgent national importance concerning the hand hoes that were promised to Ugandans some time back. The people of Rukiga Constituency are asking for the whereabouts of the hoes that were approved by the 10th Parliament but never reached the constituency, to date. 

On 14 June 2021, while you were presiding over this House, I will read verbatim what you told us. You said,

“Honourable members, the 10th Parliament passed a resolution for the distribution of hand hoes to the population as per the Government's efforts to increase agricultural productivity. I have been informed that the hand hoes have been delivered in different districts and I urge you, honourable members, to follow up on the distribution of these hand hoes so that they do not become like face masks. That, of course, gives you political mileage. Each household is supposed to get two hand hoes in every district.”

Madam Speaker, the information that you gave us came out well and clear and it was received with sincere gratitude by all Ugandans. Since that date, those hand hoes have never been delivered, specifically in Rukiga. Every day, for every 10 calls I receive, eight ask about what happened to those hand hoes and I have no answers. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that you direct the relevant ministry to update Parliament on what could have happened to these hand hoes that were allegedly procured and were supposed to have been delivered to the people, especially, in my constituency, Rukiga, where I am sure that they have never been delivered. I beg to submit and thank you very much for this opportunity. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, hon. Roland. It is a fact that we made a provision for hand hoes in the 10th Parliament. It could be that the budget could not go to all the districts but let us hear from Government.

2.38
The government chief whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have, in fact, guided well on that because even my own Mitooma has not yet received anything and people are expectant. However, Government is implementing this in a phased manner. We procured 1.5 million hoes, which were distributed in some parts of Lango, Teso and others. 

Once the budget allows and colleagues, you are the ones who will be appropriating, we are going to procure more hoes for all the people. Our commitment still stands and we are going to ensure that people get hoes. I just request the people of Rukiga to remain hopeful. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Keep the hope alive. Mine of Bukedea got. Let me hear from the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture.

2.39
The chairperson of the committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The 10th Parliament provided money, which was meant for procurement of 2.5 million hoes. As a committee at the time, we requested Government that even if they were as few as 2.5 million, they needed to touch all the areas of Uganda.

When we requested for accountability of the 2.5 million hoes, some of which arrived after the elections - actually, some of them arrived in June - we were told the hoes were given to three sub regions: West Nile Sub region got 1,203,000 hand hoes. Teso Sub region got 860,000 hoes. Karamoja Sub region got 437 hand hoes. That brings the total to 2.5 million hoes. 

We have been engaging the Minister of Agriculture to ensure that there is some provision for the rest of the districts and the sub regions of the country to benefit from these hand hoes. Like you rightly said, Madam Speaker, every household was supposed to receive two pieces of hand hoes and that is how it was distributed to the districts of West Nile, TESO and Karamoja Sub region.

As a committee – (Interruption)

Ms pacuto: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Okori-Moe, for giving way. It is true that in West Nile Region, we got the hoes and my district, Pakwach got.  

What I want to bring to attention of the House is that not the entire district got hoes. Where a whole parish or some parishes in the subcounty did not get, what are the plans of the ministry to ensure that these Ugandans too, receive the hoes?

The Deputy Speaker: Chairperson, when we go into the next budget, you must budget for all the districts that did not get hoes. When we talk of a district getting, in my own districts not all the households got the hoes. Therefore, we need to budget for that.

Ms Okori-Moe: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. That is what we are pushing as a committee but I have details of all the districts, which got and what they got. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Can you go ahead and read your letter on the Bill - after she has finished, you will come. I know you want talk about the fishing community.

Ms Okori-Moe: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank colleagues who had already spoken before me about the budget of committees. 

Madam Speaker, sometimes we really want to speed up the work. However, when a committee gets just Shs 30 million for oversight, then work becomes difficult; this is the reason some of the Bills cannot be concluded.

I request this House, under Rule 141(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to seek extra time for the consideration of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on Agriculture is currently considering the Bill entitled, “The Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021” which was referred to it on 29 September 2021.

Rule 129(2) of our Rules of Procedure requires that a committee examines a Bill in detail and makes such inquiries in relation to it as the committee considers expedient or necessary and report to the House within 45 days from the date the Bill is referred to it. 

Madam Speaker, I stand to inform this House that the Committee on Agriculture started consideration of the Bill at the beginning of October 2021. Now, the 45 days have elapsed and yet consideration of the Bill is still underway.

Madam Speaker, in line with Rule 141 of the Rules of Procedure, I would like to inform this august House that the Committee on Agriculture has been unable to complete consideration of the Bill within the required 45 days. I therefore seek permission from this honourable House that the committee be given extra time to allow it complete its work on the Bill. I beg to present. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The honourable chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture is seeking for an extension of time. These are things we have been saying; you make these people take longer when we do not facilitate them. How much more time do you need?

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Speaker, normally, there is a saying that a beggar has no choice. However, I think the committee can be able to accomplish its work in one month, including the recess.

MR KABUUSU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I am one Member who has appeared before the Committee on Agriculture, the very committee whose chairperson is seeking for additional time. All the engagements of the committee had been carried out here at Parliament. 

This Bill has spilled over from Parliament to Parliament. I was a Member of Parliament in the Eighth Parliament and I left something on this Bill. I have taken two terms out of Parliament but when I came back, I still found the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill on the Floor.

Madam Speaker, when we interacted with the committee, the chairperson said they do not have money to go to interact with our fishing communities, yet they were unable even to accept all of them in their numbers to hear from them. 

Madam Speaker, I rise to be guided; would it be procedurally right that the committee, whereas it is seeking for additional time, that it goes to the fishing communities that are affected or are the beneficiaries of the Bill, that is under consideration by Parliament? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, the chairperson cannot come out with a Bill without meeting the fishing communities; the committee has to go and meet the fishing communities, to get their views to be included in the report. Yes, another fishing person?

2.50
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I acknowledge the request by my chairperson. I am a member of the Committee on Agriculture but also, I currently lead the Members of the fishing community.

Madam Speaker, even if we got three months or six months as additional time, if we do not have the resources - the only purpose for this extension is not for us to sit here in a boardroom and accomplish the task before us.

All my MPs from the fishing community and the people down there - this issue has been on the Floor of this Parliament for the whole of the last Parliament. This Parliament had to adjourn a number of times because of the fisheries issues. 

The only time for us to have a good law – and also involve the population – is now. We have done all the boardroom issues but we have not undertaken field activities. It is imperative that – Madam Speaker, and I have no doubt that under your directive, this committee cannot fail to get resources. I am hopeful that today, you will direct the relevant office to avail resources specifically for the agricultural committee so that they bring the right views right from our communities. My people in Buvuma and other areas are praying that this committee reaches out to them, and for political accountability. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Robert Migadde, the chairperson and the team are going to visit you in your community and give you the political mileage. We are giving the committee one month to present to this House your report and you must go to the fishing communities.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was about to amend my prayer. However, if the one month is accompanied with the resources, all will be well. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter. Fortunately, the chairperson was smart enough to come back and clarify on that. I want to find out, based on statements made earlier that committees are not being adequately funded. Therefore, when the chairperson asked for one month, I was wondering whether she was comfortable with funding but thank God, she was able to raise it. 

However, the second issue, Madam Speaker, is that the chairperson said the hoes were distributed to all regions and subregions; not the whole country but in the north, Karamoja and I think part of the east. 

I want let you know, Madam Speaker, that the hoes were not given to the subregions; they were given to certain individuals to the extent that I have registered in this House that there were individuals who were given hoes to facilitate their campaigns and some of us were just onlookers. We just heard that so and so got 15,000 hoes, another one got 10,000 hoes. They even started quarrelling among themselves; how come some got 15,000 and others got 10,000 hoes. 

I would like to stand here as an elder to say there are those who also participated in the election but they never saw the hoes. Those are candidates. I am one of them, I never saw the hoes. 

Secondly, I did not see hoes being distributed in my district because then they would have sought our guidance as Members of Parliament. We were never, at any one time, called as Members of Parliament to be told that there were some hoes to be distributed to our farmers. 

If the hoes are for the people, we should leave politics out of it because we all need hoes. We all need to feed our people and that is the backbone of our economy. With our peasantry culture, Madam Speaker, please use your office to educate the NRM Secretariat or whatever secretariat to make sure that the entire country gets the hoes because then, we can all develop together. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, hon. Cecilia. I really do not see how the NRM is coming in, on the issue of the hoes. Must the party come in? If I heard very well from the chairperson, hon. Cecilia - you know, I never fault you because of being in the evening hours. If I heard very well, West Nile, Acholi and Teso in the north – We have said we should budget for all the areas that did not get the hoes because even the districts that got, not all the places got. 

That is going to be handled; we do not have to bring emotions into this. It will be handled and do not bring politics. It is for the good of everybody. 

2.56
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Thank you very much. As Soroti District and Soroti City particularly, we received 18,000 hand hoes. 

However, I would like to give information to the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture and also to interest this Parliament to follow up on the matter of Soroti. One hundred and fifty (150) boxes of hand hoes were stolen in Soroti City and this has never been followed up to date. The Minister of Agriculture, the hon. Frank and two Members visited Soroti. Indeed, 14 people were arrested but up to now, the matter has gone mute. 

I want to interest this Parliament and particularly the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture to follow up with this matter. Can you imagine the stores where the hoes were put are guarded by six police officers and 12 padlocks but in the morning, by the time they went there, there were no hoes. Where did the hoes pass with 12 padlocks and six police officers? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The investigating officer should follow that up. Of course it cannot be the chairperson of the committee. There are other bodies to handle that. 

I asked hon. Akello yesterday to lay on the Table the books she was alleging were from the ministry.

2.58
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me another opportunity to lay these textbooks because I think some thought it was not true. Actually, I went to Aristoc and bought these books. That means that they are actually out there. Yesterday I only talked about one textbook but I am going to lay three. That means the ministry has a lot of work to do in looking through all these textbooks and what our pupils are being taught. 

The first book I want to lay is Longhorn, Second Edition, Integrated Science Pupils’ Book Six. It is written by W. Mpumudde, adopted to the new competence based curriculum; expanding minds. I will draw your attention to pages 214-217. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the book approved by the National Curriculum Centre? Check behind for an approval.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Madam Speaker, if you will allow the minister to come back and tell us that it is not approved - because our students are being taught this. I am being asked to talk about the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I just want to interest you in what the minister said yesterday; that these books must be approved by the National Curriculum Centre.



3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before coming into the House, I had an interaction with hon. Lucy Akello and she showed those books to me. I told her that I think we are going to receive those books and we need to carry out investigation. I will give those books to the technical people to ascertain whether these are books approved by the National Curriculum Centre or they are not approved.

If they are not approved then that will have to take another step to ensure that all books that are brought to the attention of parents and our children are the right accredited books. That is what I shared with her.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Just at the back of the book, if I may read briefly, “Longhorn Integrated Science is a new course that has been recommended by the Ministry of Education and Sports for the use in Uganda primary schools. It fulfils all the goals and targets of the primary integrated science curriculum in Uganda.” 

It is here at the back; they are not my words. Like somebody was asking, what is in the content? Yesterday, I raised the issue of reproductive health Uganda integrated in this book and they are teaching our children that it is actually legal to do abortion and that it is okay to take pills for contraceptives. We are teaching this to 11 or 10 year old children. For what? That it is actually okay to do tubal ligation - to a 10 or 11 year old child! We are all parents. 

I beg to lay – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please lay the books and then we will make a follow up. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: The second book I would like to lay on the Table is the New Fountain Primary School Pupils Book Six, new curriculum. It is by S. Mugisha, R. Kavuma and M. Santa. 

The pages that we will interest us are from pages 191-192. I beg to lay.

Another book is Integrated Primary Science, MK – I think you are very familiar with this. It covers the current National Curriculum Development Centre syllabus. I beg to lay. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will look at those books and get back to you. If it is not from the National Curriculum Centre then action must be taken on those personalities. Hon. Lucy, thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam speaker. I would like to raise a matter of procedure, under rules 42 and 50 of our Rules of Procedure, that provide for questions asked of ministers relating to public affairs with which they are officially connected, proceedings pending in Parliament or any matter of administration for which the ministers are responsible. And Rule 50 provides that the minister shall attend sittings of the House to answer questions asked of him or her. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday you directed and you gave comfort that before the adjournment of the House yesterday, this House would be presented with a statement from the Ministry of Defence in response to the deployment of the Ugandan troops in Congo. Indeed, as the day was on, I saw hon. Huda Oleru, the State Minister for Defence, present yesterday. However, I note and I realise that today, none of the ministers under the defence docket is present to answer these very critical matters, that touch the Constitution of the country that touches our people. And that is even putting us, as Parliament, in a very awkward situation. 
We see it as we go out to the public without answers but when the ministers are not here. And it would be okay if it would be incidental matters but these are matters that are hinged on the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 
The deployment of the expeditionary forces outside the borders must be presented to Parliament and even if it was a statement of one or two paragraphs to acknowledge before the members’ representatives, so that we are able to own up and in case of any event it is the country Uganda at task. It is the people we represent - aware that war is not a tea party; there are other issues. 
Madam Speaker, if I may share a small experience: I was present when we enacted the UPDF Act in this House. However, in that act, it was to take care of the UPDF forces. I want to tell you and the Members that the gallant sons and daughters of this country, who died along Nakulabye, Wandegeya, Kampala Road, Summit View and other places, before the official takeover and announcement of change of Government, have never been compensated by the current government under the law, because they are being regarded that they were acting outside the law. And that they were rebels – (Interjections) - even those who died on 25th and yet they propelled this country through liberation where the current government seats, but we were unable to have them regularised under the UPDF Act. 
Therefore, even now, what is wrong with having our boys and girls, the officers in Congo, regularised? You never know, tomorrow under another dispensation; some Attorney-General like we have one here, would easily interpret the deployment and say they were acting outside of the law. 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be fair to the people of Uganda, that Government gives a statement and regularises our deployment that is already there, anyway? Why are ministers not in the House to answer these questions? Can the Government Chief Whip, whip his ministers so that they come and attend and answer this very matter of public importance that touches the Constitution? Why don't we have a big submit, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. The question is: why are these ministers not here? The ministers are in the field and they have written to me, as per rule 114, that they may not be able to be here because they are busy protecting and securing the lives of Ugandans. That is one. 

Secondly, we could actually ask the Leader of Government Business to give a statement tomorrow, Thursday, during Prime Minister's Time on what is happening but one thing is that these ministers have written telling us what they are doing and they will be here to report at an appropriate time.

3.09
MS JOSYLINE KAMATENETI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. Last month, one of my primary schools in Ntungamo, called Kemironko Primary School, in Ngurwa Parish, Ruhama County, was destroyed by a hailstorm. This school accommodates over 600 pupils and it is one of areas which are very hard to reach. 

We wrote to the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness on the 23rd of November but up to now, we have not got any communication. They have not given us any response. There is no action taken yet these pupils are supposed to report back next month, according to the Ministry of Education and Sports schedule but the school is not there. And we have nowhere to put these children. 

Therefore, my prayer is to request the Government to provide us with iron sheets and cement such that we can put some structures to accommodate these pupils. And in fact, we shall see if you need some tents because the school was completely destroyed. I beg to submit.

3.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, it is a very sad situation for the people of Ruhama but the request that was submitted is being processed. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, what commitment have you made to the school?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, I have given a very strong commitment of requests being processed because there are procedures we go through as Government; I cannot come and say, tomorrow iron sheets and cement are coming. I would be lying, Madam Speaker, but I am going to remain in touch with the colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamateneti, can you keep in touch with the Government Chief Whip on this issue? 

MS KAMATENETI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON COMPENSATION OF VICTIMS OF THE LORD'S RESISTANCE ARMY AND THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE ARMY INSURGENCY IN VARIOUS PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

3.13
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, reference is made to my earlier presentations to this House on the status of the compensation of victims of the insurgency in northern and eastern Uganda. The exercise has registered significant progress under the current status as follows:
On 14 September 2021, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs launched an exercise to identify and confirm for payment, genuine livestock claimants and beneficiaries in Acholi, Lango and Teso subregions with genuine claims using Bio Data and through District Structures based on Data Cards, which is currently being implemented in conjunction with District Leaders. 

The launch at Parliament was presided over by the Rt Hon.
Deputy Speaker and attended by Members of Parliament from the three subregions.

Reports received from the districts indicate a strong response –

The Deputy Speaker: Attorney-General, the report that is uploaded talks about livestock compensation claims whereas the issue on the Order Paper is on general compensation. Are we talking about the same thing?

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Speaker, there could be a discrepancy. Will you allow me to harmonise and come back tomorrow?

The Deputy Speaker: The document is on livestock, whereas what is on the Order Paper is the general compensation. These are two different documents. 

Mr kafuuzi: I noticed the discrepancy. Let us expand and present a more comprehensive report tomorrow. 

The Deputy Speaker: Okay. There is a procedural matter. 

Mr silwany: Madam Speaker, when I heard the learned Attorney-General talking about the north and eastern subregions, I got excited thinking that Busoga Region falls in the eastern part of Uganda. 

One of the wars that was disastrous, and affected my people and the people of Busoga, was the Holy Spirit Movement. People lost cows, people lost homes, and people lost a lot of property. 

We have, on several occasions, pleaded with the Attorney-General to include Busoga Subregion on the compensations. May I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that when the Attorney-General is bringing the report, they include our region so that the people of Busoga can benefit, as well as the people of Northern Uganda. We make a comprehensive report - a comprehensive payment and compensation plan that all Ugandans will be happy with and appreciate because they were all affected by war. I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Silwany, you are now talking about the substance of the report, which we have not heard yet. 

Mr silwany: The heading was –

The Deputy Speaker: No, you are speculating because we do not know. Maybe there is a Busoga region somewhere in the middle. Therefore, let us wait for the report to be presented, then we debate on it.

3.17
Mr jonathan odur (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I appreciate your guidance. I wanted to beg your indulgence that whereas the Attorney-General will come and present generally on compensation, there is a matter of compensation that is peculiar to the subregions of Teso, Lango and Acholi. Therefore, it would be proper that within his statement, he finds a sub-heading to touch that matter because they are very important issues that we would like to raise with him concerning that.

The Attorney-General, maybe, could put it on record here whether he would find time to bring both aspects of compensation; the general ones and also the ones that affect the three subregions, which was raised in this House. 

The Deputy Speaker: All that will be captured in the next report. The Attorney-General will tell you where this compensation is going. If it is going to Busoga, Sebei or Bugisu - I know my man of Bugisu is here dying for it - it will be in the report.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Speaker, considering the magnitude of the work, because now I have to look at the general picture of the whole country, not a sub region; it means I may not be in position to make that presentation tomorrow. I seek to do so sometime next week.

MR charles onen: I want to inquire whether the person we are calling Attorney-General is a learned lawyer because he should be able to interpret the messages given to him. This is a deliberate move to frustrate the war victims – (Applause) - you are abusing our elders. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Father Onen? Did anything annoy you on your way here? (Laughter)I have ruled. It is not about anybody's qualification that you should be able to decide whether compensation should be paid or not - please sit, Attorney-General.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Speaker, he has challenged my qualification. He is using unparliamentary language. I am concerned.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, let us try to be courteous enough when we are in this House because when we leave here –

Mr kafuuzi: I beg that he withdraws and he should put that on record.

The Deputy Speaker: When we leave here - Father Onen, you know I am one of your parishioners. I may start doubting my Father. When we leave here, we have a life to live. The learned Attorney-General is qualified to be where he is. You do not have to doubt his qualification. 

Attorney-General, you will bring feedback to this House on the action that has been taken on the status of how far you have gone with the compensation for all the areas including Bugisu, Busoga, Bukedi, Sebei - all the affected areas. 

Now I can see how you are shouting like you are in a drinking joint. For all the areas that are affected, give us a report. 

Mr odur: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising touches on section 39 of the UPDF Act. My brother, hon. Ssekikubo had indicated and called upon you to give guidance on this matter. 

The procedural matter I am raising is that if you look - thank you. Madam Speaker, when you read section 39 of the UPDF Act together with the Constitution, it is worded in a way to mean or to direct that even when Parliament is in recess, the moment deployment takes place the Speaker is obliged under that law to summon the House immediately so that this Parliament can sit. It was envisaged that, that is a very important deployment that Parliament must sit.

Now that this Parliament is not even in recess, Madam Speaker, I want to seek your guidance that this is squarely now within your powers. The law provides that if we were in recess, you would have to call an emergency sitting of this House to do the same.

However, now that we are here, wouldn't it be procedurally right that if the Executive is unwilling to come voluntarily, you compel them by putting this matter on the Order Paper; “Approval of deployment outside the border,” because that is what the law requires. We cannot be here, begging when actually it is our duty to do this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jonathan, this matter is on the Order Paper, so they will come, do not worry. Next item.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE EAST AFRICAN CRUDE OIL PIPELINE (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) BILL, 2021


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, there were issues that were raised yesterday on the agreements. Some people said they wanted them laid on Table. Can I ask the minister to first lay the documents on Table?

We also agreed on a committee that would reconcile what was in the majority report vis-a-vis the minority report. Therefore, the minister should be able to report on what they have agreed on in that committee. 

The committee was comprised of the Leader of the Opposition – Mr Nambeshe, can you leave my Leader of the Opposition? The Leader of the Opposition, the Shadow Minister of Energy, Government Chief Whip and hon. Katuntu. Please go ahead. 

3.25
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to lay on Table four documents:

    i. The addendum to the production sharing agreement for the exploration, development of production of petroleum resources, which the Government concluded with the upstream international oil companies – Exploration Area No.1. 
    ii.  Addendum No.1 of 2021 in respect to the production sharing agreement for Contract Area No.1, Contract Area No.2 for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and CNOOC Uganda Ltd and Total E&P Uganda BV signed on 2 March 2021. 
    iii. Addendum No.1 of 2021 in respect to the production sharing agreement for Contract Area No.3 A for petroleum exploration, development and production between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and CNOOC Uganda Ltd and Total E&P Uganda BV signed on 2 March 2021. I beg to lay.
    iv. Yesterday, Madam Speaker, from the presentation of the Member who presented the minority report, there was a requirement that I also lay on Table, the settlement action plan for the EACOP and I promised that I would come with it; I request that I lay it on Table. 
    v.  Resettlement Action Plan Uganda East African Crude Oil Pipeline Project, March 2021. 

There was also a requirement to lay on Table the statutory instruments on early project activities. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table that statutory instrument as required of early project activities. 

You had instructed me to give a report on the agreed position as you guided us to go and harmonise. I want to request that I will be reporting on the harmonised provisions as we handle clause by clause because the report was proposing amendments to the Bill. This is what we agreed with the Leader of the Opposition (LOP) and the other team members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Leader of Opposition, is that the agreed position?

3.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. True, you did instruct us to convene and try to harmonise the positions to minimise the potential acrimony during the consideration of the clauses in the Bill. 

We convened since yesterday and carried through this morning. We have been able to try to come to the centre on some of the key areas. A few remain grey, but again, our positions are not ordained because while we were doing that, we have this Parliament to eventually look at what we have been doing, because they will have the final say.

That said, I thank the Minister for the early compliance by laying on Table some of the key documents on which we insisted that should be laid before Parliament. But, I also go out of my way to explain that these documents, since they were declared that some stay sacrosanct, and therefore not easily publicly available, they should be available on demand. When Members need to read them to be able to appreciate the nature of these commitments; we are legislating for a country's financial resource, when we mishandle it, certainly, we shall be blamed for dozing on duty. 

Lastly, the minister probably forgot something. Whereas the statutory instrument for early project activities was one of the documents asked to be laid, she was supposed to attach a catalogue of those activities – probably she will have to look for it and lay it before we conclude this Bill – Not the statutory instrument but also an attachment of the catalogue of those activities for our attention and future reconciliation of activities; please look at it. 

Otherwise, we are ready to consider some of the areas that we have been able to look at. I must warn the House in advance that the nature of this Bill is such that why it is called a special provisions Bill, is because of the tendency that it touches over 18 existing legislations which it will probably amend by infection or necessary implication and, therefore, we must have our eyes and hearts open to do the business of this country without fear or favour. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition and Minister of Energy. The fact that we have agreed on a number of issues and reconciled, can we now proceed to the committee stage?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE EAST AFRICAN CRUDE OIL PIPELINE SPECIAL PROVISIONS BILL, 2021


3.34
Clause 1
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

On clause 1, my committee recommends that the House adopts that clause as is. I beg to call that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stands part of – 

MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 1 is on commencement and it provides for two commencement dates; generally for the Bill to come on a date of publication that is futuristic but creates an exception for Sections 11 and 38, which shall be deemed to have come into force on 1 January 2016. 

Madam Chairperson, this requires us to respect the rules of retrospective legislations. Laws are made for the future because of the principle of certainty. Where we are required to legislate backwards or retrospectively, we must satisfy the two conditions; certainty of facts and also the attribution of facts. 

In this case, Madam Chairperson, you will allow me to point out that Section 11 that seeks to be legislated retrospectively touches on Section 1 of the Land Act but also Section 73 of the Land Act which provides for an authorised undertaker to acquire land for the project or for whatever purpose. 

If in 2016 there was an undertaker and that land was acquired, we should be having those facts here before this House. Who was the undertaker who acquired the land? How much land was acquired? How much was paid for and in whose hands is this land available? That should be laid here before this House so that it forms part of this legislation. 

Secondly, we are talking about Section 38 which is about the early project activities. From 2016 up to now, it is assumed that some activities took place and those activities were properly costed so, by now, if we are to give it effect, we must know who undertook this activity. Were these activities under the early project activities for Uganda only? Was it proportionate to our shareholding; the percentage of Uganda? 

Also look through the definition that has been provided for early project activities under Section 2, which says that early project activities shall be cost by investors and yet investors have been defined in this very Bill to mean everybody, not only Uganda.

Why should Uganda pay that cost of US$ 428,190 when some of them are costs incurred by other partners in the project, including other governments that are part of this and also the companies that are coming from abroad? 

Therefore, unless these facts are here and Parliament can legislate with certainty on the amount, which amount must have been asserted by the Auditor-General, we cannot proceed here.

Madam Chairperson, I would advise that the second part that seeks to take back the Bill to 1 January 2016 does not stand part of this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we hear from the minister?

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I want to thank my colleague who has raised these pertinent issues where we have to come out very clearly.

If the Member can be patient, we have provisions which are elaborating land acquisition in this Bill and the Bill also respects the Ugandan laws in whatever we are doing. 

I am not aware of any acquisition of land that has been done so far regarding the East African Crude Oil Pipeline. This Bill is specific on EACOP. It is not talking about any other refinery or whatever. It is talking about the pipeline and as far as I know, we have not acquired land. EACOP has not acquired land. 

Therefore, in order for us to take care of the other activities that took place before we put in place this enabling law, that is why we provided for this commencement date. Obviously, there are activities which are taking place. It is moving but we need a law that will regulate all those activities. Therefore, no land has been acquired, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Katuntu, you chaired this meeting. Can I hear from you?

MR KATUNTU: First of all, Madam Chairperson, there is nothing illegal about retrospective legislation. You can actually legislate retrospectively, depending on the reason you have to capture the period from which you want to begin.

I think what the minister or the chairperson of the committee should be explaining is, between now and 2016, this is what we wanted to capture such that we bring it within the realm of this law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. There is information here. 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the point my colleague is raising is just settled in the Resettlement Action Plan, which we have tabled and all the details are therein. This is part of the activities. For example, when you are going to do such an activity, you do a FEED - Front End Engineering and Design. 

If you are to wait for all these activities then your project is not even bankable. What we are doing is to ensure that all activities which started in 2016 - and this is not only part of Uganda, because Uganda is taking only 15 per cent of this pipeline. These include activities which are in Tanzania. For example, in Tanzania, they have already acquired all the land.  They have moved extremely far.

Therefore, when we are doing this, we have to remember that we are a partner to a very big company where we own only 15 per cent. We cannot do it in isolation as Uganda. 

The Resettlement Action Plan has all the details of the land activities that have been captured. It has everything to do with land and then you add on other activities, which you would need to make the project move. 

We moved early, we prepared the early and we have to capture all these costs.

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, I want to subscribe to the submissions of the honourable minister and all those who have spoken in favour of this clause. 

I want to state that my committee looked at this clause and indeed, we requested the minister to clearly state what these early project activities are. This is included in our report that we have already disposed of but suffice it to say that, among others, they include integrated project management team costings, health and safety, social security, environmental impact studies. Pre-FEED and FEED - where FEED means Front-End Engineering Design and contracting people to begin designing how the pipeline will be. So, basically this has been highlighted. And so as hon. Katuntu said, there are no illegalities in having a retrospective commencement on this Bill and on this particular clause. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause, agreed to.
 
Clause 2
DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to propose an amendment on clause 2, which is an application by inserting the words “in Uganda” at the end of the provision. 

The justification for this is that this is for purposes of clarity. The provision should clearly indicate that the law shall apply to the Crude Oil Pipeline Project in Uganda and not anywhere else. I beg to submit.

MS NANKABIRWA: I concede. I support the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 2, as amended, becomes part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4
DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 4, on interpretation, I beg to move that we amend subclause (a), amending the definition of the word “of taker” by -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I propose we stand over the interpretation clause; we shall process the proposed amendments to the interpretation clause at the end. This is because we may come across another interpretation in the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 stood over.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6
DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, we had proposed an amendment to this clause to insert a new subclause (3), immediately after subclause (2) and renumber accordingly as follows: “(3) where the shares or assets of the Ugandan State participant are used as security of any description under subsection 1 or 2, by the project company, the Ugandan State participants shall submit a report to Parliament in relation to the security within 30 days from the date of acquisition of the security.” 

Madam Chairperson, the justification for this is to provide for parliamentary oversight. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is an amendment to clause 7. 
Can we look at clause 7?

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I beg to move that we amend clause 7 by inserting the words, “arising from the 15 per cent State participating interest in applicable petroleum agreements” between the words, “it” and “at” appearing in the third line, so that it reads: “Title to Petroleum: notwithstanding the provisions of any Ugandan law, the Ugandan State participant shall hold the legal and the beneficial ownership of petroleum allocated to it arising from the 15 per cent state participating interest in applicable petroleum agreements at the exit point from the upstream project at Kabaale to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under…” and the justification of this is for clarity. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed -

MR ENOSI ASIIMWE: Yesterday, I requested that we also do an amendment to this section to only allow legal ownership; we shouldn't add beneficial ownership of petroleum allocated to UNOC. I raise it once again to members that section 7, under “Title to petroleum: notwithstanding the provisions of any Ugandan law, the Ugandan State participant shall hold the legal ownership of petroleum…” 

When we add “beneficial ownership,” we change the purpose of the Bill. We are giving UNOC a lot of powers to this oil, which actually should not be by all standards because it is a trustee. It is acting on behalf of Government. However, when you add “beneficial”, it means that you are giving them a right to use these oil proceeds as and when they find it befitting. 

Therefore, I suggest to the committee that we amend to only give them the legal ownership, not beneficial ownership. Thank you. 

Mr MUWANGA kivumbi: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support my colleague, hon. Enosi. We are dealing with other laws that are not here. Beneficial ownership is a huge bone of contention. We believe what the full infection to other laws would be, because they have already said, “notwithstanding provisions of any other law”; the moment we give “beneficial ownership” in this Bill and do otherwise in other Bills, we would have given much away. 

In the other Bills we are considering, this is a hugely contentious issue. Therefore, we believe right now it is only safer for us to give them legal ownership. For beneficial ownership, if Parliament wishes, they will acquire it when we are amending the Public Finance Management Act. However, as of now, if we do it here and we have a provision “notwithstanding any other law,” that means we have - because the other laws are subject to this. 

Madam Chairperson, we believe this is huge. What they are seeking out there is to take the entire revenue. There, they will be seeking to amend all the money and use it at source because they are legal beneficiaries.

Our humble view is that the country is safer at this juncture under this Bill, to only give them legal ownership. Beneficial ownership will be hugely costly to the country. 

The deputy Chairperson: Thank you. 

Mr katuntu: I think we need to look at the reason we are giving this ownership to UNOC. That is when we can decide whether we give them “beneficial” or “legal”. 

What is the purpose? It is to allow UNOC to utilise it at that stage for purposes of business. That is all. In any case, who are the shareholders of UNOC? It is actually Uganda. UNOC is our investment arm. It is the one using the oil to trade in. The difference would be, “Then you have to sell,” “Then you have got resources,” “Then you have to get money,” “Then appropriate.” Does that happen in the daily oil business? 

Therefore – (Interjection) - let me have the information.

Mr MUWANGA kivumbi: Honourable colleague, let me take this opportunity to inform you that we have deliberated on these issues in the Committee on Finance, very elaborately. What are the implications, pros and cons? Up to now, Government has gone back to consult and the key turning point of that whole consultation is on legal benefit. 

The full impact of this is that in the other Bill, they are even going to amend the definition of revenue to exclude revenue arising out of this beneficial ownership. The full implication is that they want money. UNOC are not to be part of the revenue under the Petroleum Fund and it will have a huge impact. 

Therefore, if you have not schooled yourself fully to the other amendments, you may not fully internalise the full import of - I know, from the theoretical point where you come from, it is for purposes of doing business.

We have proposed other provisions that will give UNOC ways to do modern business in oil but not to take ownership of oil. The full impact will be too huge than what you are trying to insinuate, Sir.

Mr katuntu: Thank you for the information, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, but we do not legislate in anticipation. That is what the rule says. You cannot now bring the Public Finance Management Act and speculate that they are going to amend. Who is going to amend it? Assuming they do not amend it - (Interruption)

Mr Thomas tayebwa: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, this is an issue to which we committed ourselves long time ago. Number one, it is already provided for in the inter-governmental agreement, which we ratified here in 2017.
 
Number two, it is also provided for in the Host Government Agreement. Therefore, it is an issue we ratified. We gave legal and beneficial ownership to your UNOC here. That is just what we are doing.

Mr katuntu: Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi knows, when we were doing the downstream, midstream and upstream legislation, we went through many of these things including when we were creating UNOC and so on. Now, we are being faced with business reality. 

We are not legislating for UNOC but we are representing for the project where we are holding 15 per cent. I think we need to make that distinction. Our state participation in that project is only 15 per cent. How do we utilise that for purposes of doing business unless UNOC has got powers? 

It must have those powers really and to me, they should be legal beneficial powers. That is the only way they can now transact unfettered. 

Otherwise, Madam Chairperson, business is not like we would be coming here as MPs or even Cabinet and start running the company. The company must have some position; some powers to run. We give just the legal guidance but the decision will certainly be on our investment company to run. 

Therefore, in my view, I do not see anything wrong with giving them beneficial ownership. 

Mr mpuuga: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In our earlier attempt to harmonise clause 7, the reason it became a bit contentious was because of its dis-applying effect on the PFMA. That we conversed - when the chairperson introduced an amendment that attempted to distinguish between the 15 per cent oil and other possible oil, that created a dichotomy that even makes this clause a bit distinct. 

The submission of hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, of course, brings into perspective a possibility of legislating in anticipation; it is not a blind submission for me. From what he is saying, the same Government has gone back to consult over a matter almost related.

Madam Chairperson, we agree that UNOC is a trustee. The powers of a trustee can be qualified and I think that is what Members are discussing; whether to qualify the powers of the trustee - that the trustee is not actually the beneficiary because of a possibility of conflict when a trustee is a beneficiary - and see whether we can create that dichotomy with either a new clause or to qualify by way of couching this very clause. 

In light of this, Madam Chairperson, would it hurt this process if this clause again becomes part of the consultation before we return, so that we can return to the centre for this clause because the contention on it should not make us lose sight of what we want to do in this Bill. 

Would we lose a lot if we stood over his clause and do the final tit-bit to even invite Ministry of Finance to tell us what kind of rat they saw in standing over a clause in another matter they are dealing with?

In the meeting, one of the issues I said is that if we had glossed over these issues first, we would have gone initially to make amendments to the PFMA. However, we potentially put the cart before the horse in some of the clauses and that is why we are now speaking back and forth. I do not know whether the minister would lose a bowl of oil, if we stood over this clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, of course, I will not lose even a litre of oil. However, I need us to appreciate the fact that we are aligning this Special Provisions Bill to the already-signed agreements. 

In addition, we would not like to have a standstill that we have ever experienced – one year, nothing is taking place because of a misinterpretation. 

That is why we wanted to request that we do not stand over this, we pass it like hon. Katuntu has explained. UNOC is your baby; you called her a trustee, but you give her responsibilities to represent you fully. 

In addition, that there will be time, where on behalf of you UNOC, the Minister of Energy will be questioned for whatever UNOC does as a company because it is a Ugandan company. 

However, it is not alone; it is a shareholder in a bigger company but we do not want her (UNOC) to be in that position, which puts her in a weak position. Therefore, I really request, Madam Chairperson, that this is a provision that touches what is already in the agreements that we negotiated - it was protracted negotiation - and the Heads of State agreed to these agreements. So, I request that we do not stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Leader of the Opposition, I request that we look at what was in the agreement as hon. Katuntu was making a submission that we are ratifying what was already agreed upon. Much as we have the Public Finance Management Act, we would be acting in anticipation – and that is true. 

However, we need to know the principles of this agreement for us to be able to say we stand over the clause. I really think we move on with a clause. I want put - (Hon. Asiimwe rose_) 
You already brought your issue; I am going to put a question to your amendment and then we move on. 

We have an amendment that was brought by hon. Enosi Asiimwe where he wants us to delete the word “unbeneficial”. I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Enosi Asiimwe that we delete the word “unbeneficial” from the Bill. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8
MR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, clause 8 is on payment in kind. The committee is proposing to:
    a) Amend subclause (2)(b) by inserting the words “referred to in paragraph 2(a)” between the words “petroleum” and “to” so that the provision reads as follows:
“(b) Sell the petroleum referred to in paragraph 2(a) to other shippers or third party purchasers.” 

The justification for this is to clear the potential concern on loss of revenue from the in-kind model, if not clearly referred to “in-kind petroleum”. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed. Yes, Jonathan?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, clause 8 itself, first, the term payment “in-kind” is likely to be abused payment in-kind. If you read the Bill, it appears payment “in-kind” is the same as payment using our oil. That is what this clause says. 

If that is what it means, first of all, it must be explicit – it must be clear, that you are saying we are going to use the oil to pay but under what circumstance will you turn around and start using the oil to pay? Because you are likely, if you read subclause (3), it is talking about creation of a security and security has been defined as an encumbrance under the definition, meaning that it is a mortgage; that is what it means, that actually this oil can be mortgaged under the pretext of payment “in-kind”. Is that the kind of law that we would want to make? That we give people opportunity to come and mortgage, to create an encumbrance or a charge?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we have an explanation?

MR ODUR: I think even this clause should actually be completely deleted and issues of payment in kind left alone. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: First of all, you need to know whether she is in agreement with your amendment.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, yes, I am in agreement with the proposal to insert the words referred to in 2(a) because it clarifies that we are dealing for the crude oil and we are authorising the payment in-kind. We are in a business, UNOC might not have cash at hand, but they have crude oil which they can use to pay – where there is no cash. Therefore, the insertion is making further clarification and I am in agreement. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, chairperson?

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, further to that, I agree with the honourable minister that UNOC does not have cash to pay for the cost of transportation of our crude oil. 

Our partners in the EACOP gave us two options - to pay with the cash, in which case Uganda would have to open an escrow account offshore – outside this country – in which case our partners would get money directly from there. In addition, the other option is the one of payment in-kind. 

Our negotiators considered these two options and found that the one requiring Uganda to open an offshore escrow account which would be accessed by those who we would owe money would expose the country in terms of security. Therefore, we felt that our negotiators did a good job of providing that UNOC be allowed to pay for transportation of our crude oil in kind. 

The committee has moved on to say, we need to clearly define the oil that UNOC will have access to. That is why we move this amendment to clearly define that oil, which is the in-kind crude oil. 

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that this House accepts the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that in the inter-governmental agreement? I put the question that Clause 8 be amended as proposed.

MS OGWAL: This section which talks about cost in kind could actually be pushing us to appropriation in advance and that would be going against the law because in kind means I am spending in anticipation. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do we appropriate “in kind” in the House?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: No, we do not. That is why I am just raising a warning because I am feeling uncomfortable and I need comfort. That is a way of telling me that whatever costs I incur, you will pick it up at cost so they are allowing me to spend in advance. That is my concern and that would be against the law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Members, I really want you to first of all appreciate what is in the inter-governmental agreement, the host agreement - all those kinds of agreements before we started debating. Let us not debate because you have just heard somebody saying something. This is a technical issue and that is why I said, let us not debate it here. Go as a subcommittee, agree, and face what is being reported.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, Uganda has already committed itself with its international partners. They have negotiated, and arrived at some positions. Unless some of them out-rightly infringe on the Constitution, then we cannot support them here. However, we are talking about decisions that have been arrived at through a business manner. 

Having said that, we are talking about the 15 per cent participation of UNOC in the project. If you say oil; 15 per cent appropriated, it is like we are talking about all the oil which we have got either as loyalties, profit oil or participation. 

No, this is purely about the 15 per cent participation in the crude oil project and that is where the in-kind payment comes in; it is a transaction. You are just paying for what you should be paying for. 

I am trying to make it very clear such that we all follow. It is quite technical but I understand that we have to pay. Do we have monies to pay or we can utilise this resource for payment? That is what this particular clause is trying to do. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, payment in kind cannot be a big issue here. Some Members have not fully appreciated the full extent of what we are dealing with. The entire oil is being shared literally in kind. From production, we get royalty – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kivumbi, the 15 per cent is for shipping; for transportation of the crude – 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes. I am not opposed to payment in kind. I am only clarifying that you cannot run away from payment in kind. The entire oil, as it is, has been shared. Because we do not have the money; we are a poor lot, we are told that as the oil comes out of the ground, we begin to share it. 

We take our Loyalty in oil, they take the costs in oil and the 15 per cent in oil. We are sharing oil. When it comes to the transportation, where Uganda does not have the money to pay for the pipeline – which is a private company – the company will simply say, please give us the oil. 

That means that as Members legislate here, what they must know is that whatever we are legislating – that is why we are very careful on ‘beneficial’. We put a big question mark on ‘beneficial’ but we have passed it.

We are saying that by the time we go to Tanga, the Ugandan share of oil will be a small percentage. We will have given away oil in cost-benefit oil, in transport - In the other Bill, we know exactly what Uganda will have; not much to talk about. That is why we are very careful. Hon. Katuntu, payment in kind is okay but - 

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The current fiscal regime requires that any revenues that are collected must be spent only after appropriation. However, this payment in kind is a kind of payment at source, which is a kind of barter trade. That is a complete departure from the current regime of how revenues are supposed to be -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is barter trade allowed?

MR NAMBESHE: No. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you appropriate for barter trade? Do you appropriate for in-kind?

MR NAMBESHE: In kind? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes. 

MR NAMBESHE: No. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So that is not what we are doing.

MR NAMBESHE: I thought that is what is being advocated for by the minister; that the payment be done at source.

MR KATUNTU: Can I regain my Floor, hon. Nambeshe? Thank you very much. 

Colleagues, this is the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (Special Provisions) Bill. What do special provisions mean? It means that under the current legal regimes, there have already been set standards but we must move away from those standards, particularly for this project. That is why it is called “special provisions” Bill. 

We know very well that – and my colleagues are right. What does the Public Finance Management Act provide? It does provide that but for this particular project, we need this special law. That is why it is not any other general law on public finance. It is not; we are talking about oil. 

At this stage, you have partners. You have already entered into agreements. What do you do? You move away from the general provisions. You are going to find another provision, Madam Chairperson, which says notwithstanding anything provided in any other law - meaning you are making this particular law superior for purposes of this project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that Clause 8 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If it is not the clause that you agreed upon, let us know.

DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that we amend clause 11(a)(3), by inserting another paragraph immediately after paragraph (b) to read as follows: “Where land has been identified for implementation of project activities, compensation of project affected persons and acquisition of the land shall be done in accordance with the laws of Uganda and the host government agreement.”

The justification for this amendment is for compliance to Ugandan laws and the host government agreement. I beg to move.

MS NANKABIRWA: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14
DR OTAALA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that we amend subclause 3(C) by substituting  it with the following: “reflect the principles contained in the host government agreement.”

The justification for this proposed amendment is for conformity to the host government agreement. I beg to move.

MS NANKABIRWA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

MR MPUUGA: I thought the chairperson would rise and make clarification on the amendment that was made on clause 15 or they dropped -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no clarification that I saw.

MR MPUUGA: On clause 15?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 15

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24
MR OTALA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment to subclause 2 of clause 24 by capturing environmental EHSS in full as follows: “Environmental Health and Safety Standards” and write out all other abbreviations used in the Bill in full.

Madam Chairperson, the justification for this is for purposes of clarity. I beg to move.

MS NANKABIRWA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25
DR OTALA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that we amend clause 25, which is on joint venture with local partners, by amending subclause 2 and redrafting to adopt a more positive tone and to read: “A Ugandan party shall be considered eligible to participate in a Ugandan joint venture where…” and the justification for this is to adopt a more positive tone. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MS NANKABIRWA: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26
MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I am rising on a point of procedure. First, thank you for your wise guidance yesterday, where you directed us to go and harmonise all the reports that we had. And the effort of that harmonisation has manifested in the way we have transacted on this Bill so far. I am, therefore, wondering whether it will not be procedurally okay to sanction us again to go out and harmonise the remaining provisions? The efforts of our harmonisation stopped at this very provision 25. 

Therefore, I would like to request that you allow us proceed like you guided yesterday.


motion for the House to resume

4.34
The minister of energy and minerals development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

The deputy chairperson: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, presiding.)

Report from the committee of the whole house

4.34
The minister of energy and mineral development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has transacted the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Bill and considered clauses 2,6,7,8,10,11,14 and 24 with amendments; passed clauses 1,3,5,9,12,13,15,16,17,18,19,21, 22,23 and 25 with amendments. 

We skipped clause 4 on interpretation after your guidance, Madam Speaker, that we shall consider it after all these other provisions. I beg to report.



motion for adoption of the report from the Committee of the Whole House

4.35
The minister of energy and minerals development (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

4.36
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, the speed at which the guiding team has been working maybe has been too fast for me. We had delegated powers to a special team to look through the controversial areas and report back. You recall, Madam Speaker, that the Minister communicated to us that they agreed that their agreed position will be communicated as and when we are considering clause by clause. 

When we come to clause 11, for avoidance of doubt, can I be assured that my statement of prompt - as provided for by the Constitution - can I be assured that all those terms have been accommodated? “Prior”, “prompt” and “appropriate.” 

You are moving in a tactical way. You did not give us opportunity to interrogate your agreed position. Maybe if we had interrogated it, we would have known how you are moving. Now I am being told that everything is finished. Can I be assured, for the avoidance of doubt? (Laughter)

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Cecilia, Clause 11 that you have talked about has already passed but you still have an option of recommitting it. Actually, what is happening is that we have only passed 25 clauses. The committee is going back to sit and look at the remaining clauses. 

Are we together, Madam Imat? When I am taking you through, I need to take you very slowly because Dokolo is far. The committee is going back to look at all the things - the remaining ones - but if you have an issue with Clause 11, you can recommit it. 

Yes, clarification?

Dr otaala: From me or – the honourable minister has turned into a Speaker.

The Deputy Speaker: The Chairperson is clarifying the question. He is the owner of the document.

Dr otaala: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. The clarification I want to give to my elder, mama Cecilia, is that the amendment I moved on this clause 11 states as follows:

“Where land has been identified for implementation of project activities, compensation of project affected persons and acquisition of the land shall be done in accordance with the laws of Uganda and the host Government Agreement.”

The “prior”, “prompt” and “fair”, which she referred to are contained in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which is the supreme law of the land. I beg to submit.

Ms ogwal: Madam Speaker, the way he has summarised it has left me still hanging because I would want him to bring those statements. The project affected persons must be paid promptly, fairly and adequately. 

The Deputy Speaker: Those statements are provided for in the Land Act. 

Ms ogwal: Yes, but I want it to appear in this one, for avoidance of doubt.

The Deputy Speaker: Why do we have the Land Act, therefore? Then why don't we copy the whole Land Act?

4.40
Mr abdu katuntu (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): My –

The Deputy Speaker: Mother-in-law -

Mr katuntu: Hon. Barbara Imat Atim, popularly known as the hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the point you are raising is constitutional. Not even this law can outlaw any provision of the Constitution because the Constitution is superior. 

What the chairperson of the committee has said, and what we looked at is, we cannot set any other standard other than that provided by the Constitution. Those very words are in the Constitution. The chairperson is saying, “It shall be done in accordance with the laws of Uganda.”

For other provisions we have said, “Notwithstanding what is provided for in any other law,” making this law actually superior to other laws. In this particular provision, clause 11, we are saying that it will be done in accordance with the laws of Uganda. 

The provisions of the Constitution are actually repeated in the Land Act. We cannot legislate like we are idle that every other time, we legislate for what has already been legislated. That is not proper legislation. 

Therefore, the Constitution protects, the Land Act protects, and indeed this particular provision when it becomes law - your interest. I thank you, Imat Cecilia Barbara.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katuntu.

4.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before you put the question, just like the Minister has ably enumerated, we tried to converse over these clauses and of course they are all dicey because the law we are making is one of a kind.

However, the beauty about doing this work is that in it, there should be no winners and losers. I want to believe that nobody is attempting to be a winner and declaring others losers.

In that spirit, because the meeting to which you asked us to go for is an informal platform – it is not part of our rules. But under Commonwealth practice, it is allowed – “the usual channels” as we call them. May we, in that spirit, ask that the chairperson of the Committee on Finance and the Minister of Finance join that usual channel for the next conversation to probably avoid re-committals because the air smells re-committals.

Would it save us time that we can properly move to the centre probably in our usual channels, informally recommit from within with a view that at some stage, the Minister could move a re-committal of one of the clauses that are still contentious so that we are all able to harmonise because I do not see that we are here to legislate and declare winners and losers, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition. Chairperson Committee on Finance – once your Leader of the Opposition has spoken, you do not speak. The chairperson Committee on Finance and the Minister of Finance, please join the team in the discussions.

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I am not departing from what the Leader of the Opposition is seeking, I would like to know, what I am going to do in the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will do what they are doing – (Laughter) - you will do what all the others are doing.

Members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I adjourn the House until tomorrow. Let the committee go and finish its work. Thank you.

(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 December 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)



