
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 15 December 2021

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will cause some alteration on the Order Paper to accommodate a brief to Parliament, which is a loan proposal. It should be accommodated as a normal course of business of the House; brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow up to Euro 96 million and the rest of it. 

Secondly, I would like to move one item to be handled today; that is a motion by hon. Onen. I do not see it on the business to follow - it was on business to follow, item No.8, Clerk, activate it so that we can handle it today as well. I am told some of the people involved with this are in the House today, so we should do this when they are here.

Honourable members, we have a situation that has been created by the Public Finance Management Act, which never used to be there. In the past, we would have this Parliament go in recess this month around this time then return in February and by that time, Members would have had sufficient time to be in their constituencies and do other things. 

However, when we passed that law, we front-loaded the whole budget process. In the past, the President would read the budget before the budget was passed. After the presentation of the budget is when we go would into discussions of the budget, and then approval was usually by August or September.

So, we used to have an animal called “vote on account” because by the beginning of 1st July of every year, there would be no new budget. They used to call it vote on account; a percentage of the money which was used in the last financial year, they had the authority to spend it- they call it vote on account. 

However, all these now have changed and because we front-loaded the entire budget process and by 31st of every May, we must pass the budget and all the laws related to it.

Then when the H.E. the President comes to present an Address on the State of the Nation and eventually the budget, a week after, the whole budget is actually finished. Therefore, by 1st of July, they are ready to execute a new budget passed by Parliament but that has had implications.

It has made January one of our busiest months; so, you cannot have a break in January; 31st of December, by law, we should receive the Budget Framework Paper. And I am being informed that we might receive it next week, in which case, by the beginning of the year, we should be preparing to begin discussions. The committees must begin discussions on the Budget Framework Paper, which we should finalise and the Budget Committee reports back to the President on the proposals by 15th February. 

Therefore, that whole period is now taken; the period we used to use for a break. Therefore, we are going to be creative to find time, re-adjust our time to accommodate Members’ recess which is longer for them to have a good break. The discussions will happen and you will be notified accordingly. We had intended to send you on recess tomorrow but part of why we cannot is because we have not received the Budget Framework Paper.

If we do, then we have to call you just for one day or three minutes to receive the Budget Framework Paper. It happened once; the shortest sitting in Parliament, I think took about three minutes because we called Parliament - we just received the Budget Framework Paper and once it was laid there, House adjourned sine die - three minutes. However, we do not want that to happen. Therefore, we want to receive the Budget Framework Paper next week and then from next week, we can go on recess. 

So, I am giving you this information because there have been some alteration and we have not been able to figure out how best to factor in the recess for Members and this Parliament, when we start next year, all will be set and we will know exactly when recess is and for how long.

If you noticed, from the time this Parliament started, we have not had any meaningful recess that you can say: “Okay, we have gone on recess”. We have been here, and we are continuing; short break in December, January - we are back until the end of May. Then we continue like that.

So, I thought we should know this and then know that the committees are going to be extremely busy in the period they should not have which is January, handling the Budget Framework Paper. 

Proposals have come from Government and some of the proposals that will come, Parliament has had recommendations on them, proposed some changes that should have taken place, some of those changes may not have been implemented. Therefore, we will have the opportunity to raise them again; say, “We agreed last time that this would happen, and it is not happening. Why”? That is the Budget Framework Paper. So, thank you and let us proceed with the Order Paper. 

On what matter do you rise? Procedure?

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter, seeking your guidance and the guidance of the House given that in your communication, you indicated that the House is about to go on recess and that we can be called back as and when you deem fit.

Mr Speaker, apparently, the intern doctors have been asked to vacate their offices and this is a directive released from the Ministry of Health as of 10 December - a few days ago. However, as it is that the management of COVID-19 is in regional referral hospitals; that is the policy. In addition, the policy is that intern doctors are supervised from referral hospitals.

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter?

DR BATUWA: The procedural matter is; is Parliament finding it needful to take a decision on the letter that has been released that seeks to fire all these intern doctors and the situation that is escalating to the extent that 30 doctors who were bringing a communication to Parliament have been arrested. And as of now, they are at CPS. 

Therefore, I rise to ask your indulgence under Rule 59 that allows us to move motions without notice, a motion to enable Parliament arrive at a decision that this House considers a motion without notice under rule 59(1)(k) that we discuss the issue of intern doctors exhaustively, arrive at a decision, now that we are going into recess. 

Mr Speaker, December is characterised with many road accidents and all healthcare facilities refer them to regional referral hospitals. Therefore, we are going to look at a situation where accident victims get to regional referral hospitals and do not find help where accident victims get to national referral hospitals-

THE SPEAKER: Are you now speaking to the motion that you have just proposed that you wanted to move?

DR BATUWA: Mr Speaker, I seek for your leave such that we discuss this motion.

THE SPEAKER: No. We will not handle that motion that way. It is an important matter and you need to present a formal motion and we will have a discussion. What structure will we follow if we are to debate? This House is not a House where you important things haphazardly. The matter of the doctors is very important. Many of us have things to say about what is going on and many of us have asked questions why it is actually necessary that this issue should be talked about. 

When we sit here, we propose budgets and we pass them. All these things should have been taken care of. Why should we get ourselves in situations, where we have this state of affairs? Why? It is not a matter that you can say; “I have a motion without notice; let us discuss it.” What are we going to discuss and where is the paper you are proposing? 

So, I take that as a notice. Please, prepare a motion and if the motion can solve the problem, we will have a debate tomorrow. Thank you very much. 

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to rush and prepare a motion and come with it. 

THE SPEAKER: I have already allowed you. (Laughter)

DR BATUWA: Thank you. 

2.22
MR ABDALLAH KIWANUKA (NUP, Mukono County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, you made an important communication in this House, wherein you communicated that we are going to spare some good time before we go into very important deliberations to do with the budget, among others, for this House to know the Uganda we want - the direction we need to take.  

Since then, time is becoming tight and this was a very good direction, which you had opted to get this House first. To-date, through your communication, as we are going into the Budget Framework Paper, I have not heard that important issue and this would have been handled before we go into the deliberations to do with the budget. 

I am of the view that you spare some time and we find an item on the Order Paper for the Members of Parliament to deliberate on the Uganda we want. I beg to pray in the direction, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That matter is very close to my heart. We have been grappling with the idea of fixing because we need about two weeks, or maybe even three weeks for all the Members to have an opportunity to speak on this matter. It is critically important that as Parliament, we should know where we are going. Someone sang thus; “if you do not know where you are going, any road can take you there”. We do not want to be in that category and that is why we wanted to have this debate, which can feed into many other things, just expression of the views of the representatives of the people, as they look at the whole picture - five years or now less than five years. What do we want Uganda to be by the time we finish with this Parliament? 

That is the debate we are going to have. We are trying to find time when it can be accommodated because it is a debate without decision but it will be an important debate. We will extract the key points and submit them to all relevant agencies, including HE the President, so that they can look at our expectations, desires and what we think should change in the way we do business for the people of this country. That will take place. We have only had a difficulty on how to fix it. 

Probably, if the committees are already doing work, we can have the debate for two to three hours in the afternoon every single day while the committees are doing work in the morning, then that can be accommodated in January because normally, at that time, we do not have any other business except the discussion on mainly the Budget Framework Paper. It is important and we will have it. Thank you. (Hon. Ndyomugyenyi rose_) On what matter do you rise, Sir? 

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise, before you thank me? 

MR NDYOMUGYENYI: I am rising on Rule 59(k) on motions, which in the opinion of the Speaker, is a matter of emergency. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is a matter that I would like to bring to the attention of this House regarding Uganda Land Commission. 

THE SPEAKER: No, that matter, which in the opinion of the Speaker is urgent, links to Rule 49, which is among matters of real urgent public importance. Therefore, it is not within those parameters. If you want to have a discussion of that nature, use other rules; they are there and they are available, to accommodate any situation; what you do in this House, the rules facilitate you on how to do it but that one will not work for now. - No, it will not. Can we go to the Order Paper please?

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO € 96,270,833.84 (EQUIVALENT TO $ 108,323,942) FROM THE CHINA CONSTRUCTION BANK CORPORATION TO FINANCE THE MASINDI-BISO- KABALE-KIZIRAFUMBI-HONGWAKA-NYIRONGO-KYARUSESA-BUTORE ROAD UPGRADING PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who I am told today is the Government Chief Whip, around?

2.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a proposal to borrow up to €96,270,833.84 equivalent to $ 108,323,942 from China Construction Bank Corporation Hunan branch to finance the Masindi-Biso-Kabale-Kizirafumbi-Hongwaka-Nyirongo-Kyarusesa-Butore Road upgrading project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to lay the document on the Table? 

MR TAYEBWA: Mr Speaker, I would also like to lay the brief, which has all the necessary documents and certificates of financial implications. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to our Committee on National Economy to examine expeditiously and advise us on how to proceed with this matter. Let us have a point of procedure from Lwemiyaga.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have observed that this is a very important matter to commit Government to borrow such huge amounts of money. I understand that this Order Paper was circulated, where we have five ministers in the docket of Finance - without saying that the Government Chief Whip cannot do the task he has performed. However, if we proceed in this manner, why do we have Cabinet that is fully represented of all portfolios? They will continue doing the same. Today is not Cabinet day and you have the full minister and four state ministers and they cannot be here. In a way, Mr Speaker, I am worried if we are to proceed in this manner, where we have the frontbench that is abandoned. We vetted over 83 ministers and they know there is business in the House. This Parliament can help process all that they have to do in the country. 

Are we procedurally right to sit as if there are no ministers in charge of their own portfolios? Is this the way to proceed? As you may see, the Government Chief Whip will rise again and again, incessantly, to defend and sit in on behalf of his colleagues. This is very worrisome. Are we procedurally right to proceed on matters of finance and borrowing huge amounts when the responsible and line ministers have chosen to skip this? Are they worried that there is something behind the proposal? What is happening, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, if there was something not right behind the proposal, our committee would be able to sort that out. Are we proceeding properly as Parliament? Yes, we are. We are proceeding very well. 

The mere fact that some people choose to behave the way they do, pure bad manners, does not make us, as Parliament, take responsibility for their bad conduct. We have complained about this matter not once, not twice but very many times that ministers must respect the proceedings of this House and be present to deal with questions and to present their own papers just like this one, which has now been presented by the Government Chief Whip. I need an explanation from you. Where are all these five ministers of Finance?

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, to clarify for the ministers of Finance, as it was mentioned yesterday, the Minister of Finance and the top management are meeting the President to discuss the Budget Framework Paper, which they must present to Cabinet on Monday. This is so that on Tuesday, we meet our constitutional obligation of presenting it here. That is why all ministers of Finance are not here; otherwise they would have been here.

For the other ministers, I am going to raise it with the Prime Minister. This needs to stop. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Please, next time start with that so that Members do not become anxious about why you are the one when you are not the Minister of Finance. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPLAUD THE DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE AND COOPERATION OF JAPANESE INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY AND THE OTHER DEVELOPMENT AGENCIES IN UGANDA SPECIFICALLY SUPPORT TO THE RECOVERY OF NORTHERN UGANDA REGION

2.33
REV. FR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laaro-Pece Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to applaud the development assistance and cooperation of Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and other development agencies in Uganda, specifically for the recovery of Northern Uganda Region:

“WHEREAS the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXVIII, foreign policy objectives, mandates the state to promote national interest and promote regional and Pan African cultural, economic and political cooperation and integration;

AND WHEREAS the same national objective and directive principle under the socio-economic objective mandates the state to endeavour to fulfil the fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development, and shall, in a particular way, ensure that all developmental efforts are directed at ensuring the maximum social and cultural wellbeing of the people and that all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education, health services, clean and safe water, work, decent shelter, adequate clothing, food security and pension and retirement benefits;

COGNISANT of the fact that JICA’s cooperation to Uganda is primarily focused on improving the environment to attain economic growth and raising incomes in rural areas, improving the living environment in the areas of health services and water supply and providing support in the northern region, which fits well with the national development agenda and sustainable development goals;

AND FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that JICA and other agencies’ support to the people of Northern Uganda during the conflict and post conflict recovery has focused on the major sectors of health, education, agriculture and infrastructure;

NOTING that JICA is involved in financing major infrastructure projects in the country that include building of bridges; a case in point, the new bridge on the Nile, upgrading the Atiak-Nimule Road, Gulu Municipal Roads rehabilitation, Kampala flyover construction and electric power upgrades (Queensway Substation) and Bujagali interconnection project, among others;

FURTHER NOTING the contribution of other agencies in the socio-economic and political development of Uganda, namely Austria, Austrian Development Cooperation, USAID, UKAID, SWISS, Enabel, DANIDA, Norwegian Embassy, among others, supporting key sectors of the economy;

AWARE that the debt burden of the country reached over US$ 18.9 billion by the end of April 2021 and it stood and still stands at 18. 9 billion, according to Bank of Uganda, and this calls for strategic financing of the economy without exposing the country to relinquish its strategic assets and this threat is not visible with the development agency support to the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
Parliament of Uganda formally recognises and applauds the contribution of the Japan International Cooperation Agency for the development support to the people of Northern Uganda under strategic focus on Uganda support to Northern Uganda.

Parliament recognises the contribution of all international development agencies working and supporting the socio-economic and political development of Uganda. Government should strengthen and consolidate this cooperation to meet national objectives in line with directives and principles stated in the Constitution.

Parliament emphasises and encourages development agencies to focus development efforts to Northern Uganda in order to reduce the poverty rate, which has been levelled at 68 per cent as per Uganda Bureau of Statistics report 2020, as the highest in the country.

Parliament of Uganda to evaluate and assess major loan agreements and ascertain the risk on socio-economic progress of the country to avoid the risk of giving up national assets of this country.”

I beg to move, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Kazo, hon. Dan Kimosho, hon. Nsibambi, hon. Dr – the man stood for president so many times, how can I forget his name? (Laughter) Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika, Member for Alebtong - the motion is properly seconded. 

Would you like to briefly speak to your motion, Sir? Very briefly!

MR ONEN: I will be precise. Mr Speaker, I want to bring to the attention of this House that JICA started their work in Uganda in 1992 and through the Japanese Embassy, they have made a crucial difference in the lives of Ugandans, especially in northern Uganda.

And in my culture, if someone is up to do something good for you, we always say, afwoyo or Asante sana to mean thank you. And so, I am seeking a resolution of Parliament to thank the Japanese Government and JICA in particular, for the contributions they have given to this country.

I would also like to put it on record that the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) is not like other target workers who give with one hand expecting to receive something with the other hand. In other words, they are very humanitarian. They are very religious in their support and none of their grounds has a string attached to. 

That is why I am calling upon this Parliament to recognise and applaud their contributions and the integrity of their work. They have never compromised the quality of their work. They have done a number of projects in this country, a case in point, improving the national roads in the refugee-hosting areas of the West Nile sub region; they have sunk up to $6.8million in that West Nile road construction. 

They have also supported the improvement of Gulu Municipal Council roads in northern Uganda; they spend about $20.27 million. JICA has also worked on some agricultural projects in northern Uganda and nationwide, including other areas in western and in eastern parts of this country. 

There are other projects which are ongoing, for example, they are working to strengthen or put a project for strengthening resilience in refugee hosting and refugee affected districts in West Nile. 

And finally, and among others, because there are so many things which they have done for this country, I cannot mention all of them but in a nutshell, the Chop Japanese Embassy, through the hands of JICA, is doing a lot for our country, for which this Parliament deserves to thank them, on behalf of the government. 

I want to bring to your attention, Mr Speaker, that Japan has contributed about $45 million in support to other agencies, like UNICEF and World Food Programme, among others. They are also supporting the development of local communities through grants for the grassroots projects by constructing schools and hospitals, among other projects. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Charles Onen, for the motion. Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Embassy of Japan in Kampala and the Japan International Cooperation Agency. They include the following people:

Mr Horri, Mizumoto, Deputy Head of Mission;
Mr Kitamura Yoshinori, Head of Economic Cooperation;
Mr Usui Takaaki, Head of Political Affairs;
Ms Teredo Eri, researcher and advisor; 
Ms Watanabe Mizuki, Coordinator of Economic Cooperation;
Mr Uchiyama Takayuki, Chief Representative; 
Mr Fukuhara Ichiro, Senior representative;
Mr Muhame Ivan, Senior Programme Officer;
Mr Pacoto Emmanuel, Programme Officer. This particular one must be coming from Japan which is in West Nile; and
Ms Eseri Watsemwa, Public Relations Officer. 

They have come to observe the proceedings of this House, which is a matter that is touching them and the work they have done. They want to listen in as we debate this matter. 

So, can I have a seconder for the motion before I propose the question for debate? Yes, hon. Dan Atwijukire.

2.45
MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion and as rightly put by my honourable colleague, it is not African to appreciate the contribution given by someone, especially when that someone can clearly indicate that there are no attached interests, but geared towards helping humanity to improve it. 

Mr Speaker, I am greatly touched by the efforts of JICA in supporting healthcare in this country. We cannot count the extent of investment in improving the health care system, in terms of infrastructure, that JICA has put in our health centres.

I happen to have worked with the health sector and so, I know the extent to which JICA and the Japanese Government have supported the improvement of the health infrastructure. And I really want to appreciate and appeal to all members in this House to thank them for that great work done.

Mr Speaker, JICA has also greatly worked in the areas of our culture, schools and infrastructure, and all these have been geared towards improving human life and human dignity; to make our people live a better life. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, the other reason I am very passionate about seconding this motion is the integrity and the quality standards of the JICA and the Japanese community, the work they do here - non-compromising high integrity and high value on their return. I want to thank them because they serve as an example to many other partners, in terms of the integrity and the quality of work they offer this country. 

I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I see this motion has another seconder; hon. Aisa Agaba.

2.48
MS AISA AGABA (NRM, Bugagaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to second the motion. Really, even in the Bible, they say that when someone has done really great, it is good to appreciate. We really appreciate the Japanese Government and JICA.

Mr Speaker, JICA in Uganda has focused on improving the environment for us to attain sustainable economic growth. And not only that but also helping to raise incomes of the people in rural areas by improving the health services there. They have also helped in ensuring water supply. Like they say, “water is life.” They have not left us to die; they have supported us through the availability of, for example, better water services.

It is not true, like my honourable colleague said, that they were only focusing on areas in Northern Uganda; they even focused on other areas in other parts of Uganda. When you look at the new bridge across River Nile in Jinja and as you come ahead, you look at the Queensway Substation; they have done great work to the development of this country. 

I rise to second the motion and appreciate JICA. Thank you for the work done and may God bless you. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question that I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to applaud development assistance and cooperation of the Japanese International Cooperation Agency and the development agency in Uganda, specifically support for the recovery of northern Uganda.
 
That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. I see all of you would like to speak on this motion. Can we agree on a time? Can I give you two minutes each? Are two minutes okay? Okay, let us try three minutes. I will start with the Member for Amuria.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. In supporting the motion, maybe I will just give a testimony. As this august House is well aware, I was the minister responsible for refugees for 15 years. I remember when Juba nearly collapsed and a big number of refugees crossed into Uganda, in thousands.

I was sent by the Cabinet to receive those much traumatised human beings at Elegu. When I was asked by the media whether the Government of Uganda was financially ready to look after the refugees that were now in their millions, I told the country that the President and the Government had goodwill and “we shall translate that goodwill into resources”. 

Indeed, on coming here, the Japanese and other partners were able to cushion the Government of Uganda and that is why we were able to take care of the over one million refugees that are in Uganda. 

So, I rise to confirm that the road network in the refugee-hosting areas, the expansion of classrooms, the expansion of health services and the feeding of those refugees – that comes through the World Food Programme – is thanks to the generous support of the people of Japan, through JICA and indeed, at a larger level through their embassy here. 

I have now moved to the road sector. Mr Speaker, at some point, with my senior colleague, I will be laying to this Parliament – to bring Members to speed with what is available – the number of partners who have been kind to support us in these very critical connectivity interventions in the country. Japan, again – and indeed JICA – is one of the leading organisations in this very noble endeavour. 

Therefore, I rise to speak and support the motion and thank the taxpayers of Japan for accepting to work with the people of Uganda. I commit that we shall transparently utilise their resources for the good of the people of Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Is that Ruhaama?

2.54
MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to support this motion. I want to interest myself in the quality of human development, where they have contributed largely. Certain funding and support largely look at other things. However, the funding that looks at the human quality is very important. 

We have seen this in a number of institutions that have been supported. If this is put to good use, we are very hopeful that it can be translated into better efforts in this country, well knowing that the quality of the population is very important in socio-economic development. 

Mr Speaker, certain fundings come with conditionalities. However, the Japanese funding has given us a lot of freedom in looking at results. In addition, they are very quick and visible, not only looking at northern Uganda but the entire country because all these other benefits accrue to the development of Uganda. 

Most specifically, I want to interest myself in the funding, not limited to only one sector, but the funding or the support given to health, education and infrastructural development – which is very important. We say “thank you very much” and we would love to have more of these, especially in other areas that are not doing very well. How I wish you came to Bunyoro – Kagadi – we would say “thank you very much.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

2.56
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion for thanking JICA for the tremendous support they have offered to the people of Uganda. 

It is only JICA that stood with us during emergency, recovery and development in northern Uganda, if you compared them with other donors. When our people were in Internally Displaced People’s camps (IDPs), JICA was with us. They moved with us as we were returning to our villages. 

They also worked directly with the local governments in ensuring that the local governments implemented activities supporting people. As my colleague said that they also went towards supporting human development, JICA supported the various local governments in ensuring sustainability. Even when they left, the people that they had trained would remain in those local governments to carry on with the activities. Therefore, we thank JICA and say that today we are standing on our feet because of their support. 

In the area of agriculture and infrastructural development, we all remember that as we were trading with South Sudan, before Atiak-Nimule Road was worked on, most of our traders lost a lot of perishable items on the roads because they could take days to reach South Sudan where the markets were available. When the road got worked on, transport became easy, traders would move easily with their goods and that improved the trading with South Sudan. Therefore, I join colleagues and the movers in thanking JICA for the support they offered this country. 

2.59
MR RICHARD SEBAMALA (DP, Bukoto County Central, Masaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that JICA has given us the best. It did not only give us the fish but also helped us with the road to go and fish. I will particularly be thankful to the engineering side of JICA. You have come in with a lot of new technology. 

Everyone might look at the Jinja Bridge as a beautiful bridge. As engineers, we look at the technology that you have invested in this country. We look at the new flyover that is traversing Mukwano as you go to Entebbe; the engineering fraternity has gained a lot of experience from such projects. 

There are countries that have come to this nation, with their own citizens to do all the work. You have come here and trained us: got our engineers, taken them to Japan and trained them. They come back with masters and PhDs, new software, and they have learnt how to do this work for the country. I thank you for not only showing us the way, but leading the way of the engineering sector in Uganda. I am sure it is you, JICA, that has worked on the bridge and the flyover and we know when you leave, our people will be here to maintain them. Thank you very much. I beg to second.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Member for Bukoto. 

3.01
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to support the motion and to appreciate JICA Government for the support they have continued to give us, as a country. JICA has stood with us and complemented the roles of Government by supporting us in the water projects, vocational education, agriculture, to mention but a few. I thank the Japanese Government and Japan taxpayers for sacrificing the resources that would have been used elsewhere to support the projects here in Uganda.

I only want to add my voice to hon. Musana’s, that we in Tororo, appreciate these services. How I wish you could extend them nearer to us such that we can continue to enjoy the privilege that the rest of the countries are enjoying with a good relationship that the Japanese Government, through JICA, is offering to this country. We thank you very much and we look forward to seeing a beautiful flyover that is going to traverse Kampala. Come with more grants for us because the debt burden is choking; bring more grants and our partnership should continue to flourish. I thank you very much. 

3.02
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion. However, the mover of the motion was narrowing it only to northern Uganda. I believe what Japan has done for Ugandans every honourable member would appreciate. 

Therefore, the motion would change to Parliament of Uganda appreciating the Japanese Government and its agencies for what they have done for the people of Uganda. Japan, in particular, has put its effort in areas, which are very critical and important in the lives of Ugandans. Most of the health centres in Uganda were equipped by the project funded by JICA and it has done tremendous work in that respect. 

As Ugandans, we appreciate JICA for doing a lot for Uganda in areas of knowledge transfer, to us who are technologically advanced, we know how much we have benefited from the knowledge transfer from the Government of Japan. Whatever they have done here, they have put in place projects of skilling people to get them the knowledge such that they can live even when Japan retires their activities in Uganda. We really thank them for the effort. We commend them and look forward for more support in that aspect. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.04
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. For record purposes, I am now in Elgon County; things have changed. 

THE SPEAKER: So, Bulambuli is for hon. Isaac Katenya?

MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then can you speak now that you have been–(Laughter)

3.05
MR ISAAC KATENYA (Independent, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to support the motion by hon. Onen, that the Japanese, especially JICA has done a lot in education. I was a member of Secondary Science and Mathematics Project, which was started by JICA to support the science sector in improving the standards of education and increasing technological advancement and innovation in Uganda and in Africa in particular. 

I would like to comment that your support has improved a lot. That is why Uganda was encouraged to make science compulsory. As I talk, many regions, especially Bugisu and Sebei regions were able to produce many science students and more students are now pursuing science courses in universities and institutions. I want to call upon the Government - because for us from the East, we have very few universities, especially in Bugisu and Sebei subregion. 

I would wish that the Japanese Embassy, together with the Government, give us a university so that we can be in position to embrace the technology, which we have yearned for and these people had groomed since we sent very many students in universities. You have assisted and given us vehicles in different projects, you have assisted orphans, you have assisted refugees in West Nile and the northern part of Uganda, to ensure that at least their lives improve.

This effort cannot be undermined. Therefore, we are here to support you but we call upon you to add more money in this country so that we should not be chocked by loans as one of my friends commented. I submit, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now, I will use my discretion to allow Elgon, Alebtong and then Kiboga.

3.07
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): I do support the motion to thank the Japanese Government for the assistance. We have been given an irrigation grant. Mr Speaker, it is along River Atari and it will serve Bulambuli and Kween. I am among the beneficiaries and tomorrow, I am handing over my title, which I have in the office, to give right of way. 

We thank them but this has taken six years. I think Uganda is the only country, which is slow in absolving grants. It is a grant, which has taken six years; but getting right of way has been a problem. The problem has been with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries. They have hired a consultant, who wants the project affected persons to come to Kampala. Some of them have never reached even Mbale. How do you expect them to come to Kampala? It was until yesterday morning, when they called me and I have organised a group of them. We are handing over the site and I think by next week, everything will be okay. 

The other side of Bukedea and also Bulambuli – I am talking about Bulambuli because I have been a Member of Parliament for Bulambuli for 10 years. I only created space for him; that is why my brother Katenya is here. Otherwise he could not be here. (Laughter)

On the other side, there is also a similar project under the same assistance of JICA. It will help us to improve on the growing of rice and other cereal products.

The flyover – some of us who are living the other side, the jam which is here at the Clock Tower – I hope when it is done, things will be normal. I support the motion. And I thank JICA for the assistance.

3.10
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to support the motion and recognise the enormous contribution of JICA in expanding services in this country. 

I want to pick on one recent great event, enormous contribution, coming from the area I come from, which is Lango Subregion. Just last week, JICA handed over a Shs 37 billion fully upgraded, fully equipped facility in Gulu Regional Referral Hospital and Lira Regional Referral Hospital. These are serving up to 42,000 outpatient departments. This is a great contribution. I think there is no better way of defining how we can secure the future of Ugandans than what JICA is doing. 

This has greatly supported a subregion which has nine districts with only one district hospital. The regional referral hospital is now having increased capacity to be able to handle emergencies and also maternity services. I highly commend. I know that increasingly, there is donor fatigue. But what you are doing as JICA is greatly commendable. You are having very impactful programmes in this country. Thank you. 

3.12
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We used to refer to you as JICA, others JAICA. But all the same, we are very grateful for the contribution you have given to our country.

I once worked with an NGO called Volunteer Efforts for Development Concerns. Between 2007 and 2013, we were working with JICA to enrich Northern Region. 

When everybody was saying our poverty status as Uganda is the same, JICA came out strongly and brought to the attention of Ugandans that the of poverty Northern Uganda was far ahead of other regions. And they came up with programmes of equal poverty reduction across the country. 

During that time, we were fundraising with JICA on issues to do with agricultural value addition. In case you wanted JICA to support you, you had to convince them that you are working together with the officials of the respective local governments. It was mandatory that you provided proof that for example, you are with the district surveyors, and all that.

To me, I saw it very different from other civil society organisations and international funders, looking out at an applicant independently. These ones were looking at an applicant together with all the technical officials at local governments.

As a shadow Minister for Water and Environment, we are very grateful. Recently, you worked to ensure that youth participate in environment management. When you worked on a project that you are referring to as “waste is wealth”, you engaged youth to collect waste, to sort it, to trade in it, and the proceeds were working to fulfil their health insurance, but cash as well, which helped them establish projects on briquettes. We look at yours as initiatives that at least help our environment thrive, as well as improve the participation of youth in environmental management. Thank you very much. And please go ahead. We still need your support. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.15
MR TONY AWANY (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. 

I rise to support the motion that has been moved by hon. Charles Onen. I would also want to state and give a testimony to the great feat of architectural works that the Japanese Government through JICA has done. In 1997, as a student of science at the Faculty of Science of Makerere University, we witnessed the best and the most qualitative building ever established on the campus of Makerere, the JICA Building at the Faculty of Science. The building housed a state-of-the-art laboratory that gave a new meaning to research on the university. 

Little did I know that 20 years down the road, I would still encounter the same feat of great architectural and infrastructural development in my own home city of Gulu. 

I want to thank the JICA for midwifing the process of post-conflict recovery in Northern Uganda. Just last week, I happen to visit Gulu University, Faculty of Medicine. I was told that infrastructural contribution that the JICA has done to the regional referral hospital has made one of the scientific research laboratories of the university almost attain level four. 

We have been debating in the cause of the COVID-19 vaccines development in this country, whether we have a laboratory that can be levelled at four. But with what the Japanese government has done, the Faculty of Medicine and the regional referral hospital of Gulu can make us proudly say, “yes, we have a level four laboratory that could do research in this country”. (Applause)

We want to thank the JICA and the Japanese government for the support that they have given to the people of Northern Uganda, and also to the rest of this country. I submit, Mr Speaker.

3.17
DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to add my voice to the other voices as we pay tribute to JICA for the contribution it has made to the people of Uganda. I add my voice on behalf of the leaders and the people West Nile for the tremendous work that JICA has done in this country in general, but in particular in West Nile. This is during hard times, as well as good times, by supporting both humanitarian and development interventions. 

As we reflect on and pay tribute to JICA, Japan, I am told is not as well resource-endowed as Africa. But they have been able to develop because of investing in knowledge, investing in technology, investing in excellence and investing in total quality management. 

As we pay tribute to JICA, as the government and people of Uganda, I think we need to learn from them. 

My prayer is that, in partnership with the JICA, we need to put a lot more emphasis on capacity enhancement through skilling Ugandans, through tooling Ugandans using appropriate technology transfer and through facilitating programmes, projects and services that will leave us stronger. 

I want to conclude by further appraising a commonly cited statement that I am told originated from Japan; “give someone a fish, that person will eat for a day. Teach that person how to fish and give him a fishing net and that person will eat fish for life.” We pray that in our engagement with the JICA, they teach us how to fish and in that way, they will leave Ugandans stronger. I thank you and may God bless you.

3.20
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a former Ambassador of Uganda to Japan. For the record, around 2000, because of financial difficulties, the Government decided to restructure all Uganda embassies abroad and some were deemed due for closure. One of the stations to be closed was going to be Tokyo, Japan until somebody went to His Excellency the President and said, “even if Tokyo is one of the most expensive cities in the world, it would be a mistake to close the mission in Japan.”

Luckily, the President listened and Tokyo was saved from closure while other missions were closed. We are celebrating JICA today because of that important decision. All these developments that have come after that were a result of reviving the mission in Tokyo and I was privileged to serve there. 

JICA is the development arm of the Japanese Government, like you have USAID, DFID, and very many others from other countries. None of them compares with JICA with the quality of support and guidance they have given to our country for all these years. 

They fall in three categories; one, they focus on the element of human security with a multiplier effect. That is why they are in the health sector; honourable colleagues have talked about their support to hospitals. In Gulu, Arua and Lira, there is JICA’s intervention of quality service. 

In new hospitals like in Mubende, Mityana, JICA has built world-class hospitals in those areas, which nobody talks about. In education, my colleague talked about SESEMAT. They brought in teachers to teach our science and mathematics teachers because those are the foundation of the technical area. Therefore, in terms of supporting quality areas, nobody supports like JICA. 

In addition to this, they have a lot of emphasis on skilling and capacity building. Nakawa Vocational Training Institute is one such example. Before that, they used to send students –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: A few more minutes, courtesy to the former Ambassador to Japan. 

MR BABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The last point I would make is that their support is concessional and for a long term grace period; 40 years and above. I do not think we are getting that kind of support elsewhere. 

Mr Speaker, the only regret I have is that while I was there, the Japanese Government initiated discussions with our Government about rehabilitating our old railway system. They said that will be the most viable thing to revive the transport network in this country. However, somehow, our technical people insisted on Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) until they told them that one is a very expensive technology and venture was unsustainable and therefore, they grew cold feet over it. 

I hope hon. Ecweru is here for the Minister of Works and Transport. They can revive this interest so that we can rehabilitate our already existing network properly to serve the majority of Ugandans and to improve transport efficiency in this country. 

I pay tribute to JICA for the support they have given to the Uganda Government and for this solidarity they have shown to the people of Uganda. Thank you. 

3.25
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Bible reader and a believer. There is an instance when Jesus healed 10 lepers and only one came back to say, “thank you.” I join other colleagues in this House to say “thank you” to the Japanese through the JICA but also to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving the House and the people of Uganda an opportunity to say “thank you” to the Japanese people.

The testimonies of the work of JICA and of the taxpayers’ money of the people of Japan are spread everywhere in this country. I interfaced with JICA when I was still at the School of Veterinary Medicine. They supported us in capacity building and they were everywhere in Makerere University, including the wonderful science faculty that my colleague has ably testified to.

I thank you very much because Northern Uganda needed those resources after many years of war. We would like to thank the people of Japan for standing with our brethren in northern Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, as we seek to dialogue and debate on the Uganda we want, we must choose nations that we can benchmark; nations that have got a history and culture similar to that of Uganda. Japan is one nation that we can choose to benchmark as we dialogue on the Uganda we want. 

Japan is the third richest nation in the whole world with a GDP of five plus trillion dollars. All of us know that Japan turned around their destiny after the world war. We have much to learn from the nation of Japan.

I request that as we debate and dialogue on the Uganda we want –(Member timed out.) Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are known as a former presidential candidate.

DR BWANIKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we seek to dialogue on the Uganda we want, Japan has a history that is similar to Uganda. It has a rich culture that we can learn from. I request that it becomes part of the nations that we can benchmark and as we have come to thank - you know when the leper came back to Jesus, he blessed him more. Since the Japan team is here, we request that more support comes not only to other parts of the country but also to the Parliament of Uganda. I beg to submit.

3.29
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, I want to join my colleagues to applaud the Japanese for the diligent service and the contribution they have made to the development of our country. 

Most importantly, I applaud the level of excellence with which they do their work. I have visited the roads in Gulu City; there is nowhere else I can take people to learn that high quality roads can be made other than in Gulu City. I have seen a number of infrastructure projects, which have been done; it is a good job. In an environment like ours and a time like this where shoddy work is normal, getting excellent work is such a good thing that we cannot just wash it away; we should applaud and appreciate the quality of the work. 

Mr Speaker, colleagues have testified that the work of the Japanese Government has not only benefited northern Uganda, it has benefited Bunyoro too, and we have seen the Jinja Bridge and in many other parts of Uganda. Rule 61 allows us to amend a motion. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we can amend it by removing the specifics because it is about Uganda as a whole. This will help us not to come back again to appreciate them for the work they are yet to do in the Karamoja subregion. We need to appreciate them once, as a country.

Accordingly, Mr Speaker, I move that we amend the motion to take care of Uganda as a whole.

3.31
MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to support the motion.

In my previous role as the Chairman of the World Customs Organisation (WCO), I worked closely with the Japanese, through the Secretary General of the WCO but also here, I recognise the support JICA has given especially when it comes to the infrastructure projects at the borders, the Marine Unit, and the capacity building that Japan has given. 

However, on a different twist, I think Japan is supporting Uganda because we have also been supporting them over the years. Our imports from Japan are worth over $350 million. Over the years, I think we have contributed to their prosperity through the trade opportunities to the people of Japan. 

Therefore, I consider this support as part of, you know if I may say, reciprocity, because if you look at our exports to Japan, according to the UN Comtrade in 2020, you will realise that we are still exporting at around $5.2 million. Perhaps, this is a challenge to Government to build on the goodwill that we have with the Japanese Government to negotiate more trade with the people of Japan for us to increase on our exports.

I also know that the Japanese Government, through the Tokyo International Conference on African Development, which last sat in 2019 under the theme “Advancing African Development through People, Technology and Innovation,” has come through with a number of declarations and resolutions to support the African economies to develop. 

This is an opportunity for us as the Ugandan Government to negotiate and partake the opportunities that Japan, which is one of the prosperous countries, has. We would like to see more tourists coming; we would like to see exports increase so that we have more income and more revenue so that we can build infrastructure. There is no country which has developed in this world based on donor support. Japan is not going to do everything in every district. 

Therefore, while I want to support the goodwill the Japanese Government has given Uganda, I also urge Government to build on that goodwill to negotiate trade; trade is more important than aid. We need more trade with our development partners like Japan, to see the prosperity sustainably for the people of Uganda. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are beginning to draw to a close. In the circumstances, I will have Apac, Buhweju and the two honourable members from this side, then we proceed that way; I will come back here. 

3.34
MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support this motion to thank JICA. The Japanese Government, through JICA, has supported Uganda enormously in terms of development. It has supported Uganda in the areas of education, healthcare, refugees, capacity building, and so forth, all in the name of helping the people of Uganda. 

Key to their performance is the clean track record, and this is very pertinent. We thank JICA for their integrity.

To the people of Japan, as leaders in this country, we are happy and grateful for your support to the Government of Uganda. I am saying we should never lose this very good partnership with JICA, which is touching the lives of our people. I want to thank you, JICA, we applaud your Government and we wish you well. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is that Ntungamo? Hon. Yona Musinguzi, which constituency do you represent?

3.36
MR YONA MUSINGUZI(NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to thank the people of Japan and the investment arm of Japan, JICA, for choosing Uganda, as one of the stable countries where they can invest their money. 

In the same vein, I also want to thank our President who has stabilised our country to enable such investors come and invest their money without fear or favour. 

I want to use one word: as we appreciate, the support from Japan to Uganda has been insurmountable, adorable and their support is not like - I do not want to mention other partners. Anyway, the people of Japan have not interfered in the political atmosphere of this nation as they invest their money here. They have given us their money at the lowest interest rate. They have given us grants. Some partners - when I was growing up – would build a bridge at night to ensure there is no one who can copy their technology or skills. The Japanese have trained Ugandans; we cannot thank them enough. 

However, I also would request the delegation, which has come from Japan which is here with us, that as you go back home, tell your Parliament to thank Uganda for consuming your vehicles, and please continue trading with us as usual. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you now negotiating for appreciation? I think let us disregard the last part of the Member’s remarks and concentrate on what we are doing in appreciation of what the Japanese people have done for us. 

3.39
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very good day to have time to appreciate and thank someone, who has been a partner – and in a positive way – for such a long time. 

Buhweju is not a frequent recipient of grants. There are not even very many Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), if they are there at all. However, JICA, through a local NGO called CARA, came, without much soliciting, and looked at the nature of our schools and found that they were needy. They constructed water tanks for a number of primary schools, among them Nyakahita, Kibarya, Nyakitoko, and Rubengye. They were mainly targeting girls’ schools. 

Therefore, when we are talking about the life of a girl-child, JICA has gone to Buhweju and touched their lives. I find no reason or hesitation not to thank JICA for being so positive. 

Mr Speaker, I was here in the Ninth Parliament when we were beginning to work on the Jinja Bridge. JICA was at the centre. It is unfortunate - I heard that when they were going to deal with the rehabilitation of the railway, there was a disruption. In the preceding debate – that is what is coming: the lack of the railway which is causing part of the carnage on our roads. The Japanese were ready to help us on that. 

I think we should visit that one but I want to thank the Japanese government, through JICA, for coming to Uganda to help us move forward. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.41
MR LUKE KYOBE (NRM, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to support the motion and thank JICA, together with the Japan government, for the quality services they have rendered in most cases – they are the people who have provided equipment, which is still functional even after they have left a project. 

I know most Ugandans are happy with their services in infrastructure and equipment because they are always ranked No.1; whatever they provide, if you tell a Ugandan that this thing is from Japan, they will know that something of quality has come. On that note, I join the rest of the Members to thank the Japanese government for providing quality services and training. I hereby submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.42
MR FRED KAYONDO (DP, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think I am the most privileged one to talk about JICA because I worked as a porter on the JICA project during my Senior Six vacation. After that, I proceeded to Makerere University, where I spent four years in a JICA building when I was pursuing my degree in the natural sciences.
Therefore, I am the right person to thank JICA.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I picked you. (Laughter)

MR KAYONDO: Mr Speaker, allow me to inform JICA that their student is now a Member of Parliament, representing Mukono County South. (Applause) I love the technology they put at the bridge. I think you should follow your student because we need that bridge connecting Ggaba to Mpata so that you can ease the transport and road traffic that we have on Jinja Road. I always feel concerned when my JICA people are trapped in the Jinja Road traffic jam. 

Therefore, I have got the right chance to tell you that if you connect Ggaba to the Buule-Mpata-Ntenjeru Road, it can ease transport so that you do not get stuck on the Jinja Highway traffic jam – 

THE SPEAKER: I think you are addressing it to the wrong people. You address it to these ones. You do not have direct access to JICA now. (Laughter)

MR KAYONDO: Mr Speaker, I was speaking to them as their student. (Laughter) Let me take this opportunity to direct it to the right people. 

Since we are in the festive season, I always pity my people on Jinja Road: there is a lot of traffic jam. The access road that was put there to connect to Katosi-Kisoga has been flooded by the jam, yet it was not meant for that. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to return to the motion?

MR KAYONDO: Therefore, Mr Speaker, in the presence of JICA and the right people, allow me to request JICA to follow up with their student - whom they trained and is now in Parliament - to see how he is faring in his constituency. I congratulate them. Allow me to say, they taught me one word in Japanese Arigatō gozaimasu, meaning: “Thank you very much.” I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Clerk and the leadership of Parliament has to make a quick appointment for the honourable member to visit JICA offices. We will do that and then you can go there and have - (Laughter) 

3.45
MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion by thanking JICA for the development work that they have done in Uganda. Between 2012 and 2016, I happened to be the finance director for one of the solar companies in Uganda called Incafex. JICA gave us jobs to extend solar power to St Joseph’s Hospital in Maracha, Jinja, Entebbe and Goma hospitals. That solar power project, which we undertook in those hospitals, helped a lot because at that time, there was a lot of load shedding but through JICA, we managed to reduce the problem tremendously. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to add to the voices of the different colleagues, who have talked about zero tolerance to corruption in the JICA-supported projects. The integrity in their projects is overwhelming and these things of kickbacks for projects are very minimal, if they are there anyway. Therefore, they exude integrity in the way they implement their projects. 

Finally, allow me to thank JICA and the Japanese government for allowing our young people to get training from their universities. I am aware of very many students who have been taken to Japan for further studies, both at masters, PhD and undergraduate levels. They have come back with enormous skills, which will definitely help this country to leap forward in terms of knowledge and skills. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Like I said earlier, we should be drawing to a close. I still see many Members who would like to speak. 

Honourable members, we need to draw to a close but let us start with these Members and then we see how to proceed. I will reduce the time to two minutes. It starts with you.
 
3.48
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A friend in need is a friend indeed and that is JICA. I thank JICA for the enormous projects it has done in our country. My colleagues have already alluded to these, that is in education, infrastructure and many others.

Mr Speaker, there is one thing I want us to understand. Because of what JICA has done, majority of Japanese have ended up coming to Uganda as tourists. Japanese are really high-income earners. 

I now want to implore Government to take this opportunity to tap this market through UTB. Market our country so that a majority of these tourists from Japan come to Uganda. Everything will be okay. 

Finally, because of time, I come from Katakwi. Majority of the schools, because of heavy rainfall, are totally dilapidated, more especially the classrooms. I kindly request JICA to extend its hand in renovating these houses. Thank you very much.

3.50
MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I rise in support of the motion. I would like to state one thing - the contribution the Japanese Government made through their volunteer program. 

First of all, I appreciate the appreciation that people have made to the Japanese Government. I fully concur with all they have said. 

Allow me add that when I joined Government, in the ministry of finance, I was given the task of coordinating UN programmes. Within the UN programmes, there was a UN volunteer programme. My other colleague was responsible for the bilateral cooperation. In there, there was the Japanese volunteer programme as well. 

Whereas the Japanese volunteer programme came in with personnel to fill the skills gap, to fill the manpower gap and to build the capacity of Ugandans in various sectors of the economy, over time, their volunteer programme was growing at a supersonic speed whereas the one that I was coordinating, the UN volunteer programme was actually contracting. 

Therefore, I would like to say that given the example the Japanese Government has shown us, we could, as Ugandans, also emulate them and come up with our own national volunteer programme and strengthen it on the basis of their volunteer spirit. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.52
MR DAVID KARUBANGA minister?(NRM, Kigorobya County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity. 

I would like to thank the honourable member for raising that motion. And, indeed, I would like to add my voice to the colleagues who have appreciated JICA for the development programmes. 

I would like to specifically talk about the Energy sector. Indeed, one Member has already talked about their contribution to energy access through renewable energy solutions but I also wanted to add that they have funded many projects in the distribution networks so as to increase energy access. This has happened through ministry of energy and REA. 

They have helped us to reduce losses by increasing energy efficiency. I know during the time we had load-shedding, they gave Ugandans a grant of energy savers. And, indeed, that was a moment we needed this because we had a critical problem of power shortage. 

In the same sector, they have helped strengthen the distribution and the transmission networks. Many of these substations you see around have helped to –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you did not ask for extra time and it is okay. Can we just go through the Members who have not yet spoken? I will start with hon. Phyllis. Let us keep it brief. Then, we go in that order and finish. No new Member can rise. You risk being ignored.

3.55
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to support the motion to thank the Japanese Government, especially through the project of JICA, for the developments that they have done in this country. 

I thank them especially for what they have done in my region of Sebei, especially in Soy County, which hon. Chemaswet represents. Since Chemaswet is not here, I would like to talk on his behalf. 

This is what they have done in Soy County: They have established a very big irrigation project for rice, which is still ongoing up to now. They are even levelling grounds for the production of rice. They have established boreholes for many farmers, both solar-pumped boreholes and those which are manually pumped.

They have also supported the sunflower farmers by giving them oil pressing machines. I thank them very much for their generosity. This challenges us because you are doing very good work and we are not doing much for you. 

We thank you. We pray for God to bless you. Thank you very much.

3.56
DR JAMES NSABA-BUTUURO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I join others in commending the mover of this motion, for it is absolutely civilised, for one to say “thank you”, when something good has happened. It is, therefore, right that the House commends the Japanese Government and the people of Japan for the support they have given us. 

It seems to me that the Japanese know what God has said about mankind; that there is more honour in giving than receiving. This is a lesson we Ugandans must learn. It is more honourable to give than to receive. Receiving on a permanent basis has no honour at all. 

The lesson we should, therefore, draw for it is true that the Japanese want us to reach a level of self-sufficiency. We cannot go on receiving for things we should, under normal circumstances, be able to do ourselves. And so, it is a lesson I appeal to Members to learn very quickly. There is more honour in giving than receiving. 

We commend the people of Japan and their government for their desire that Ugandans reach that level of not receiving only but also being able to give to those who are not able. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, it is essential that we say, “Thank you.” However, it is also a matter that we invite ourselves in with the expectation that we cannot go on in - others. 

Mr Speaker, so as we commend the Japanese and say “Thank you,” it should also invite us to say, “It can’t go on like this.” I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.59
MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to support the motion, especially in the environmental sector. Japan, especially through JICA, promoted what we call “Non-consumptive utilization of forests”. They are training and habituating gorillas and chimpanzees, especially in the forest of Kalinzu in Bushenyi, in the forest of Budongo in Masindi, and Bugoma. This one attracts tourists, just to watch when other countries and other nations are here to import our timber and destroy our environment. 

Mr Speaker, I wish the Japanese will continue with a good heart and non-tolerance to corruption then, if we copy that example, our Government of Uganda shall be the best. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes.

4.00
MR ISAAC MODOI (NRM, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the mover of this motion and this spirit of thanking and appreciating should be upheld at all times. When I was a young officer - I was a chief administrative officer - Uganda adopted the policy of decentralisation. Our Government identified three sectors which are affecting this country: the road sector infrastructure, health and education. I was among those officers who benefitted in the training of tackling those areas. 

You would appreciate that most of us come from rural areas with feeder roads which are extremely bad. The feeder roads were a challenge and they remain a challenge. The Japanese did research; they do not come into heavy machinery but they gave us tractors with the tipping system behind. And they trained us on labour-based methods of maintaining roads. Probably, we had the best in the region as most of the countries came to visit us to see how we were managing the roads. I thank you very much. 

They created repair workshops for our tractors in Busoga subregion in Bugembe, Soroti and the West. In other words, they trained our people to repair the machines and operate them. You do wish to know that those young officers who are trained - like one of them, who have just said across there - are now the ones managing garages all over the country. In other words, they build the capacity.

4.02
MR ROBERT WANDWASI (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to others by supporting the mover of this motion and at the same time appreciating the partnership with the Japanese government through JICA. 

Mr Speaker, at that time, I happened to be a leader in Mbale District. I would like to share with you; JICA trained quite a number of our people -the youth in the construction of roads using murram. Through Mount Elgon Technical College, we applied the skill called “low rubber-based technology” whereby quite a number of our roads were murramed. 
However, as we speak now, given the terrain of Mbale and other eastern districts, murram deposits have gotten depleted. We no longer have murram. 

How I wish to interest our colleagues the Japanese that they will do again develop interest in the low-cost ceiling technology, whereby if they can agree to come and continue giving both technical and financial support in helping us work on these roads, using low-cost ceiling with some little tarmac and affordable items that they use on - 

Mr Speaker, also, they drilled for us boreholes, but given the rate at which these boreholes are breaking down, I would again interest them with their technology, now that we are in the new era, that if they could come up with the solar-motorised boreholes, at least that is the project that I pledged to spearhead in the area where I come from. 

If they can partner up with us, so that they can come up with the motorised solar system for these boreholes. That way a person will be in his village under a tree and will access water without manually pumping the boreholes or dancing for the borehole before a borehole can give them water. 

I call it “borehole-dancing” by using the shoulders in Lumasaba. If that can be appreciated, Mr Speaker, we shall be as grateful as I very much appreciate JICA for your continued support to the people of Uganda. Thank you so much.

4.06
MS CLARE MUGUMYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to say a word. I would like to add my voice to my colleagues’ to thank the Japanese government, through JICA, for having supported the country on its road to development and the middle income status. 

Mr Speaker, JICA is not a common occurrence in Isingiro but I would like to take this opportunity to let JICA people know that Isingiro is one of the big districts in the country composed of 30 subcounties. So we welcome and need you. 

However, one other thing I would like to appreciate most about JICA is the comprehensive nature of the support they have given to Ugandans; they have supported education, health, roads and agriculture. So we would like to implore you to keep coming as you have done a lot; we still need you, especially in the rural district of Isingiro. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are not telling them to keep coming. You are telling them to stay because they are already here. Just urge them to stay. Thank you. 

4.07
MR RONALD AFIDRA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the mover of the motion and join the House in thanking JICA for the tremendous work that we have all alluded to. In particular, I thank JICA because this week from West Nile, the team from the Ministry of Health together with JICA moved to open a magnificent new OPD, together with a casualty unit for the regional referral hospital. 

Mr Speaker, this hospital has been serving and is continuing to serve more than three countries. We have DR Congo, South Sudan and of course the refugees within the region. Their support, which is in relation to the need that this Government identified in strengthening the health sector in the three regional referral hospitals, came timely. 

However, much as the hospital has been equipped with state of the art equipment, I can report to the House that Arua Regional Referral Hospital is likely not to utilise the equipment as the Casuality and OPD was opened due to two factors: one, some of the equipment needs LAN, which is work for us. Two is insufficient and inadequate power that the region is experiencing. 

Mr Speaker, I want to urge Government to continuously support these efforts by JICA. As I end, one particular observation I have had with JICA is that every strategic undertaking by JICA creates employment for the people of Uganda, once the projects are done, whether in education or engineering. However, these projects come at a cost. 

Therefore, I want to urge Government to make a commitment for the continuous use, upgrading and support of all these projects so that they can be able to serve the people of this country whether in the health sector, infrastructure, roads, education, or in skills development. It comes at a cost and therefore, the House should be able to continuously support the needs of the population. I beg to submit, thank you

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We will bring that to a pause. Honourable member for Dokolo, you never stood even once so you are not on my list of people who are - You never expressed interest in speaking to this motion. 

Hon. Onen, there are issues which have arisen from your motion and I think that is part of why the Member for Dokolo would like to speak. You have discovered that your region is not the only good leper that has come back to give thanks; the whole country has received some support and help from JICA. They would like you to enlarge your motion to accommodate activities in the whole country. 

Secondly, your prayer number four imports a statement that could be misleading and can be misconstrued on different scales. The request is that you remove prayer number four because it contains some things that are fundamentally important but not correct. Therefore, you might want to consider dealing with your main motion. In addition, consider removing prayer number four. I am going to give you time to do that while the Leader of the Opposition speaks and then the Leader from the Government side.

4.11
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me join colleagues to appreciate and say thank you to JICA for the sacrifice and generosity that they have offered to the people of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, thanksgiving is a form of prayer and in essence, there has not been any Member that has failed to support; all have been giving thanks to JICA cooperation for the investments and projects that they have brought to this country.

Therefore, it is not for nothing that Japan is referred to as the Land of the Rising Sun-Nippon. Nippon in Japan literary means the Land of the Rising Sun. Actually in the world, the competition is between New Zealand and Japan on where the sun rises first but I think it is Japan.

Mr Speaker, regarding the disaster prone district of Bududa, I would like to refresh the memory of the Members that have come from the Embassy of Japan in the Republic of Uganda that Bududa is a disaster prone district. When I was concluding my tenure of office as a district chairperson of that disaster prone district, JICA cooperation to Uganda refurbished- 

This hospital was constructed way back in the administration of the then President the late Apollo Milton Obote and it had, for donkey years, not even tasted paint until JICA refurbished it. Long live JICA cooperation to Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, JICA is known for honouring its pledges. On that particular function, it was not a pledge as such; it was a pledge generated through a memorandum. Given that this is a district with a complicated terrain, a promise of an ambulance that would help in the case of emergency operations was made but it has not yet been delivered. I will come and remind you in due course. 

Mr Speaker, I am captivated by the JICA cooperation to Uganda. Its primary focus, as we talk, is on improving the environment to attain economic growth. As I was scanning through the disaster vulnerability atlas, Bududa is one of those districts that are captured as a hotspot of environmental degradation and it is yet to be a beneficiary of that fund. 

Therefore, I want to use this opportunity to thank you very much for creating that fund for improving the living environment which is being ravaged by all manner of natural and manmade calamities. 

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, we have received countless offers from Japan, as a country, regarding scholarships and I was compelled to go through the selection criteria and eligibility. It is so generous and so fair. It is only that the ministry that domiciles these scholarships has issues and in no time, I might come up with a motion to compel that ministry to furnish this House with the list of beneficiaries because as the generous Japan offers freely and puts no stringent criteria, it is the complete opposite with the ministry. 

I want to conclude by thanking JICA cooperation to Uganda and wishing you the best of stay, best of health and happiness. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.17
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to begin by thanking you for creating space on the Order Paper for this motion, which has given us an opportunity to publicly thank the people of Japan through JICA for the support that has been given to this country. 

I also want to thank the movers and the seconders and in a special way, I want to thank the House. Those who have been able to catch your eye have all talked in support and have been able to tell the country that different parts of the country have benefitted from the resources from Japan, either in form of loans or grants. I would like to thank you, honourable members.

I also thank the Japanese leadership for the mutual respect we accord each other as countries. We are a country and we have cooperated and worked with several development partners but at times, some want to go beyond the boundaries. You have respected the sovereignty. 

I would like to thank you, JICA for all the projects in health, education, infrastructure and environment, that you have been able to extend help to. Most importantly, as Government, we have also taken lessons from you on the issue of – (Hon. Ssemujju rose_) Hon. Ssemujju, let me build my point, please. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of ensuring monitoring and evaluation such that –(Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the acting Leader of Government Business. She has made a very strong statement that there are people who help Uganda but they go beyond the boundaries. I would like to seek clarification from her: what are those boundaries? Tomorrow, JICA may also go beyond the boundaries, if you do not tell them what these boundaries are. Can we know what these boundaries are such that JICA does not go against them? 

In addition, help us to know those who have gone against or beyond those boundaries.

MS LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for seeking that clarification. Mr Speaker, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju is a good student of diplomacy because it is also coupled in the curriculum for Mass Communication, for which he is a graduate and a practicing one and he knows all these issues.

When I talked about boundaries, I did not mean boundaries between the different countries. I was talking about the boundaries that are spelled out in the cooperation agreements between the two countries. Hon. Ssemujju, we have also experienced it in your constituency. Sometimes, you see certain things happening and you also put questions to Government but Government may not come out clearly to explain to you what is behind because we are bound by the rules of diplomacy. (Applause) 

Mr Speaker, JICA together with the Government of Japan have been very helpful to us. I was building the point of monitoring and evaluation. The way they monitor the implementation of their projects, to make sure there is good and visible value for money in the communities where the projects are, is something that we have also taken on, as a country, and as a unit under the Prime Minister’s Office that is responsible for monitoring and evaluation. 

I thank them because they have cooperated with us and that is something, where our Government has been having gaps. 

I also thank them very much for the technological transfer but in a special way, to thank them for the scholarships that they give us, meaning they want us to develop and acquire technology. They help us to work today but also build our capacity for the future. Government thanks them for looking into the future and helping us to be part of them but also to be more sustainable in our country’s development. 

Their loans are usually highly concessional but they also give us grants. In some cases, the concession goes to 50 per cent, which is very good. We want to applaud them for that. Thank you very much. 

Their lending or supporting portfolio may not be as big as that of other development partners. Whatever size it is, they emphasise the issue of effectiveness and value for money. 

Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank, once again, the people of Japan and on behalf of the NRM Government, I would like to pledge that we shall continue working together, supporting the two countries, especially in terms of trade because that is the relationship that puts us on the same table when it comes to negotiations. I also want to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for maintaining Uganda’s relationship with Japan. 

Also, in a special way, I thank the former heads of State for Uganda because the relationship did not only begin with the NRM Government. Rather, it started before NRM took leadership. I thank our former leaders because what they started, we have maintained, sustained and we promise to keep improving every day. 

I would like to thank all the development partners who work with the NRM Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it has been an elaborate debate. As you can see, I gave priority to this even when it was not supposed to be debated today; it was on Business to Follow but given the significance of this motion, I brought it forward.

Secondly, I have given us sufficient time to have this debate because in the opinion of the presiding officer, it is a very important debate, recognising the contribution of a partner that has stood with us in thick and thin, rain and shine, they are here. It is only fair that when we decide to talk about them, we give it enough time and that is exactly what we have done. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Hon. Onen, you have two issues to sort out before we take a decision.

4.29 
MR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for accepting this motion to be moved. You have really helped me to present this motion. I would like to thank my honourable colleagues for supporting this motion. 

The great African philosopher called Beatty once said, “I am because you are, and because you are, therefore, I am.” I only insinuated the debate. I am aware that the contributions of JICA to this country are quite enormous. Those contributions have touched the lives of very many Ugandans in different regions and that is why people have stood up to give acknowledgement of the contributions Japan has given to their constituencies. 

I accept that this motion be amended for the good of our country, as it has been requested by hon. Faith Kunihira, to accommodate the contributions, which Japan Government has given not only to northern Uganda but to all the regions of this country. Mr Speaker, I would also like to request – you know, prayer is just an assent of the human heart to a supreme being. 

In my prayer No.4, I asked the Parliament of Uganda to evaluate and assess the major loan agreements to ascertain the risk on socio-economic progress of the country to avoid the risk of giving up national assets. Therefore, in this regard, I would like to request that the statement, as is the case to the international airport, be removed but the rest remain.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can you remove that from the record, then? Can you restate that prayer for record purposes?

MR ONEN: The new one should be “Parliament of Uganda to evaluate and assess the major loan agreements and ascertain the risk on socio-economic progress of the country to avoid the risk of giving up national assets”. 

THE SPEAKER: Would that be fair? I think the whole idea of coming to this national asset – the risk – yes, hon. Ssemujju?

4.31
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, this motion, in my understanding, is a motion to say “Thank you”. The things that are not going on well may actually not be part of JICA. 

In my view, they are misplaced if they are going to be housed in this motion. My proposal is to have the whole of that prayer go away. The Member will know or we will help him to know where he can house it, properly.

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, I second it.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no. You have accessed the microphone before, Ambassador. However, being a former ambassador to Japan –(Laughter)

MR BABA: I would like to support what hon. Ssemujju has said. This is exactly what the honourable Minister without Portfolio was talking about: going beyond boundaries. 

This element of assessment – touching on the value – does not apply to JICA in view of the praises and appreciation we have given. Let it remain appreciation and giving thanks to the government and the people of Japan for the relations we have had.

Therefore, that amendment should be expunged from the motion so that we are all home and dry. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Onen, item four should not be part of the prayers. 

MR ONEN: I accept. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the title of the motion has been amended. Did you amend it? What did you say?

MR ONEN: Yes, this is how it should read: “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to applaud the development assistance and cooperation of Japanese International Cooperation Agency and other development agencies in Uganda.”

Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your decision is for a resolution of Parliament to applaud the development assistance and cooperation of the Japanese International Cooperation Agency and other development agencies in Uganda. That is the motion for your decision. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Thank you, Japan, for the support and for standing with us all the time and throughout. Thank you.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO URGENT QUESTIONS

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE FATALITIES ARISING FROM INCESSANT BOMB/GRENADE EXPLOSIONS IN NAKASEKE DISTRICT

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Mr Speaker, this is a matter that arose in October and was also followed by other similar incidents. I will run through them, as they happened. 

The first one was on 29 October 2021, where there was an explosion at Ssegalye Village in Ssegalye Parish, Semuto Subcounty in Nakaseke District, at the home of Mark Kalyango, a builder. 

It was reported in that incident that one child died on the spot, followed by two other fatalities in the hospital. The victims were Pathius Kiwuuwa, aged 11 years, Shield Odong, aged 10 months and Michael Kiyingi aged 14 years. 

Police took over the scene and did the investigations and had one person arrested. However, one prime suspect, named Robert Adomat, is on the run. 

It is reported that there was contention over a child between one of the suspects – Adomat – and Peace Nantale, a daughter in that home. The said child was one of the victims: Shield Odong. 

Adomat had reportedly gone there a month before to demand for the child but the family declined and he reportedly left in a rage. 

Forensic analysis will help to reach a conclusion on the type of explosive but by the accounts of witnesses, it looked like it was a grenade which killed the victims. This will have to be corroborated with other circumstantial information as well as apprehension of the suspect, now on the run, to inform final action on the case. 

This, so far, looks like a crime of passion, using this explosive object that was brought and left with the old lady in the house. However, concrete conclusions will be drawn after all the pieces of information are woven together.

Other than this incident brought to this House by hon. Sarah, hon. Luttamaguzi also raised the issue of similar incidents of unexploded ordnances in other places, including the one at Kapeeka – also in Nakaseke – the one in Kasese and another in Tirinyi. The one at Kapeeka claimed one life and caused injuries to some people. 

These unexploded ordnances have been there and are usually disarmed or destroyed by our demolition experts when reported early. However, these incidences caused more alarm because of being, unfortunately, connected to the terror attacks that happened that time. We need more public awareness and how to deal with them, when seen, so that the community can call in our people to disarm them. 

The matter of compensation of the victims is a cross-government issue that can be handled through the appropriate Government organs. That is what I would like to report for now. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. This is an update. We have had these engagements before but we keep updating ourselves on how far we have gone and what could still be done.

4.37
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, for the job you and your team are putting in place.

The only thing I would like to say is that the General is familiar with warfare. In warfare, you focus on capabilities: 

1. 	Defensive capability
2. 	Offensive capability. 
3. 	Sustainment capability. 
4. 	Sustainability capabilities, there are so many capabilities in warfare. 

However, Mr Speaker, after appreciating the submission from the minister, I am alive to the fact that when the enemy wants to attack, God forbid, they will never make a signal. Every time I pass or drive along our roads, I get concerned; some of these fuel or gas stations are not manned in terms of security. 

If there is anything that should worry this nation number one on your list, General, should be the gas stations that are not secured. Now, having got an interest shock that we had where evildoers exploded bombs all over the city, I expected the internal affairs leadership and all that support you in that very important work, to ensure that also your focus goes to the gas stations. 

Mr Speaker, everybody knows that one gas station going up in flames will be just a disaster for the entire nation. So, you will talk about money, but those are commercial projects. You can assign adequate security to each gas station so that at least there we know, because we can never be sure when and how the enemy will strike. Of course, God forbid. 

I am saying that, Mr Speaker and assure that we keep on our toes to ensure that we are prepared enough to handle any emerging or pressing challenge that could occur for our nation as far as security is concerned. But I want really to applaud the minister and the Ministry of Internal Affairs for a job well done. I appreciate it. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, would you like to respond to that?

GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable member who has raised those pertinent issues, but which are wider. They are not necessarily limited to my docket but very pertinent, nevertheless. Issues of gas stations, I think you are right they are vulnerable, but they are also many. 

Therefore, there are issues of clearance, issues of SOPs, how to manage these vulnerable points, there are issues of urban planning, which I think can be comprehensively tackled across the government so that we can inform the way forward. Thank you Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, on what matter do you rise?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification on the minister’s statement. Year in and year out, the Ministry of Internal Affairs has been putting on the wish list, the storage bank for all the explosives and the unexploded devices. However, year in year out, it has remained on paper; they have not effected it. 

It so bad that there is no any proper storage as a country that we have, even in this Kampala, for all materials, for all bombs, and it was supposed to be under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I had thought that probably he would give a hint on what they intend to do to have all the explosives under proper government storage.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, you are aware that this country is in a recovery process from the periods of war after many years. It is surprising that even when the unexploded bombs of 1979 are still around, has Government taken any deliberate effort to ensure that they comb areas and places of war where those bombs were littered and they are a danger to the community? 

Look at northern Uganda after the conclusion of the LRA war, many bombs were buried but apparently, there is no effort being taken to ensure that there is a technical intervention to search for all the bombs in the theatre of war; those that remained unexploded in the camps where the army was stationed. They litter everywhere, literally where there has been a trace of war. 

Honourable minister, are you being proactive? Are there any steps being taken by your ministry to ensure that where there has been war, you take deliberate effort to comb the area? You use the modern equipment to detect particularly the buried guns and bombs so that once people go back to their normal lives, they don’t have such fatalities arising out of the many or thousands of the bombs that remain littered and around for the communities. Is there such a programme?

GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Ssekikubo. There has been such an exercise only that it has been in batches, especially as regards the former war zones like northern Uganda-

THE SPEAKER: Please adjust the microphone so that we can-

GEN. MUHOOZI: Similar exercises to sweep - if I can call it sweeping - of these former war zones have taken place but by the MOD and not Internal Affairs. Luweero Triangle was never swept, unfortunately and I think it is a matter we can do together with the Ministry of Defense.

About the storage of explosives, I think that one will be adequately addressed in the new law in the offing regarding both military and commercial explosives. It will come and will adequately provide a policy framework to handle that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Ecweru, you can speak either as a minister or as MP for Amuria or both. 

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT(Works)(Mr Musa Ecweru): General, just to supplement my honourable colleague, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. Mr Speaker, there are two types of demining; humanitarian demining and military demining. Once a place is polluted, sometimes the army sweeps and when the army gets out of the place, it may not have swept the entire place 100 per cent and therefore, the population may return to a place which continues to remain relatively insecure. Therefore, humanitarian demining comes into place. 

Government of Uganda, with the support of the Danish Government, had a programme to undertake humanitarian demining and I was privileged to lead the process, particularly in many parts of the Rwenzori, the North and West Nile. Just like the general has correctly observed, not much was done in the Luweero Triangle. 

Therefore, humanitarian demining actually took place. That is why, there are those hills where the LRA at least had attempted to put mines next to Lamwo, and it was a very concerted effort of the Government of Uganda that made it possible for that place to be re-occupied by humans and now, cultivation is going on.

However, I also want to make it abundantly clear that even with humanitarian demining and all the sophistication, it is sometimes not possible to do 100 per cent demining. There will be some explosives that might not be detected but can be triggered by either fire or a lot of pressure. Some of them even just explode and that is what continues to happen even in Cambodia up to today, despite the fact the Khmer Rouge stopped fighting many years ago.

However, as the minister has said, maybe it is important to give a look particularly to the Luwero Triangle and some other areas. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, if you look at the Order Paper, none of them can be active today because the responsible people are not here. House is adjourned to tomorrow 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 4.48 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 December 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
