PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTSECOND SESSION - SECOND MEETINGTHURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6626PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEThursday, 8 December 2022were working on the Order Paper. That is the report from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government concerning a petition on the salary enhancement discrepancies for nurses and interns. It is an issue we must sort out today so that the Government can act.In the same vein, I had already raised it here and the Minister of Public Service needs to tell us about the salary discrepancies for the police legal officers, who were being paid as judicial officers and all of a sudden, you have again reduced their salaries to normal officers. Finally, colleagues, I held a meeting today with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister leading the Government side, which included the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of the Opposition in the follow-up on the issues to do with the Government response in the cases of people whom the Opposition reported having disappeared, and the Government had not yet come out to clearly state whether it has them or not. So, in that meeting, we found that the documents we had were not conclusive; so, the meeting was not conclusive. We have agreed that on Tuesday, at 10.00 a.m., we will have a conclusive meeting on those matters so that on Tuesday afternoon, we can report to this House because what we are handling is not for us as leaders in the House. It is for the country and the whole House. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentSECOND SESSION - 16TH SITTING - SECOND MEETINGParliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Today, we shall be winding off outside in the tent, after this session, with our end-of-year party. I saw the Leader of the Opposition threatening the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that they will be showing only rare strokes. (Laughter) So, we are extending the competition we usually have here, to the tent. I do not know whether Hon. Ssemujju will win this time; he usually wins many arguments. Colleagues, today, we are going to have our end-of-year party. The Clerk had already invited you, and on behalf of the institution, I invite all of you. Let us meet up and it will be until late; we have very many performances - our usual Afrigo Band and the rest.I do not want to comment on what I am hearing from the sides, colleagues. I will also amend the Order Paper to accommodate one report, which was an oversight yesterday when we PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA6627THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022If there are any new cases, we agreed that they should also be shared - like the case that the Leader of the Opposition immediately shared. So, we shall handle this matter on Tuesday on the Floor of this House, after we have finished our meeting, which will take place at 10.00 a.m. We agreed on the delegations that will be in that meeting. Today is your day; I want to have more of your issues sorted today because I have very many pending issues. So, we shall have a few items on the Order Paper, which we shall handle and then I open up. The Prime Minister is about to come to the House and I hope most of the ministers are about to come here so that we tackle Members’ issues. As presiding officers, Thursday is the day we want Members’ issues concerning their constituencies raised. Next item.MOTION SEEKING LEA VE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIV ATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE LAW REVISION (MISCELLANEOUS) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022.”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this matter, I received a call from the Attorney-General who shared with me and the Rt Hon. Speaker, extensively, how he was ready and was just waiting for space on the Order Paper. And this is an item he has been working on for some time. So, I consulted with the mover of the motion and we agreed that indeed, we can give the Attorney-General up to Tuesday, to come and present the Bill. If he does not, then we shall continue with the private Member moving, of course. 2.24MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Indeed – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: LOP, we had also earlier on agreed in this House, that shadow ministers should occupy the Frontbench. So, if there is any shadow minister who is seated behind, please come and take your seat because the Frontbench is for shadow ministers, as a priority. And if you know that you are occupying space for the shadow ministers, in case they get full, please take leave so that – we need to know the shadow ministers. Some of them say, “I am a shadow minister” and we do not know them. The LOP has started compelling the Frontbenchers. MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With the permission of the LOP, he has allowed me to speak from here; I was going to speak from the other side, but he said I come here. Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and confirm the position you have communicated. I thought that the learned Attorney-General would be here to highlight on the Bill, but now that he is not here, just to confirm that law revision is a very wide thing. So, we only hope that the Bill that the Government brings will cover aspects that are in this Private Member’s Bill. This Private Member’s Bill is talking about aspects of association freedoms. There are cases that have nullified provisions in the Public Order Management Act that impact on freedom –(Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you have said that the Attorney-General will table the Bill next week and our rules do not allow us to debate in anticipation.Hon. Basalirwa is a senior lawyer and he has represented me many times. Is he in order, with full knowledge, to seek to violate the Rules of Procedure of Parliament by inviting Parliament to begin debating something that has not been presented? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa is not in order –(Laughter) - to start discussing what has not been presented. Luckily, you have confirmed what we discussed; so, let us move on. 6628PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMR BASALIRWA: And I withdraw my legal services to Hon. Ssemujju with effect from now –(Laughter). Mr Speaker, I just thought the Attorney-General would be here to confirm the position we have agreed on, but now that he is not here, we will wait for Tuesday, Inshallah!   THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, I now want the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to be presented. I will open for matters of national importance and Prime Minister’s Time when the Prime Minister comes in. We will handle other items later. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION ON SALARY ENHANCEMENT DISCREPANCIES FOR NURSES AND INTERNSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have 30 minutes. 2.27THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I present a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Petition on Salary Enhancement and Discrepancies for Nurses and Interns -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, can you get closer to the microphone so that you are audible? MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, a copy of the report and the minutes of the meetings we held with different stakeholders.  Mr Speaker, at the Sitting of the Third Meeting of the First Session of the 11th Parliament -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, allow me to interrupt you just a little so that I sort this out because our guests might go before we recognise their presence. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of religious leaders, headed by Rev. Anthony Opita from Barakalo Parish, Kole District, represented by Hon. Peter Ocen and Hon. Judith Alyek. They have come here to observe the proceedings of this House. Colleagues, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You can stand up for recognition. Thank you and you are always welcome; this is your House. Let us go on, Chairperson. MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, at the Sitting of the Third Meeting of the First Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda held on Wednesday, 4 May 2022, Hon. Ruth Molly Ondoru, Member of Parliament for Maracha East, presented to Parliament a petition on salary enhancement discrepancies for nurses and interns in line with the collective bargaining agreement and the Presidential Directives for the Financial Year 2022/2023, by the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council. The petition was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government in accordance with Rule 30(6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The Committee on Public Service and Local Government examined the petition model in detail, made inquiries, and in accordance with rule 30(7) hereby presents this report.MethodologyThe committee held consultative meetings and received submissions from the following stakeholders: a) The petitioner, Hon. Ruth Molly Ondoru, MP Maracha East;b) The Ministry of Public Service;c) The Health Service Commission;d) The Federation of Uganda Nurses and Midwives (FUNM);e) Uganda Medical Interns Union (UMIU); andf) The Association of Graduate Nurses and Midwives of Uganda (AGNMU). SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6629THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022BackgroundThe petition was premised on the following:a) The petitioners are aggrieved by the continued non-implementation of the 2019 Collective Bargain Agreement intended to streamline the salary discrepancies among various categories of medical professionals; b) The nursing profession in Uganda has, over the decades, evolved with nurses acquiring super-specialised skills to handle complicated 21st Century high-tech medical challenges and equipment, in various specialisations;c) Currently, the pool created by the nursing resource contributes over 70 per cent of the staffing levels of Uganda’s health system, which is highly multidisciplinary and multi-sectoral; d) With the training and passion, nurses have, over the years, demonstrated tremendous commitment to serving the country’s healthcare system, from health centre IIs to regional and national referral hospitals as demonstrated during the challenging national health crisis of the COVID-19 pandemic; e) Despite the commitment and dedication of working for long hours alongside doctors in the same risky environment, nurses continue to be heavily disgruntled and demotivated due to the continued underpayment and non-recognition as important players in the medical care service delivery chain;f) The failure by the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Public Service to implement the schemes of service for the Nursing and Midwifery Cadre 2017, regarding recruitment and promotions, has further resulted in continued improper recruitment, promotions, and failed retention  of well-trained nurses and midwives; andg) In a bid to address the remuneration challenges faced by nurses and medical interns, the Government, through a Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), reached a consensus with different public service unions whose terms are supposed to be implemented in Financial Year 2022/2023.Prayers and the committee observationsThe first prayer is that Government should fulfill its commitment under the Collective Bargaining Agreement to enhance nurses’ salaries in Financial Year 2022/2023. Committee observationThe Ministry of Public Service issued a Circular Standing Instruction (CSI) No. 1 of 2022, dated 1 July 2022 (Annex 1), indicating that a wage bill of Shs 5,985,40,000,000 billion had been allocated for the Financial Year 2022/2023. This represents an increment of Shs 509.29 billion, which represents 9.3 per cent from the wage bill of the previous Financial Year, 2021/2022 of Shs 5,476,11,000,000 billion. Under the management of payroll-related allowances in the Financial Year 2022/2023, the allowances of all medical officers, regardless of the deployment, were enhanced from the Financial Year 2022/2023 to remove disparities, promote mobility, and enhance career growth, among other benefits. Under Schedule 6 of the circular (pages 22-26), the salary structure for medical workers and health tutors (Consolidated) for the Financial Year 2022/2023 are indicated as below. Mr Speaker, I do not know whether I should read that. I thought Members could -  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members have iPads. Clerk, ensure you capture the whole report on the Hansard. MR ONZIMA: Honourable members, the increments are there. When you look at the salary of a commissioner, you notice that the increment, in terms of percentage, is 65.5 6630PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEwhich is from a monthly salary of Shs 7.3 million to the one of Shs 12.1 million. For Assistant Commissioner, the increment is from Shs 4.6 million to Shs 6.5 million. For Assistant District Health Officer, it is from Shs 3.5 million to Shs 4.9 million. The list is there. When you look at some of the percentage increments for other staff, it is above 100 per cent. You can read through that list.The committee noted that prayer No. 1 of the petition has been catered for and adequately provided for in the MDA’s budget for Financial Year 2022/2023, as evidenced in the table above. Prayer two: the Government, through the Ministry of Health, pays lower cadres (diplomas and certificates) the emoluments agreed upon in the collective bargaining agreement 2018Under Section 6 of the Circular Standing Instruction No.1 of 2022 dated 1 July (Annex one) from pages 24 to 26, the salary structure for medical workers and health tutors (consolidated) including lower cadre in the health sector for Financial Year 2022/2023 were enhanced. The table below indicates the enhancement of all medical officers with diploma and certificates. In this category, a senior nursing officer, which is U4SE (Special Executive), initially earned Shs 2.2 million, but after the enhancement, they earn Shs 4.4 million. That is, 100.4 per cent increment. A senior public health nurse, that is U4SE, was earning Shs 2.2 million. With the increment, it has gone to Shs 4.4, which is 100.4 per cent increment. The others are in the table and Members can read. The committee noted that prayer No.2 of the petition had been catered for and adequately provided for in the MDA’s budget for Financial Year 2022/2023, as evidenced in the table above. Prayer three: the Government, through the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Health, harmonises salary discrepancies between nurses, midwives, medical interns and other medical practitioners, including doctors and pharmacists Under the management of payroll-related allowances in the Financial Year 2022/2023, the allowances of all medical officers, regardless of their deployment, was enhanced in the Financial Year 2022/2023 to remove disparities, promote mobility and enhance career growth, among other benefits. This is evidenced in Circular Standing Instruction No. 1 of 2022 on 1 July 2022. The committee noted that prayer No.3 of the petition was based on inadequate information, as evidenced by Schedule six of the Circular Standing Instruction No.1 of 2022 issued by the Ministry of Public Service on 1st July.Prayer four: Parliament, through its relevant committee, ensures that the Health Service Commission fast-tracks the redesignation of nurses according to the schemes of service for nurses and midwives 2018 to regularise nursing and midwifery terms of service. Committee observationsThe Ministry of Public Service issued a Standing Order Instruction No. 14 of 2017 on the scheme of service for nursing and midwives cadres in the Uganda Public Service. That is found in annex two. The grading of qualification, career progression and recruitment is provided for in the scheme. The committee, while interacting with the Health Service Commission, learnt that for the job title, “Enrolled Nurse U7, the education requirement is a Certificate in Nursing. For job title, “Nursing Officer U5SE”, the education requirement is a Diploma in Nursing. The committee further observed that the scheme of service shows the level of care of which the enrolled nurses and assistant nursing officers are deployed. The committee noted that prayer No.4 of the petition was based on limited information and the scheme of service issued by the Ministry [Mr Onzima] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6631THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022of Public Service has streamlined the grading of nurses and midwives as per Standing Order Instruction No.14 of 2017.Prayer five: the Government, through the Uganda Health Service Commission, desists from advertising jobs that consider a Bachelor’s Degree in Nursing as an added advantage than a requirement. Committee observationsThe committee observed that the Minister of Public Service issued a Standing Order Instruction dated 27 December 2017 on the scheme of service for nursing and midwives cadre in the Uganda Public Service (Annex three). The grading of qualifications, career progression, and recruitment is provided for in the scheme. The table below represents the existing grading of nursing and midwifery cadres. One, there is a Commissioner Nursing. Here, the education requirement is a Bachelor’s Degree in Nursing, Masters in Nursing or Midwifery, or Public Health or Postgraduate Diploma in Public Administration. The level of deployment for these is at the Ministry of Health. Two, for Assistant Commissioner Nursing, that is U1E, the education requirement is a Bachelor’s Degree in Nursing, Masters in Nursing or Midwifery or Public Health or Postgraduate Diploma in Public Administration. These are also deployed at the Ministry of Health. The Assistant District Health Officer, that is U2SE, the education requirement is a Bachelor’s Degree in Nursing or Midwifery, or Public Health or Postgraduate Diploma in Public Administration. These are deployed at district health office. For Senior Principal Nursing Officer, that is U2SE, the required education is a Bachelor’s Degree in Nursing, a Master in Nursing or Midwifery or Public Health or a Postgraduate Diploma in Public Administration. These are deployed at the Ministry of Health or national referral hospitals or regional referral hospitals. The list is very long. Honourable members, I request that you read because there are up to 17 categories. The committee further reviewed Health Service Commission’s advert No.2 of March 2022, which is marked annex four, for the positions of senior principal nursing officer and senior assistant nursing officer for Naguru Hospital and Moroto Regional Referral Hospital respectively. The committee noted that the adverts did not indicate a degree as an added advantage for job requirement, as alleged in the petition, neither did the petitioners prove to the committee the allegations. Appearing before the committee, the Chairperson of the Health Service Commission informed the committee that the commission advertises vacancies based on the approved scheme of service for nursing and midwifery by the Ministry of Public Service. The committee noted that prayer No.5 of the petition was not based on the facts on the ground and the scheme of service issued by the Ministry of Public Service has streamlined the grading of nurses and midwives.ConclusionThe committee noted that all prayers of the petitioners have been adequately addressed by the Government and, therefore, the committee did not see any tangible justification to uphold the prayers. Whereas, the Government has enhanced the salaries of medical workers regardless of their deployment for the Financial Year 2022/2023, the reality on the ground is different since the wage bill does not match the releases. The funds being disbursed are based on the previous wage bill before the salaries were enhanced, leading to wage shortfalls in many local governments. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)6632PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Procedure?MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. The procedural matter I am raising is that one of the prayers was on discrepancies in the pay for the medical interns; intern doctors, intern pharmacists and intern nurses. Last month, there was a strike by the medical interns and they raised an issue about discrepancies in regard to the allowances. The committee has presented the discrepancies on the salaries for entry-level officers. However, there was the issue of discrepancy in the implementation of the pay for the interns.For example, this report –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the procedural matter you are raising? MR OPIO: The procedural matter I am raising is that last month, there was a matter of national importance raised in regard to the discrepancies in the salary for medical interns, which has not been handled here adequately. However, it is mentioned within this report. So, procedurally, wouldn’t it be better that this aspect be handled separately – because the Minister of Health had been asked to give a report on that discrepancy? Once we have it here and it shows that it is resolved, then, there would be a procedural challenge in that regard. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. First, that is a matter you should have raised during debate. It is not a procedural matter at all because I cannot now strike out part of the report. It is a decision of the House, yet procedural matters should be ruled on by the Speaker. A Speaker cannot rule to strike out part of - you are going to cause more problems. Committee chairperson, you will have a chance to respond to the issues raised. I want to take this as an issue raised. So, minister and committee chairperson, take note. You will have to respond to this issue.Usually, the practice – in such a matter – is that we, first, call the honourable colleague who brought the petition. Is Hon. Molly Ondoru here? If she is not here, I will open this up for debate. Usually, I call on the minister to, first, give a few highlights, but the report is in favour of the minister. So, it will be more or less repeating what the report has said. Whatever the minister presented to the committee has been accepted and adopted. So, in the interest of time, I do not need to disturb the minister, except for the other issues, which will come up during debate. So, the question for debate will be whether the House should adopt the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition on salary enhancement discrepancies for nurses and interns. The debate starts now.2.50MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give three minutes each.MR AMOS OKOT: This report was a petition, which means there were some other issues to be considered. I thank the committee for having gone through this. Mr Speaker, issues about salary enhancements and wages cut across and go beyond the nurses and other medical practitioners.I come across many people who complain that their names have been deleted from the payroll. They say it is a struggle for them to get back on the payroll. The Ministry of Public Service needs to take interest so that they can follow up all this because those are Ugandans, serving the nation. Mr Speaker, there is this point that the committee decided to drop. However, in the table that the committee forwarded on the job adverts for the Senior Principal Nursing COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRSECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6633THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022Officer and Senior Assistant Nursing Officer for Naguru and Moroto, it was not indicated that a degree was an added advantage.Still, the committee went further by indicating that for you to become a Senior Principal Nursing Officer or Assistant Nursing Officer, you are supposed to have a bachelor’s degree. Again, in their recommendations, they said they were not satisfied with the presentations that came from the petitioners. Therefore, they found it right not to continue.Mr Speaker, there is a practice that always happens in very many Government institutions. You find somebody working, with a low level of qualification, but they are protected. When they bring out adverts, they do not indicate the right qualification so that the person who has a lower qualification can benefit. When people who are near note this, they cry out. So, I think the committee should not have dropped this because this was a cry. People cried that for you to become a Senior Principal Nursing Officer, you are supposed to have a degree as a minimum qualification. You then say: “In our adverts, we did not indicate that you should have it. Therefore, even though you have a diploma, you can go for it.” I do not agree with the committee on this point.2.53MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. We are here because we are healthy. If you were not healthy, I do not think you would be here.There are a lot of challenges, not only in the medical sector, but also in other institutions, including security. I think this is the right time for us to be considerate.In most cases, when you go to the Government health centres, some of these workers are so frustrated; they just look at you. They do not want to attend to you because they have not been paid for a couple of months. Some are frustrated; their children are at home, they have not fed and have not gone to school. So, I would really urge the Government to ensure they increase payment to our medical personnel. Two months ago, we had challenges in the Lira medical department. We are all aware there was a big strike. About 100 staff were on strike; they had not been paid for three months.  For example, let me mention one of the security companies called Falcon in Mukono. You find a person being paid Shs 100,000 and they work the whole night. How do you expect such a person to take care of you, as a ‘big’ person? So, I support this committee’s report. Let us encourage and join hands to make sure the medical teams are supported. Thank you.2.55MR ABDULHU BYAKATONDA (Independent , Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for considering the process of the motion. Most of these things are constitutional. Article 29(1)(e) gives rights to people to form associations and unionise. Article 40(3) emphasises the issue and right to collective bargaining. Based on those articles, Parliament came up with an Act in 2008 called, “The Public Service (Negotiating, Consultative and Disputes Settlement Machinery) Act, 2008.” It is duly assented to.Article 40(3) says thus: “All Government Ministries, Departments and Local Governments shall have consultative committees that shall handle issues of salary, promotions and disputes.” Mr Speaker, the point I am alluding to is that as Parliament, we need to urge Government to consider these available laws. When they are put into action, Uganda is destined to have a very motivated workforce and at the end of the day, we shall develop. For example, recently, His Excellency gave a directive that all the nurses and doctors – about 600 people – who worked during the COVID-19 pandemic be 6634PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEabsorbed. To date, these are still languishing in poverty.My prayer on this is that let us constitute the Action Taken Reports by the responsible ministries. We need to know when they will really implement this directive, so that at least when another pandemic comes up, people can be motivated to work. That said, - and even the recommendations of the committee - I pray that they consider the Action Taken Report so that we know the timeframes when they will be implemented. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, we have a question for debate. When debating, I need you to give your position – whether you agree with the findings of the committee or not so that we do not just have general statements. If they continue, I will understand that indeed you agree, and then we will vote on it and go to other items because I have a long Order Paper. 2.58MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, but for starters, I think they did not do adequate work to come to the conclusion. The reason I am saying this is that their observations differ from the conclusions. I will give an example: The committee looked at the lump sum of salary increment, but I believe that the petitioners had their grievances that they wanted Parliament to tackle. When you look at the lump sum as a salary increment and make a conclusion that the issue has been sorted, I think that is not enough. The committee did not look at, for example, the payrolls of those nurses and midwives to ensure that those discrepancies they are talking about, actually existed. Secondly, the chairperson has submitted that when these salary increments were effected, the money is not being released to the local governments to pay these nurses and midwives. To me, what this means is that the increment is hot air. If you increase my salary, but do not pay it to me – then the committee says the issue has been sorted by the standing order – I think that would mean I am getting the money in word, but not actual cash. Therefore, I think the committee ought to have done further analysis, hospital by hospital in the ministry, to ensure that what they are bringing here as their conclusion that this petition has no merit – because that is what they are saying – they did not do enough work to warrant reaching this conclusion. I beg to submit.3.00DR CHRISTINE NDIWALANA  (NUP, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for the report he presented. However, according to the prayers - the report indicated that the matters, which were raised, were addresed  by Government. I would like to inform the chairperson that if the matters had been addressed, then the strikes would not be happening today. You can see how the medics are striking just because they are not satisfied. Secondly, concerning the discrepancy in the payments of the salaries, I would like to inform you that it forces medics to be involved in corruption, yet we are trying to fight it here. Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister of Health to think about the medics. They are working under terrible operational risks. As you can see with the infectious diseases - when had COVID-19 and Ebola - we lost very many medics. We do not have any compensation for the risks taken. Therefore, I think we should increase the salaries. Before, people used to say that every fool can be a nurse. We should think and know that today, they are educated. For one to become a nurse or a cadre in medicine, you must have passed well all the sciences. I would like the nurses to be paid according to how they perform their duties because they struggle a lot and so are other medical cadres. Thank you. [Mr Byakatonda] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6635THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 20223.03MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I thank the chairperson and the committee for the good job done. I see that in the recommendations, there is lack of political goodwill towards salary enhancement. I expected a recommendation that Government should have goodwill towards fulfilling its promises to our workers - not only the in the health sector - concerning the salaries. If this is not done on time, it is what results into what we saw recently whereby Dr Samuel Oledo, the President of the Uganda Medical Association, knelt before the President to beg for salary enhancement. In my clan, medical doctors do not kneel; those who kneel are witchdoctors. (Laughter)Therefore, it painted a very bad picture of the medical profession. Until Hon. Luttamaguzi told me that the medics of this country are now buying political will so that their salaries are increased – I would have gotten (take E) annoyed with Hon. Luttamaguzi, but I kept quiet. This is where I agree with the Member of Parliament for Workers who says that workers in this country are not using their trade unions and associations to bargain. However, I believe that the committee should have put in an element of political goodwill. I know some of the statements come when we are pushed to the wall, as leaders; when we need votes to cross over to the next level of leadership.Therefore, I note that the committee’s oversight on that matter. It should have been included so that the petition has more content to help our medics to achieve the objective a salary increment. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, the chairperson of the committee has to limit himself or herself within the prayers of the petition. You cannot go outside the prayers of the petition. MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. We are talking about salary enhancement for nurses and interns. I am getting flabbergasted because the interns are in training. Are we supposed to determine the salaries of people who have not yet been employed? Are we supposed to talk about their allowances, which they are supposed to manage themselves? We are mixing the two: the nurses and the interns. That is where we miss the point. Therefore, are we proceeding correctly?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, a debate depends on how you proceed. For example, you have now debated. We are debating the findings of the report, which was out of a petition. So, maybe by the time we accepted the petition on the Floor - if you had moved that we amend it - we would have done so. However, the fact that we allowed the petition to go the way it did - we sent it to the committee and it was processed - we must debate the findings of the committee and make resolutions. Otherwise, I would be amending the petition along the way, if I took that route. 3.06MS SUSAN MUGABI (NUP, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee and the chairperson for the report. Apart from a salary increment for the nurses, I would also like the committee to consider the general welfare of these nurses. In the islands, which I represent as the Woman Member of Parliament for Buvuma District, there are a lot of challenges. For example, they walk long distances and move on water. On top of that, they do not have good accommodation; they do not stay in Buvuma. Hence, they deliver poor services to our people, the citizens of Buvuma.These people also need special allowances because they are working in vulnerable areas; being islands, they are considered vulnerable. 6636PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETherefore, the committee should have brought this report, but they need to make some amendments for special allowances for the people working in vulnerable areas. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague that would be wrong because it would mean the committee amending the prayers and introducing new prayers. However, you have raised a very important matter, which the sectoral Committee on Health, should pick.3.08MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am happy that the committee has tabled a report on the salary enhancement of nurses. There are other sectors that are also suffering the same. In secondary schools, there are teachers that were recruited at diploma level. In the last 10 years, they went back to school and pursued their bachelor’s degrees. They are graduates and have been teaching with their diplomas for 10 years with no salary enhancement. This also applies to primary school teachers. My humble request is that as we handle the salary enhancement for the nurses, let us go back and enhance salaries for all the other sectors. I beg to submit. I thank you.MS NALUYIMA:  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I was fully engaged in this debate while we handled this petition. As we receive these submissions, would it not be procedurally right that whoever comes up to speak tells the House what petition number they are handling, in order for the committee to know what we handled, when the chairperson comes here? As the Members submit on this Floor, they should be in position to tell us the number as per the petition they are submitting on. I am asking for procedural guidance on whether it would not be better if we aided the committee. I was unable to sign because I was in Juba. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, it would be better, but from the practice here, I find that when I become restrictive, I deny very many Members a chance to submit. As long as a Member confines their submissions to what is within the report, then, I am okay with that. That is why I have been guiding on issues outside the report; I always tell you what is outside the mandate of the committee and the report. Generally, if it is within the report, I do not need to point out the page number, petition and prayer number, although it would have been the best thing to do. For easy flow of the debate, let us be accommodative.3.11MS JUDITH ALYEK (Independent, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for bringing this report. We are aware that there are discrepancies, not only between the nurses and interns, but also among other professions. Mr Speaker, together with Members of Parliament present here, I worked in the medical sector before I came to Parliament. I also acted as district health officer and worked as a senior environmental health officer. We have been observing these issues in and out. However, there are bodies for medical workers such as; the Allied Health Professionals Council, the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council and the Medical and Dental Practitioners Council. These are bodies to which all these workers belong. There is no uniformity in the way the salaries are enhanced across these bodies. When we talk about interns and nurses, it means that we are living out other cadres. For example, in the Allied Health Professionals Council, we have clinical officers, environmental health officers who are public health workers, and many others. Therefore, the issue of salary enhancement is affecting everyone in the medical sector. Mr Speaker, I suggest that since there is no uniformity - we have seen salary enhancements [Ms Mugabi] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6637THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022of 65 per cent, 80 per cent, 100 per cent, 131 per cent and many others. Recently, we talked about the salary review commission. I do not know how far its formation has gone in this country. It is not only health workers crying; other people are also crying. I wish a certain percentage is set; for example, 100 per cent salary enhancement across the board. That would help in curbing down this confusion where every sector is now coming up with petitions. We are not only discussing this petition, but we are expecting many more petitions to come from the health sector alone. What about the education sector? What about other sectors? There are so many that will come to Parliament. Therefore, we want a once and for all solution to this problem. If we do not do this, then we shall continuously discuss this. I think I already mentioned - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleague. I can see that you are starting to repeat yourself. MS ALYEK: No, there are people who came to me in Kole –(Member timed out.) 3.14MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I have one observation on the recurrence of strikes in this country. I strongly believe that strikes are a result of unattended grievances. Each time strikes happen, my government comes out to take action. In my opinion, this gives my government a bad reputation.I propose that my government - which is our Government - gets proactive because these strikes have had negative impacts on our people. Some people lose their lives and their health deteriorates as a result of these strikes. Secondly, I know it is one’s right to be paid well, but I also know that there are different factors that motivate a person to concentrate. My proposal is that let us do an analysis and give a very good environment for our people to operate. But beyond that, we need to also analyse the correlation of increment in salaries and performances that we receive. For example, the situation at health centres II is wanting. I have visited my health centres II; if you go there at midday, you will not find the people supposed to serve the patients. When you go to health centres III, you will notice that attendance is poor. That is why we have high referral cases in our district referral medical units. So, Mr Speaker, as we support these people who are helping us, they should also offer the services that we need. And I agree with Hon. Alyek that every profession matters. If we concentrate on only the health workers, what about the teachers who taught the health workers? What about the engineers? Can we come out, as Government, to streamline and encourage people to perform based on their skills and experiences? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.3.16MR BASIL BATARINGAYA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with my colleagues and really stress that the issue of salary enhancement should not be left to different committee chairpersons to come and present reports, on behalf of their committees. Rather, we should go for salary enhancement across the board because I am also on the way; and I have been preparing a motion. Since the Minister of Local Government is here, there are LC Is who are receiving Shs 10,000; the LC IIs receive Shs 20,000, the LC IIIs and LC Vs - all these need their emoluments reviewed. So, I think it is time the Salary Review and Enhancement Commission is empowered to work across the board so that all Government workers are duly considered. I beg to move. 3.18MS DORCUS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee and 6638PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEcolleagues who have already given very rich suggestions. However, to add to what my colleagues have already raised, I would like to urge the chairperson and the team to move towards looking at salary enhancement. I say this because it would be good for us to understand the parameters that we will be using. Looking at the committee report, No. five - for example, if we are relying on qualifications, how come we have a huge disparity? I want to pick on, for example, the position of Commissioner Nursing; you notice that the required qualifications are: a Bachelor’s Degree in Nursing, a Masters in Nursing, Midwifery or Public Health, or a Post Graduate Diploma in Public Administration, which are the same qualifications for the Assistant Commissioner Nursing; entirely the same. Yet when you consider the salary discrepancies, you notice that it is really bad for someone out there. The salary was doubled from Shs 7.3 million to Shs 12 million yet for the assistant commissioner with the same qualification, the salary was increased only from Shs 4.6 million to Shs 6.5 million, which is half. Moving forward, as we look at reviewing the salary structure, let us be very clear with the parameters so that our people out there will not feel like others are being favoured while others are not being considered. I thank you. 3.20MR HERBERT ARIKO (NRM, Soroti East division, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report presented. I know that you have been guiding the House to focus the debate on the prayers that are enshrined in the petition. Mr Speaker, I would like to raise one issue that Hon. Alyek mentioned, which is very critical; that in the Tenth Parliament, severally did this House raise a matter of instituting the Salaries Harmonisation Commission, that the then Rt Hon. Prime Minister said was underway. Mr Speaker, the petition by medical interns as well as the nursing officers is just a tip of the iceberg. There is a fundamental problem in the entire salary structure of the country. Within the medical fraternity, there are people who are classified as nurses and doctors, earning significantly different salaries. Recently, we also have had people that are medical professionals like those working in the blood transfusion services, those working under entomology and others coming in and saying that whereas they had been given higher salaries for one financial year, with effect from July this year, their salaries were reduced. So, we would like to see that we take into account the matter of having salaries in the country reviewed in their entirety for us to address these discrepancies. Mr Speaker, the fundamental issue will be addressed once we have harmonised salaries for all professionals in the country. I thank you. 3.33MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report presented. However, I find the report inadequate in addressing the key issue in the petition. The petitioners are aggrieved by the continued non-implementation of the terms and conditions in their 2018 Collective Bargaining Agreement with the Government. When the committee says the issue of salary discrepancy is addressed by the circular from the Ministry of Public Service and the budget for this financial year, I wonder whether the committee looked at those terms and conditions in the Collective Bargaining Agreement of 2018. Does this budget that they are referring to, to address the salary discrepancies address those concerns of the medical workers in that 2018agreement? I am happy that the committee, in their conclusion, also indicated that even when some of this money is budgeted for, it is not [Ms Acen] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6639THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. So, we have a wage bill in the budget completely different from what is being released to the MDAs. Mr Speaker, what is happening is that some local governments have decided to continue paying these workers according to the old Wage Bill because that is what is being released to them. Then those that are paying the new salary scales are being affected because when they receive the release for a quarter, all the money is spent in the first month of the quarter and in the next two months, they have nothing to pay the workers. That means there is still a problem. So, I find that the committee probably only listened to the submission of the ministry, but did not go into details of what is included in the Collective Bargaining Agreement of 2018 that the petitioners are referring to. I think there is still much more that the committee needs to dig and find out, if all these issues are to be resolved. I thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we are debating the report. So, raising issues of procedure and all that – let us allow Members to debate. Hon. Sarah Opendi?3.25MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for presenting its report despite some gaps in the report. I want to inform this House that when I was in the health sector, at the Council of Ministers Meeting at the East African Community, as Chairperson then, we received a report where there was a decision to scrap off certificate nurses, and I think, even diploma holders. This led most of the nurses then to go and enroll for degree courses.As we speak, a good number of nurses hold degrees yet there are no positions for them at the health facilities at district level or even at national level. So, they are working with their degrees, but there are no positions for them. This causes disgruntlement. We should know that it is long since Government restructured most of these health facilities; the health centre IIs and IIIs, the regional referral hospitals and general hospitals. Before I left the health sector, one of the things we had tasked the Ministry of Public Service was to undertake a restructuring exercise because we cannot keep on with the past structure. There is need to have a new structure in place to accommodate the population we have currently. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I hope this can be fast-tracked so that we can create space. You cannot have one person handling a general hospital or a senior nursing officer handling a regional referral hospital; just one person. There is need for restructuring so we see how to absorb that excess workforce. Other than that, we should also note that one thing the committee did not bring out was what my former colleague talked about: the collective bargaining agreement. What was contained therein was not brought out –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition?3.28THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The obtaining debate, in a way, impeached my intended submission and I dropped it and decided to submit generally. Hon. Richard Gafabusa, in part, presented my disappointment. The Government last restructured public service at the consideration of a series of retrenchments probably 10 plus years ago and since then, you can best describe public service and its attendant matters as “organised chaos.” I do not fathom and admire my honourable sister, the Prime Minister, how she presides 6640PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEover organised chaos. Take an example: the Government issued a decree to the effect that all primary teachers must be degree holders, but those who entered as Grade III more than 10 years ago are still being paid as Grade III. So, who originates those pronouncements that are not considered properly? I know Hon. Ecweru considers this as organised chaos. I agree. That is why I am submitting so. Mr Speaker, probably this petition is an invitation to Government - and I would like to invite the chairperson, with due respect, to probably reconsider when you meet the ministers considering policy documents - whether they are actually aware of how chaotic the entire public service is structured currently. You have medical workers’ pay enhanced - and like Hon. Gafabusa submitted, on paper, in the local governments, they had an enhancement, but the release to the local governments is actually the old release. Is there another definition of organised chaos than that? Even if it is Finance; Finance is part of the system. The system must speak; communication must be top-bottom, bottom-up. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in my Government as the prime minister, that cannot happen. (Laughter) There is no way I can preside over organised chaos.Mr Speaker, I think the Prime Minister and her team must pick this up. There is a very big problem. Somebody is running away from responsibility by making pronouncements that cannot be followed up by actual implementation. It should be picked up and, probably, as we discuss the next financial year, we should have an indication of what actually is going on. Lastly, I hope in the follow up to action taken, Government will be able to report on a very serious matter to which you gave a directive of unpaid pensioners, and every time, it comes up, it is dodged or a partial report is given. I hope we still have time as we instructed every sector to report and submit – it is not very difficult. Since we made that directive, I have received more than 10 pensioners of different agencies, over 10 plus years, not paid. Who is presiding over that chaos? Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today, I thought the agreement we had earlier that Hon. Mpuuga and Hon. Nabbanja will settle their scores on the dance floor would wait, but it seems it is heating up. (Laughter) But this is easy. I think it was very direct; these are issues we should be able to answer, as leaders. Honourable chairperson?  MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I listened to the debate, I realised that Members were trying to look at general issues relating to salary enhancement opposed to the specific prayers which are contained in the prayers of the nurses and the nursing interns, which was raised by Hon. Molly Ondoru in May. Two, when we were looking at this petition, whether -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, this is not a place for conversing. If you want to converse, go to the canteen. We are here to do serious business. If you have kb which you have not completed, just go in the lobby or the canteen; do not come here to disturb us. Next time, I will mention names because it has continued to happen. MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, Hon. Gafabusa Richard raised an issue whether the committee looked into the collective bargaining agreement document between the medical union and Government. Indeed, we looked into it. That is why when you read this report from the beginning to the end - one of the things I realised was that many of the people were debating as if they did not read the report. If you look at the percentage increments that we have presented here – which I had earlier said Members could read on their own – when this bargaining agreement was brought to our committee - I remember Hon. Gafabusa was also a member. We had these copies and there were percentages that were supposed to be increased for each of these public service unions. When you look at some of these percentages, for example, nursing officer, the increment [Mr Mpuuga] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6641THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022is even beyond the one in the bargaining agreement because here, it is 117.4 percent salary increment.Two -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait, honourable member. Honourable colleague, if you know you are not properly dressed, kindly get out of this House. I do not need to mention your name. If you know you are putting on a suit and you do not have a tie, help us and – Let us go on.MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, the basis of the analysis of salary increments was the bargaining agreement and the percentage indicated by the Government in that document. We looked at this. One thing is -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chief whip usually has spare ties. So, you can borrow one. (Laughter)MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I was saying that our argument was based on the salary enhancement bargaining agreement and that is where we obtained this. When we interfaced with the ministry, they also presented this document. Two, when we looked at the salary increment, there were two issues. One is increment in terms of figures on paper and the other issue is increment in terms of implementation – whether these people are actually earning what is on paper. When you see these problems - the argument is that whereas these people are supposed to get these amounts, which were increased on paper, the releases by the Government do not match the salary increments. Then, when you look at the issue, which was raised by honourable -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, did you only look at what the Government had given you, not what these people are earning? Their issue is earning, not just what is written.MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, that is what I was coming to. This petition was brought in May and the Government started implementing this financial year in July. So, there is no way we would say that they were earning when the financial year was still ahead of us. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me guide you. Next time, if you do not get space on the Order Paper and the issue is overtaken by events, you approach the presiding officer and we allow you to update your report – as a committee. It is not your problem, but next time, do it that way.MR ONZIMA: I think that is the issue. There was an issue of the intern doctors, but this was not part of the petition. When the intern doctors went on strike – the strike did not inform the petition. So, there is no way we would go outside the prayers of the petition. I heard many Members emphasizing those, but it was not part of the prayers.Mr Speaker, those are some of the few issues, which were raised by Members. There is some clarification I would like to make. On Thursday, this report was called to be presented. By then, I had just walked out to go and pick a notebook. It was supposed to be the fourth item – there were still eight substantive issues to follow. I left when Hon. Macho was raising an issue of national importance. When I walked out to pick a notebook, the Order Paper was amended to call the report. When I came back to the House, the Speaker had ruled that we were not in the House and that we would need to explain. However, that day, I was in the House. I only walked out to go and pick a notebook, but by the time I came back, it had already been called after an amendment on the Order Paper. She demanded that we explain ourselves. That time, I tried to seek an opportunity to explain, but -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will explain on Tuesday. We shall give you time to explain on Tuesday.6642PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEHonourable minister, the question is that while the committee is in agreement with what you submitted at the time, you have not implemented what you told the committee you were going to do. It is on paper, but not being felt in the pockets. People count what is on the accounts, not what is just on paper as a promise. Secondly, honourable minister, I had raised to you an issue, which I also expect you to touch – the issue of police officers. This brings me to how the Government works. It is really disappointing, sometimes. You have been paying legal police officers from 2010, the same equivalent salary to that of DPP officers. In 2010, you even processed a supplementary to address that concern. Out of nowhere, in October 2022, the Minister of Public Service, after paying a salary for over 12 years, wrote to the police saying “you have been overpaying”. You have police officers whom you recruited on contracts within that same period, with a very clear pay. The law is very clear: you cannot review someone’s salary to their detriment. You can only increase, not go down. Honourable minister, I raised it and I hope it is one of the issues you are going to talk about. They are 171 police officers. Above all, their salary is provided for in the budget. We budgeted for it. So, this is a budget neutral item. It is not an item where you say, “We are going to look for a supplementary”. We need the Ministry of Public Service to lift that ban so that police officers from – October up to now – can be reinstated on the salary structure, which they had been on since 2010.3.42THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Mary Mugasa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would also like to thank the committee for their submission. I also thank the honourable members for the additional information they have given to us. Mr Speaker, I have noted with concern the issue you have raised about the salaries of our police officers. They have also tabled their petition and appeal to the Ministry of Public Service. I promise that we are going to give a clear report next week – if Parliament is still in session.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is not a matter on which we need a report.MS MUGASA: You need a report –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Listen to me, honourable minister, please. Kindly, take your seat.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have been paying these police officers. They took you to Court after the Government had not considered them for review in 2010. After the President came to know about the issue, he issued a directive. Based on the President’s directive, in 2010, the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service, the Rt Hon. Henry Kajura, wrote and a supplementary budget of Shs 17 billion was brought to this House and processed. Since 2010, you even recruited new people on clear terms – as an equivalent of DPP officers. These officers have been paid their salary, since 2010. After 12 years, the Minister of Public Service writes to say, “You are overpaying people.” I have letters here from the Permanent Secretary and the Inspector General of Police. You see, most of these were my classmates in law school; so I know them. They have brought me their issues; it is illegal. From the 22nd of October when they wrote - I do not know how the public service really works on such a matter. Even the IGP has written a protest letter.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I request you to take up this matter. It is not a matter of reporting; it is to go and you reinstate people on their rightful salaries – it is very simple. (Applause)[The Deputy Speaker] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6643THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022THE PRIME MINISTER  AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I have taken note of your concern. I request you to give me copies of those letters so that we can take action. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will follow up with you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. – No, there is Prime Minister’s Time, please. Clarification comes when a Member is still on the Floor. When a Member is off the Floor, the rules do not allow clarification. Honourable minister, please continue with the one on nurses and interns. MS MUGASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are going to take up this issue, as directed by the Prime Minister - of the salaries, as alluded to by the Rt Hon. Speaker.Members have talked about disparities among the nursing cadres; however, it depends on the job description, the qualifications attained and they use the compression ratio (according to our technical people). That is why you see that some nurses are getting seven; some nurses are getting 12 - it depends on that.Honourable members, we need to understand the issue of how the salaries are arrived at –(Interjection) - Sooka olindeko . Some people are still complaining that they have received, on paper, the salary enhancement, but they have not received it in their pockets. I think this answer should be given by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because the Ministry of Public Service does the structures. We also make submissions on who is supposed to be paid and how much, according to the directives. However, if we do not get remittances from the Ministry of Finance, we cannot implement it. So, Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence that probably, the Ministry of Finance gives us an update on that as well.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, you can sort that quickly. Where is the money for the nurses and interns?3.48THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the Financial Year 2022/2023, which opened on the 1st of July, we enhanced salaries for all scientists across the board, including the nurses. They are also in that category. It is good the chairperson has pointed out that this investigation was done in May. In May, we had not yet increased the salary for scientists. I wish to inform this House that our current record shows that in all areas where we enhanced, these people have received their new salary. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Health, can you confirm for us that your nurses received their money because the minister responsible for the sector is here? 3.49THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Mr Speaker, I think there has also been a system problem because some of them have received their enhanced salary, but others have not. Others were not captured by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, but they have also been updated now, and everybody will get their salary enhanced.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. When I open up this issue, all we shall do is apportion blame; we will blame this one and blame that one. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, kindly take up this matter. You can see that whenever you are on this Floor and you see one minister inviting the other, know there is a problem somewhere and now it goes back to you. MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I wish to add is that whatever is not going well can be resolved administratively. It 6644PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEis no longer a budget issue. It can be resolved administratively among the MDAs, which are implementing this reform.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I tend to agree with the minister on this. Salary is a statutory obligation; so the moment we appropriate it here, that is a given. If there are any issues, they should be administrative. That is why I have referred the matter to the Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, - Please, the Speaker is speaking; you must hear me in silence. (Laughter) Rt Hon. Prime Minister, kindly take up this matter and on Thursday, during Prime Minister’s Time, update the House on how you have sorted it out. Colleagues, I want to put the question that the House adopts the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition on salary enhancement and discrepancies for nurses and interns. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have a lot of matters of national importance. I said I want to sort out your issues today, and then go to the next items. So, I will do this quickly. We shall get into Prime Minister’s Time and then see how to move forward. I will start with Hon. Kwizera Wa-Gahungu. 3.53MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Colleagues, we have Kisoro Airport, which has been supporting internal flights. It is 3,000 metres, but the tarmac is 1.2 miles.The airfield is in a sorry state. It is now a danger to our airport. Flights cannot go in and out because the tarmac on the runway is now worn out and there are more flying stones and potholes on that airfield. My prayers are that:i. Government should urgently take up the matter to rehabilitate Kisoro Airport to promote internal tourism and regional integration; and ii. They should expand it to 3,000 metres. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Works? Hon. Ecweru was here. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Member wants you to talk about the upgrade of Kisoro Airfield, which is in a very poor state yet it attracts very many tourists. It has potholes. I have landed on that airfield. When you are on the runway, that is when you know that 30 seconds is a very long time. That area attracts very many tourists because of the mountain gorillas and all that, so, the Member needs your intervention. When is this going to be done because they had promised? 3.55THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS  (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the time we went to Kisoro to campaign for the same Member of Parliament, I landed on the same airfield. I saw the state in which it is. Today, the Ministry of Works and Transport is doing a review and I saw Kisoro Airfield and others – Kasese and the like - on the programme. I think it is work in progress.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the record, it is an airfield. This is a matter we should follow up on. Honourable member, I encourage you to keep following it up. We shall always give you space in case you are not satisfied. 3.56DR ABED BWANIKA  (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka): Mr Speaker, Masaka City, Masaka District and the surrounding districts were serviced by two very important roads for farmers; Kyabakuza-Kiwangala-Ndagwe and also, Kyabakuza-[Mr Musasizi]GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR SUCCEEDING WEEKS SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT6645THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022Mateete. These two roads are in a very bad state. We have approached UNRA in Masaka to ask for assistance, but they said they do not have equipment. All equipment in our area is down and is supposed to be serviced from Mbarara.My prayer is that the government should swing into action and help us rehabilitate these roads. They are very key for our farmers to reach the market. I so submit.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the Member’s concern. We had a meeting with UNRA, the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development when the engineer in charge of maintenance of this equipment was complaining about lack of money. This financial year, money has been given to the works department in charge of maintaining our equipment. I believe all will be maintained, across the country, including those of Masaka. We have given them money to maintain roads – and the notice about that money was published in the newspapers of 17 October. I request Members to also help us monitor across the board so that this money is put to good use by everybody, including the districts. All districts have been given the equivalent of 50 per cent of the annual budget. We are also going to give them more money upfront in January. I believe this will enable us have better roads in the next financial year. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, let us go to the next item. Other questions will come under Prime Minister’s Time. In the next session, the Prime Minister is not leaving here before finishing with your questions. We are about to go for recess; we need to go with answers. We are lucky we have her here. So, I urge the Government Chief Whip to call the ministers to be here because I want to handle Members’ issues today. STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK 13 TO 15 DECEMBER 2022THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure.MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, we have two sides in the august House, according to the Commonwealth system. When I look at the front bench of the Opposition side, I see there are almost only five shadow ministers. The rest are other members of the Opposition. I do not know whether we are proceeding well to have such a small number of shadow ministers in the august House. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, if you know that you are a shadow minister and you are seated behind, please find space in front. I raised that issue much earlier. If you know you are not a shadow minister, please, leave the front bench.I do not need to mention names. The front bench is for the Government Cabinet and Shadow Cabinet. 4.01THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robina Nabbanja): Mr Speaker –(Interjections)- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is reading. There is no need for procedure. Continue, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA: Thank you very much for that protection. Under rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I am required, as Leader of Government Business, to make a statement in the House regarding business for the succeeding week. I, therefore, submit the following business for the week of 13 to 15 December 2022: 1. The Law Revision (Miscellaneous) (Amendment) Bill, 2022.2. The Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2023/ 2024.3. The Animal Feeds Bill, 2021.6646PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4. The statement by the Minister for Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs on the management of markets in Kampala Capital City.I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We need the Budget Framework Paper, indeed, by the 15th of this month.MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You gave us adequate notice and we are working around the clock to lay the Budget Framework Paper on Thursday next week.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Yona Musinguzi, do you have a procedural matter? MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My procedural matter is on the Order Paper for today. We have gone to item No.5 and left item No.4, which is about REA. Speaking as one who comes from Ntungamo Municipality, as we talk today, 90 per cent of the people there are in darkness; there is no electricity. Therefore, I beg that through your office, good chairperson, allow us to move this motion because it hurts all Ugandans. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Yona, rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda indicates that 4.00 p.m. is Prime Minister’s Time. (Laughter)PRIME MINISTER’S TIME4.04MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, Hon. Musa Noah, Member of Parliament for Koboko North in Koboko District asked a written question relating to the fact that the Ministry of Education and Sports, in conjunction with the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA), is carrying out a country-wide registration of primary and secondary school children. He went on to say that when he goes to his district, he notices that the parents are supposed to transport their children to the NIRA offices at the district headquarters, which is not the case in other districts where children are being registered from their schools. And according to him, the parents are very poor and do not have the money to transport their children. His question is whether this is the proper procedure that the people in Koboko are following to register the children. My response is: the purpose of this exercise is to ensure that all learners have a National Identification Number. Efforts have been made to enable learners to register while at school. In the case of learners that have not been registered, parents have been advised to approach the nearest NIRA offices and have them registered. NIRA offices are usually at the district. Secondly, there was a question from Hon. Julie Achayo, Member of Parliament for Ngora District. She asked: “The Government emphasizes the provision of vocational skills to the youth as a means of fighting unemployment. To that effect, it has a policy of establishing a technical school in each constituency. Ngora Constituency, and indeed Ngora District, have no government technical school. Being an area that suffered years of insurgency, some generations of young men and women missed out on formal education, and this makes the need for a technical school in Ngora even greater. What plan does the Government have to set up a technical school in Ngora Constituency in Ngora District?” My response is: we share the concerns raised by the honourable Member of Parliament for Ngora Constituency on the need for a technical institute in Ngora. However, among the challenges we have with many of our existing government technical institutes is lack of adequate equipment and staff. Because of these shortcomings, the Government is prioritising the upgrade of these institutions to secure their intended purpose. [Ms Nabbanja]6647THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022The request for the institute in Ngora will be kept in view in the midterm, and implementation will be a considered subject when there is availability of funds.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I have received information from Hon. Noah Wanzala Mutebi, the MP for Nakasongola Constituency that he is the one who raised the question relating to the Ministry of Education and Sports and NIRA. Therefore, for record purposes, it was not “Noah Musa”, but “Noah Mutebi of Nakasongola.” MS NABBANJA: I will repeat the same answer - I will give another answer – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is just for record purposes. MS NABBANJA:  No, the answer for Nakasongola may be different. Therefore, I take the responsibility to come back next week and deliver the answer because these are two districts with different geographical issues. Hon. Julie Achayo, Member of Parliament of Ngora Constituency asked another question and the question goes: “The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) is the head of public service in the district, the head of administration of the council and the accounting officer of the district. He is, therefore, a very important person. The last three consecutive CAOs who have been transferred to Ngora were all officers who were about to retire. The current Chief Administrative Officer, the fourth in the row, is also pending retirement. Whereas they may have the experience, the danger is that they characteristically fear to take certain critical decisions. They are not innovative, and prefer to play it safe as they wait for their retirement, thus, making the district lag behind. Why has the Ministry of Local Government, consistently deployed CAOs in Ngora District who are due for retirement?” My response is that the chief administrative officers and their deputies, and the city and municipal clerks are employees of the Central Government and are appointed by the Public Service Commission, in accordance with Articles 188 and 200 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995 (as amended). The chief administrative officers, deputy chief administrative officers, city and municipal town clerks are, therefore, deployed by the Ministry of Local Government, which is also responsible for monitoring their performance. The history of the last five CAOs deployed in Ngora District, is as follows - I thought that it is necessary for us to give the history:  i) Mr Lawrence Wadada was 57 years at his deployment at Ngora in 2020 and his home district is Sironko. He is still in service in Ngora.ii) Mr Andrew Mawejje was 52 years when he was deployed in Ngora in 2018 and his home district is Kibaale. He is in service at Kakumiro District and he is doing a very good job. In Kakumiro, we are very proud of him. iii) Mr Bruno Mwayita was 58 years in 20l7 when he was deployed in Ngora and his home district is Budaka. He has retired.iv) Mr Alex Kwizera was 49 years old in 2014 when he was deployed in Ngora and his home district is Kisoro. He retired in 20l8.v) Mr Davies Dembe Bayeza was 50 years old in 2011 when he was deployed in Ngora and his home district is Kanungu. He retired from Sheema.Mr Speaker, the retirement age in the Public Service, except for Justices of the Supreme Court and the Court of appeal, is 60 years. It is evident that it is not true that the chief administrative officers deployed in Ngora Local Government are those nearing retirement. It is also not true that public officers nearing retirement pose a danger to the service because of fear to take certain critical decisions and that they are not innovative. 6648PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMr Davies Dembe Bayeza, who worked in Ngora District Local Government as the first Chief Administrative Officer, retired from Sheema District. His exemplary leadership and innovations have earned him a mentor role and was made a member of the faculty of trainers at the Civil Service College Uganda.Hon. Julie Achayo says that while she supports the restoration of wetlands because of the critical role they play in the water cycle and maintenance of a healthy environment, the exercise of demarcating wetlands in Ngora, especially in the villages of Omaditok and Opelu, was hurriedly and haphazardly done because:l.  There was inadequate sensitisation of project affected persons. 2.  There are complaints of inclusion of chunks of arable land into areas demarcated as wetlands.She requests that the demarcation exercise be reviewed in Omaditok and Opelu.Mr Speaker, my response is that one of the key result areas for the Wetland Management Department under the Ministry of Water and Environment is restoration of fragile ecosystems and demarcation of wetland boundaries as a way of protecting their hydrology so that they continue providing ecosystem services.The Agu Wetland system is located in the four parishes of Agu, Kopege, Odwarat and Ongodi and the nine villages of Agu, Opelu, Orit, Omaditok, Okoboi, Galilaya, Angodi, Odwarat and Ogirigiro.Agu Wetland system is among the priority wetland systems in the country because of its importance as a catchment for the Nile Basin and water source for both domestic and production purposes. These services deem it necessary for demarcation and other wetland management interventions to be undertaken.The demarcation line was informed by the 1994 Wetland Data and the pillars were planted. The exercise was preceded by consultations and sensitisation of the stakeholders at district, subcounty and community levels.During the first phase, some of the wetland dependent communities received alternative livelihoods including goats, pigs, chicken and beehives as a way of providing alternatives to the activities foregone in the wetlands. The next phase will include distribution of additional livelihoods and further sensitisation on the various interventions and will address any grievances arising out of the exercise. Hon. Atkins Katusabe, Member of Parliament, Bukonzo County West said: “There is rising concern on the mounting of roadblocks in the Rwenzori region contrary to the presidential directive waiving all roadblocks in the country.” His prayer is that can he be informed as to why the presidential directive has not been implemented? My response is that the Directorate of Traffic and Road Safety has indicated that there are no police roadblocks in the Rwenzori area. However, there is a roadblock set up by the fisheries department at Kikorongo manned by the Fisheries Protection Unit Personnel (FPU).Hon. Iddi Isabirye, Member of Parliament, Bunya County South, Mayuge District said there is information about titling of parcels of land in South Busoga Central Forest Reserve by unscrupulous individuals at the expense of the locals in whose favour a presidential directive was issued. His prayer is: could I please inform the House on the status of South Busoga Central Forest Reserve?Mr Speaker, the Central Forest Reserves affected by the presidential directive are Bukaleba and South Busoga Central Forest Reserves, which were gazetted in 1932 with an area of 9,663 hectares and 16,382 hectares respectively, and are located in the current Mayuge District, like I told you earlier.On 29 April 2002, Idi Mwandha for and on behalf of the residents of Malongo, Bumwema and Kityerera subcounties, Mayuge District, [Ms Nabbanja]6649THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022jointly sued the National Forestry Authority (NFA) and the Attorney-General in the High Court of Uganda in Jinja vide Civil Suit No.046 of 2002.The residents claimed that they were the original inhabitants of the 63 villages of Kityerera and Malongo subcounties, which now are part and parcel of the gazetted South Busoga Central Forest Reserve and returned to settle back on the land.Following the claimants’ entry in the forest reserve and heavily cultivating the forest, the NFA embarked on massive sensitisation and eviction of people from the reserve to bring it under planned management and protection.His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni Tibuhaburwa, directed and guided as follows:1. South Busoga Central Forest Reserve (CFR) -a)  The local community takes land composed of 48 villages;b)  The National Forestry Authority takes land planted with trees under 18 villages, including land for the forestry college and under the forest cover. 2.  Bukaleba Central Forest Reserve (CFR) -a)  500 hectares – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is incomplete. I am reading from what you submitted here, there is one in small letters.MS NABBANJA: I did not read that one; I thought Members have – because it is even – Okay, 200 metres demarcated off for the conversation of the lake shores. All settlers within the 200 metres should relocate to land covering four villages under NFA, thus leaving NFA with land composed of only 14 villages.2. Bukaleba Central Forest Reserve (CFR)a)  500 hectares be given to the local community, which land had already been demarcated and occupied by the local community. Mr Speaker, implementation of the presidential directive commenced in accordance with the guidance of the Office of the Prime Minister in June 2017, in conjunction with the National Forest Authority, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Office of the Attorney-General. The survey and demarcation of the villages to be given to the community and those to be retained by the National Forest Authority (NFA) has been done by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. What remains is the NFA placing concrete boundary markers to demarcate the 14 villages to be retained under the South Busoga Central Forest Reserve. Mr Speaker, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) also undertook a demarcation of the 200 meters lakeshore line to be maintained as a conservation belt, but the claimants have not vacated as they wait to be settled in the area of the forest reserve earmarked for them in line with the presidential directive. The individuals who are creating titles in South Busoga Central Reserve before it is legally degazetted are doing so illegally and the NFA should work with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to halt – I repeat: to halt the illegal titling and cause cancellation of those titles, if any. Mr Speaker, Hon. Stephen Kangwagye Rwakanuma, Member of Parliament, Bukanga County, raised the issue that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda promised the people of Isingiro to upgrade the Isingiro-Rugaaga-Ntantamuki-Rakai Road, which has become totally unmotorable and impassable. He said that this is a strategic and important road corridor between Isingiro and Rakai districts, connecting the western and central regions of Uganda. The road is also a link to Tanzania and is used by many vehicles and trucks carrying produce and goods between 6650PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEUganda and Tanzania. Besides, as a refugee hosting area, the road is vital for connectivity. He added that the World Bank and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees expressed interest in supporting the Government on the construction of this road and that on 20 April 2022, the Executive Director, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) visited the area with her technical team and pledged to provide Shs 6 billion, which is required for feasibility studies and design on the road, which, to date, has not been done. His prayers: i) When will UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport prioritise the upgrade of the Isingiro-Rugaaga-Ntantamuki-Rakai Road as pledged by the Fountain of Honour of this country, which has taken over 30 years? ii) When will the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development assure the people of Isingiro and Rakai districts as to when they will release funds for a feasibility study of the road project to implement this long-standing presidential pledge to the people of Isingiro and the country at large? iii) The World Bank and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees office supported the road project and provided Shs 6 billion. When is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development releasing funds to have this road upgraded and tarmacked?iv) What can we tell the people of Isingiro, who support this Government with over 90 per cent votes and whose livelihoods are dependent on this road and use this road to ferry produce to the various parts of the country and neighbouring countries such as Tanzania, Rwanda, South Sudan and the traders who are stuck over the status of this road?Mr Speaker, my response is that the road in question is part of the national road network and is managed by the Ministry of Works and Transport, through the Uganda National Roads Authority. The Government of Uganda plans to upgrade the Isingiro-Rugaaga-Ntantamuki-Rakai Road to paved standards in order to promote inter and intra-regional trade and reduce poverty as outlined in the National Development Plan III, under the Integrated Transport Infrastructure and Services Programme. Mr Speaker, indeed, the road was prioritised and funds appropriated in the budget for the feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs for the upgrading of the Isingiro-Rugaaga-Ntantamuki-Rakai and Kikagati-Kafunzo roads this financial year. The road also promotes international trade and the stakeholders of the Central Corridor Transit Transport Facilitation Agency (CCTIFA), at the 14th Stakeholders’ Consultative Meeting, recommended that the CCTTFA works with Uganda to mobilise resources to undertake the feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs and upgrading of this road to paved standard. The proposed project will include upgrading of the Rakai-Nakabanga-Kityanza-Isingiro (l03.6kms) and Kikagati-Kafunzo (30.1km) roads to Class II Paved Standard. The works will include installation of drainage infrastructure and road furniture. Mr Speaker, the feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs for the upgrading of the Isingiro-Rugaaga-Ntantamuki-Rakai and Kikagati-Kafunzo roads is expected to commence this financial year. The procurement process for a consultant is nearing completion. Mr Speaker, I would like to assure you that the NRM Government is committed to ensuring that upgrading of the Isingiro-Rugaaga-Ntantamuki-Rakai is implemented as part of improving the country’s stock of the strategic transport infrastructure. [Ms Nabbanja]6651THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I beg to move. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. This is now time for oral questions, but I will give – Leader of the Opposition, you are supposed to comment on all: both oral and written. Honourable colleagues, I will start with Members who booked their matters of national importance and I promised them that I would use Prime Minister’s Time. (Member rose_) Not on this, please. I will go to Hon. Catherine Lamwaka, followed by Hon. Mudimi.4.34MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Mr Speaker-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And it is one minute. It is quick.MS LAMWAKA: Mr Speaker, on the programme of the Government of Uganda to phase out the old lower secondary school curriculum, after introducing the new lower secondary curriculum - 2023 is supposed to mark the end of the old lower secondary curriculum. What is happening with schools now, as they close for third term, is that there are students of senior three who have not been promoted to senior four, and parents are stranded with them, as they may not be able to repeat because they will fall in the new curriculum. Mr Speaker, it is crucial for the Ministry of Education and Sports to come up with a clear position, as far as the phase out of the old curriculum is concerned, and the current senior threes who are not being promoted to senior four. What is their fate, Mr Speaker?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, this is a very important matter. I believe everybody here is concerned. We are going to have a comprehensive statement in this House from the Ministry of Education and Sports. I request the Member to link up with me so that we can take this up further.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The technical staff of the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, should follow up the matter. I do not want someone to say the Member did not follow up. You have made a commitment and your staff should take it up.4.35MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Mr Speaker, I heard the Prime Minister in her response say that the President gave a directive that they should utilise part of South Busoga Central Forest Reserve, which they gave to the community. However, the law says that any change of use of land or forests has to be degazetted. I do not remember - and I have been around for some time - whether Government brought that instrument to degazette that area. On top of that, there are districts and cities, which submitted areas to degazette - Mbale, Mbarara, Pakwach (in West Nile), Kalangala - to compensate. I want the Prime Minister to tell us the progress so far.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, this was done in 2002. We, as Cabinet or Government, have come up with a strategy. We need forests. We need to protect our ecosystems. We agreed that no more de-gazettement of forests. That was done way back, but as of now, we agreed in Cabinet and as Government that we have to protect all the forests that are there now. We also need to plant more so that we can navigate through the changing climate issues that you see happening in the country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you; but Prime Minister, there is a contradiction. For example, the case of Gulu University; Gulu University got an African Development Bank-funded project. You built it in a forest reserve. You told Gulu University to get 500 acres of land and plant - they followed each and everything. They planted the 500 acres of land in Nwoya. Up to now, you have never – and it is a recent project after 2002. 6652PRIME MINISTER’S TIMENtungamo Municipality are in court because the minister allowed them to get part of the park, which was in a forest reserve, in exchange for another piece of land on which they planted and the forest is up. Then you have, in cities - for example, in Gulu City, the forests you are talking about are not there; it is high-rise buildings. Instead of lying to ourselves, why don’t we be honest and say that where we have no forests, we come in, we realign, and then we stop. We need to stop lying to ourselves that we have a forest in Gulu when we do not have it; it is only high-rise buildings constructed with plans approved by Government. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, there are these isolated cases and the Minister of Water and Environment will come here and give a comprehensive statement, especially about Gulu. These isolated cases will be handled on a case-by-case basis. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.4.39MR ABDULHU BYAKATONDA (Independent, Workers’ Representative):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On 5 December 2022, a private called Okawa Charles, a worker of the Uganda Wildlife Authority was killed by suspected poachers while on duty in Kidepo Valley Conservation Area.On the fateful day, when he was in the company of 11 other colleagues patrolling, the enemy fired at him and another colleague was seriously injured. They were rushed to Yokotokam Medical Hospital in Kitgum town. One poacher was killed while others fled and one gun was recovered.Tourism is one of the core foreign exchange earners of the country, fetching approximately about Shs 1.6 billion and is destined to double with all the effort that has been put in place –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I told you one minute. You came - first switch off, please. Your time is up yet you do not even have the courtesy to ask for more time; you just switch on. Ask a direct question; it is not a matter of prayers, but rather a question. What is your question?MR BYAKATONDA: We pray that joint security be mounted to protect our ecosystem and wildlife. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. MR BYAKATONDA: Just to add a quick one: lastly, Mr Okawa left seven children and a widow. Government should take over, even with their education.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, it has been our practice; in case there is a minister amidst us - the Minister for Tourism is here. Please come and give us the answer.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, our answers are one minute.4.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Prime Minister. I thank Hon. Byakatonda, for raising the matter. Indeed, it is true, this happened. I thank Government because we are trying to increase the number of staff to boost the rangers that we have; we are currently training about 860, who will be passed out very soon.It is unfortunate that poachers go into these parks and kill the rangers. These are Ugandans that deserve to be protected. I also support his message. However, I also encourage the other forces, which are already giving us support, to supplement our efforts so that our rangers are protected. It is unfortunate. [The Deputy Speaker]6653THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022As UWA, we are going to support the family, but also take – (Member timed out.)4.43MR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Prime Minister, there are more than 16 villages in Erute North and Kole North constituencies that have been negatively affected by the quarrying works at Ale Rock in Lira-Kole border. As a result, more than 30 buildings have developed cracks because of the blasts. The community water points have been contaminated and the project-affected persons have not been compensated. We raised this matter to the Ministry of Works and Transport, who sanctioned an investigation by the State House Anti-Corruption Unit and they made recommendations. However, it is now six months down the road. The National Environment Management Authority has refused to implement the recommendations of this investigation report to carry out an environmental audit. Our prayer is that you direct NEMA to immediately conduct these environmental audit investigations. Mr Speaker, we request that the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources oversees the implementation of this –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Works is here and I request him to come and stand in for me.4.44THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I did visit the place with the honourable colleagues and it is true that there are some challenges. I am, therefore, a little surprised that NEMA has not done its part. We instituted some investigations and made recommendations. What I can only promise is that I will follow up with my colleague, the Minister of Water and Environment, so that we can see what happens. In any case, I am going back with the team very soon to assess the progress of the entire project, so that will be one of the issues we will be looking at.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ensure you involve the leaders in your visits. 4.45MR HENRY ZINKURATIRE (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. There was an outbreak of anthrax in two subcounties in my constituency, mid-last year. I made an effort to inform the minister in charge, Hon. Bright Rwamirama and vaccinations were made. However, to date, our animals continue to die in large numbers.I made further effort to contact the District Veterinary Officer, who advised me that we need to spray those two subcounties with soda ash, but farmers cannot manage this. My request is for the Government to intervene and supply farmers with soda ash. I so pray.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister?MS NABBANJA: I know my ministers are in Namalere giving out tractors to mechanise our country; so, they are not here. I promise that we will get in touch with the Member so that we can engage the Ministry of Agriculture and solve that problem.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Luckily, the ministry has already been there; they know the problem. So, it is about taking further steps. 4.46MR ABDUL MUTUMBA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter I am raising is related to the shortage of medicines and essential medical supplies in Kiboga Hospital and other lower health units. 6654PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEFor the last three weeks or so, Kiboga Hospital, which serves Kiboga and the neighbouring districts like Kyankwanzi, Nakaseke and Kassanda, has had no medicines and other essential supplies. The health of our people in that area is at risk, especially at this time when they are heading into the festive season and when the rate of accidents on the roads, especially Kiboga-Hoima Road, is on the increase.My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that the Government immediately procures drugs and mobilises medicines so that we can save the lives of our people.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I need you to ask questions. So, turn your prayers into questions. - It is okay; the principle is captured.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I worked as a Minister of Health and I know the procedures of getting medicine from the National Medical Stores. I request the Member to link up with the Ministry of Health. Where possible, we can even organise - I can coordinate that meeting and we see what has gone wrong. The fact is medicine is supposed to be given to health centres, up to health centres II. Therefore, I am wondering why Kiboga is not getting medicine. However, if he has information, I request that he brings it.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you want to bring your rules here? (Laughter) That is for your meetings, not the House I am chairing. Here, we follow Rules of Procedure; Rule 41 does not allow information on questions to the Prime Minister. Rule 41 is very clear. So, take up the issue, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.We have Hon. Christine Kaaya on Zoom. Colleagues, be patient. The Prime Minister is here. I see all of you making signs for me that you should be next; please settle. (Laughter) If Hon. Kaaya is not ready, we shall be informed when she is. Is she unmuted? Hon. Kaaya, we cannot hear you; maybe increase the volume. I will get a signal from our IT team in case the honourable member is ready. Hon. Macho? 4.50MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker and Rt Hon. Prime Minister 2021, I want to thank the NRM regime. They gave us a Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Programme (MATIP) III market of Shs 21 billion and a value addition factory of Shs 15 billion. My question, Madam Prime Minister, is: why has the Government decided, through the Ministry of Local Government, to nationally advertise the market? Moreover, the President, in his speech that got him 79 per cent votes in Busia, told the people that the value addition factory is going to be given to the Busia Produce Dealers Association.Secondly, Madam Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, why do we still have load shedding in Busia, to the extent that nine women have died in Busia Health Centre IV and Masafu Health Centre? Moreover, load shedding continues even in a place where Hon. Oboth, the minister in charge of defence and veteran affairs, comes from. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, even in my area, we have load shedding. Even in Rwakitura, we have load shedding; so, it is normal.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, NRM is a Government, not a regime. On the issue of women dying in hospitals because of lack of electricity, to me, it is regrettable. I was an RDC of Busia for more than six years. I believe those health centres, especially Masafu Hospital – it was built under my supervision. I remember we had a generator. I do not know what happened to those generators. I have been to Busia Health Centre IV about three times, even when I became Prime Minister. What I can promise is for me to investigate what truly happened. [Mr Mutumba]6655THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022On the other issue of load shedding, what I know is Hon. Oboth is the Minister of Defence, not internal affairs. However, if there is load shedding even in his place, we need to do something.Colleagues, we have experienced vandalism recently. We have to step up our game. Government has invested heavily to give us electricity, but we have saboteurs. The Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Security and the Ministry of Defence have had a meeting under my chair, and we are saying enough is enough. We have deployed. I want to caution those people who have been stealing our infrastructure that their days are numbered and we have given a directive. If you are got; you will face it.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is Hon. Christine Kaaya there?MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, regarding the markets, I will request the Minister of Local Government to come here and give us a statement.4.53THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT  (Mr Raphael Magyezi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been informed of the issues of the market and the value-addition facility in Busia. There are two different types of facilities: there is a market, which is under the local authority and a value-addition facility, which is a regional project. I am scheduled to visit Busia Municipality to sort out the issues there, and I will inform the local authorities and the Members of Parliament. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is Hon. Christine Kaaya now audible?4.54MS CHRISTINE KAAYA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga) (Zoom): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about we, the people of Kiboga District, who are hosting a number of NRA war veterans that stay in miserable households in Lwamata. We need a pronouncement from the Prime Minister on whether the Government will really compensate these people or whether they should leave and go.MS NABBANJA:  Thank you - the Member is enjoying somewhere else, but colleagues – (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is not in order. We allow Zoom under our rules and the Member is out doing work. That is unfair to a colleague.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go on.MS NABBANJA: The fact is that there are a number of people who were mobilised and put in Lwamata. Some of those are our veterans who have not yet been compensated. The Minister of State for Luwero/Rwenzori Affairs is here. I request her to come and give us more information.4.56THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (LUWERO TRIANGLE-RWENZORI AFFAIRS)( Ms Alice Kaboyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy to be here because this is my maiden speech. (Laughter)The veterans in Lwamata have been there for quite a while. They were given money to go home. We paid them Akasiimo - all of them. –(Interjections) – protect me, Rt Hon. Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, you are wasting your time because I am about to close if you continue that way.MS KABOYO: They were given ex-gratia or a ‘thank you’ token. Unfortunately, they are always mobilised to come back. During COVID-19, they were paid transport to go home, but I am surprised that they have come 6656PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEback. My office is targeting them, especially. We are introducing to them income generating programmes. I will go back and check on them and report back to this House. (Applause)4.58MS SHARTSI MUSHERURE (Independent, Mawogola North County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Due to torrential rains that have hit Ssembabule and other areas in the country, the Kagari Bridge, connecting Ssembabule to Gomba, is now impassable. The embankment has been washed away. Hon. Rwakoojo and I have been keen to work with the people in this area and assure them that something will be done on their behalf. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, kindly help us know whether UNRA can take up this bridge and do urgent repairs as well as adopt this bridge because Ssembabule District is unable to afford its maintenance. Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I am directing Hon. Musa Ecweru here –(Laughter)- to go to Ssembabule and make sure that, that bridge is repaired for the people to use it. Thank youMR ECWERU: Thank you for the permission to carry on. (Laughter)5.00MS FORTUNATE NANTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 26 August 2021, the Prime Minister informed this House that the Kyotera-Mutukura Road was going to be rehabilitated by September 2021. As Members of Parliament from Kyotera, we met UNRA officials and they told us they did not have the money to rehabilitate the road, but that it would be repaired. However, this road is beyond repair, especially when you go to Kakuuto side. My question is: what is the current government plan to rehabilitate this road and when, exactly, are you going to start working on the road? Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, that is a priority road. Recently, the House approved a loan for infrastructure programmes and Mutukula Road is one of those roads that will be worked on using that loan that we approved in this Parliament.5.01MS ANNE TUMWINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There was a loan passed here in December 2018 and it was supposed to be used to work on roads in some districts and Ntoroko was one of those to benefit. The road had no objection; the Solicitor-General approved it, but up to today, the works on this road have not started. I would like to know from the Minister of Local Government - because it is the ministry that acquired the loan - what happened and when is it going to be worked on. The road is called Rwebisengo-Kiranga and it is found in Ntoroko District.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Local Government, instead of wasting time calling the Prime Minister to call you, let us shoot right away. MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The project called “LEGS” is about Local Economic Growth Support. Ntoroko District is a beneficiary and I am aware of that Rwebisengo-Kiranga Road. There was a challenge with funding, but we have now been assured that in the second phase, we are going to make sure that the road is done. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Prime Minister is still with us. 5.03MS CHRISTINE NDIWALANA  (NUP, Bukomansimbi North County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have a problem of roads in my constituency. We have a main road running from Lukaya to Kagologolo and it passes via my constituency. That road is under [Ms Kaboyo]6657THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022UNRA, but whenever I reach my constituency, the constituents say, “Do not come back. Next time, we are going to beat you, if you cannot repair our road.” When I tried to call the UNRA managers and engineers, they said, “The bulldozers are dozing.” I wonder if there are people using the bulldozers and are dozing the road machines. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are you going to work on that road? I even fear going to my constituency. We are going for recess, but I cannot even access my constituency. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am sure you are not dozing.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the bulldozers do not doze, but I would like to assure the honourable colleague that the fact is that UNRA had funding problems. We have given them Shs 300 billion this quarter. The President directed that we carry out frontloading. Therefore, by December, if the other loan that we approved is successful, these people will be given money to ensure that all the roads across the country are worked upon. Then, the bulldozers will not doze. 5.04MS SUSAN MUGABI (NUP, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Seven years back, the Government extended the National Oil Palm Project to the islands of Buvuma District, where approximately 7,500 hectares were acquired and 5,000 hectares were dedicated to the estate, where the rest of the land was for small hold nucleus farmers. Today, I bring to your attention that since 2017, over 2,600 project affected persons in the subcounties of Nairambi, Buwoya, Buvuma Town Council and Busamuzi have not been compensated, and yet the valuation processes were concluded. Their land is also currently being utilised. We are aware that the Constitution provides for prompt payment, fair and adequate compensation for any property, prior to taking it. My question is: when are my people in the constituency going to be compensated? Thank you.  MS NABBANJA:  The honourable member has been to my office over the same issue. I would like to thank you, Member for Buvuma. At least we are making some progress towards helping your people - the project-affected persons for palm oil growing. Of course, we also want them to join so that they can be out growers. The challenge has been money to compensate those people. I promise you, honourable members, we shall - you and I - find a way of coming together with your district officials and have these people compensated.5.07MS SYLVIA BAHIREIRA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about a one Vivian Amanya, who was recruited one year ago – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we are in Prime Minister’s Time. MS BAHIREIRA: I am sorry. I can ask her directly. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a resident of Kamwenge District called Vivian Amanya, who was taken a year ago by a recruiting company called Ekisiinga Recruiting Company Limited, owned by a Ugandan called Joab in the Middle East, particularly Saudi Arabia, to offer domestic work services. I have all the contact numbers. So far, she has been locked indoors for more than a week. As I speak, we have no communication with her. She is under sexual terrorism, where the room is –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have one minute to present your issue. What is your question?MS BAHIREIRA: She is being abused sexually by a dog and then they, again, put it out - my question is: when is this problem 6658PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEof our girls being tortured in the Middle East going to be resolved once and for all? When can we evacuate our girl as fast as possible? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I need you on the Floor. Hon. Atkins, I do not want anyone to disturb the Prime Minister at this time. Kindly, engage the Prime Minister later.MS NABBANJA: Honourable colleagues, this question has been here almost whenever I have the Prime Minister’s Time. The ministries of labour, foreign affairs, together with those countries where we take our children for domestic work are in direct contact to ensure that we have the human rights of our children protected. I cannot speak more than that now, but the issue is being taken care of. However, I request you to come and we will see how to rescue that girl using our embassies on the other side. 5.10MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA (NUP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): My pleasure, Mr Speaker. Let me acquaint the House that last week, the chairman of the Executive, during his televised address to the nation, affirmed – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, honourable colleagues, when I give my directives in this House, respect them. Hon. Atkins, take your seat. The Prime Minister must listen to the questions to be able to answer them. Hon. Aloysius, repeat your question so that the Prime Minister can hear it. MR ALOYSIUS MUKASA: Mr Speaker, recently, the Head of the Executive, during his televised address to the nation, affirmed the existence of COVID-19. We saw a need for ambulances because their existence is totally zero. Therefore, I am asking the Prime Minister for the status of the availability of ambulances, especially in Kampala District, so that we can curb the need.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health is here; in fact, I have two ministers here.  I request that you allow them to answer this question.5.11THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the colleague’s concern. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Ministry of Health received some donations in the form of ambulances and Kampala was one of the beneficiaries. We are in the process of procuring more ambulances and when funds are available, again, we shall find how to distribute them. 5.12MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my constituency, Nakaseke Central, the so-called “Mecca” of the NRM Government, does not have any single tarmac road and a health centre IV .Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are you upgrading Kikamulo Health Centre III to IV and tarmacking the Luweero-Kiwoko-Butalangu Road, which you have promised to do for 36 years? Thank you. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the President was in Luweero recently and he directed me to have a meeting with the leaders, which I did. The discussion on that road came up. Hon. Ecweru was with me and it is one of the priority roads. The designs were already done and the procurement process is supposed to be concluded by December so that, that road is tarmacked and the Mecca – Luweero – really benefits from this Government. In Luganda, they say Amaaso ku lutimbe.  (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.13MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware that it is Government policy to establish a seed [Mr Bahireira]6659THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022secondary school in every subcounty, which the Government has endeavoured to implement. However, there is a challenge with some of the recruited teaching staff in these schools. They do not execute their mandate, but instead hire other people to teach in their place, especially in hard-to-reach areas. Some even hire Senior Six dropouts to teach in their place. My prayer is that the Minister of Education and Sports should enhance due diligence and carry out impromptu visits and also embrace strategic supervision in order to unearth and bring to book all the culprits. Some of these head-teachers and teachers do not respect the district education officers and inspectors in the districts because they claim to have “godfathers” in the Ministry of Education and Sports. This is happening countrywide, not only in one district.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I look at this as a very big issue. This is because if we recruit teachers and somebody hires a Senior Six dropout, to me, it is criminal and it must stop. (Applause) The Minister of Education and Sports is here – I do not know whether he has something to add. We shall investigate and act accordingly.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is conclusive enough.5.15THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add that I will interest myself after I meet with my colleague and get more information so that we can follow it up. 5.16MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is that because of the heavy rains over the last two months, in most parts of the country, most of the bridges have been washed away and some roads destroyed, specifically the UNRA roads. When we talked to UNRA, they told us: “We are under a lot of pressure and we have received only 10 per cent of the funds.” The Prime Minister just told us a few minutes ago that they have received a lot of money. So, I want to know: do they have the money? If they don’t have the money, what happens? This is because most of the bridges have been washed away and the roads have been destroyed.I speak for Buhweju, but I know that most parts of the country are affected. They even said, “We are overstretched.” Thank you very much.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I request the Member to be specific so that I can also base my action on what he really wants. He has been very general and I have no answer. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Mr Mwijukye rose_) Thank you. Unfortunately, the rules do not allow me, but we are going to follow up on that matter, Hon. Mwijukye.5.17MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs constructed a radar in Nakasongola Town Council, on Sungira Hill, in 2019. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, a number of houses – during the construction of the road – were directly affected and others were indirectly affected. Those which were directly affected were compensated, but the 250 houses that were indirectly affected have not been compensated, to date. I have engaged the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs on several occasions, I have written to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, I have reached to you – Rt Hon. Prime Minister – and you have given directives, but the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs is not responding. 6660PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEWhen will the people of Nakasongola, whose houses were indirectly affected, be compensated? I thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Hon. Oboth? (Laughter)5.18THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Mutebi is the Member of Parliament of the area, where we have some of the facilities of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affair. What he raised is not new and I think we need adequate time to fast-track and report back to the House.However, he has been engaging us. Let him not get tired. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the relevant committee take note of that so that we can support.5.19MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is about Matugga–Semuto-Kapeeka Road. That road has been in the budget since 2016. Up to now, nothing has been done and several accidents happen on that road, almost on a daily basis. So, I am inquiring whether there is any progress on that road. Thank you.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I used that road about a month ago. The road is really bad. You really feel that we need to do something. (Laughter) That road has been given to a company called Abubaker Technical Service and General Supplies Limited. They are going to start working on it in January. All the procurement processes are concluded. Just wait; we are going to work on that road. It is bad. (Applause)5.20MR GEOFREY KAYEMBA (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Today, Umeme has confirmed to the country that Government is not going to renew its contract. So, my question to the Prime Minister is: how is Government going to handle that transition? Is the Government going to give that work to a private company, again, or to a Government agency?The country needs to know because that is a very critical issue – to avoid mistakes that have been made. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I believe this country knows that we have an able leader in the name of Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. We have successfully taken trouble to go through all the preliminaries. The contract will not be renewed and the country will not end with Umeme. (Applause) We have many Government companies and I want to assure this House that the transition period will be handled very well. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The sectoral committee in charge will be following up that matter. 5.22MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 2012, the Government issued regulations banning the transportation of children under 12 years, unaccompanied, on boda bodas. Mr Speaker, you may have seen, especially during school time, children below the age of four or five still being carried on boda bodas, unaccompanied, yet the regulations are there. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is the Government doing in implementing its own laws and regulations? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister -  MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we have the custodian of law amidst us; I request the Attorney-General to help me answer that question. [Mr Mutebi]GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR SUCCEEDING WEEKS6661THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 20225.23THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like the honourable member said, the regulations are on the book and it is a question of enforcement. We are doing everything that we can, to try and enforce the laws. It is really a challenge, but we need to work together. When you see them, please assist us and report them to us so we can follow them up. I beg to submit. (Laughter) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otimgiw?5.24MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the 12th of November, I attended a road committee meeting in my district Nebbi, and was sad to learn that our district grader had been parked for over a month because there is a new directive from the Ministry of Works and Transport that all graders or mechanical equipment in the district should not be serviced within the district anymore; they should be taken to the regional offices.The problem is that they are not being serviced on time. As a result, the grader stood parked for one month just because of an oil change. Luckily, I got in touch with the Minister of Local Government and he issued a directive that the district leaders go ahead and service it using the Road Fund. Why has this directive been issued and yet they are not doing timely servicing of these graders through the regional offices? Thank you. MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, some of these directives are in good faith. The local governments have been complaining of lack of money to service these machines. I believe if we service these machines with the right oil, the right – we shall have these machines for quite a long time. But the minister is here; you can add something. 5.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, when we gave that equipment across the districts, initially we decided to put regional workshops for the servicing. The idea was what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has correctly observed - about the quality of the service - that we would continue to extend to that equipment. We realised that the resources could not allow us to decentralise adequately. That is why, sometimes, there has been backlog. We have had a discussion with the Minister of Local Government where we have issued a position that allows the local governments to do minor repairs like what has been described by my colleague.I think the question of Nebbi now is a question of implementation and that will be something that we are going to share again and communicate to all the districts and make sure that all the district engineers will abide by the directive that we have given. Minor repairs will be handled in the district. Only those critical ones will be taken to the region. Even in the regions, we are trying to create more workshops. For example, West Nile, very soon will not be having all their machines going to Gulu; they will be in Arua. And the same will be for some parts of –(Member timed out.) 2.27MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Mr Speaker, for the last 28 years, the Anyirubu-Ofaka-Olepi Road has never been rehabilitated. Even when the President has written two directives, which I am going to lay on the Table-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your one minute is going. MR ETUKA: I want to ask when the road will be worked upon. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister? The Minister of Works and Transport has not heard.6662PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMR ETUKA: It is Anyirubu-Ofaka-Olepi Road. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport can help you. Hon. Ecweru?MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I want to give precise facts when I get the details on how much we have progressed. I know the name of the road is a bit scary, but we will – (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gafabusa?5.28MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I reported here some time back about pieces of land sinking - not landslides. This morning, Bundibugyo-Fort Portal Road, just two kilometers from Bundibugyo town, has been affected greatly and if there is no urgent attention -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that what we saw on the screens?MR GAFABUSA:  Yes, what you see now - even the rail roads you can see have collapsed. Can you, please, immediately send a team to Bundibugyo - maybe from the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) or the Ministry of Works and Transport - to salvage the situation? This is the only road that connects us to the rest of the world. If it collapses, we cannot move anywhere. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister? I think this is submission with evidence.MS NABBANJA:  The Member has done us proud. The honourable minister has seen and everybody else has seen. Therefore, I now, again, direct you to go to Bundibugyo tomorrow. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Grania Hope?5.30MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we all know that Mubende and Kassanda are under lockdown for over 50 days now. You remember during COVID-19, His Excellency the President mentioned that a lockdown is always instituted as we plan and prepare for a long-lasting response. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I believe that has been enough time for us to prepare, as Government, to respond to this outbreak without affecting the economies of Mubende and Kassanda districts. The question is: when do you plan to open up Mubende and Kassanda?Last week on Saturday, a one Byaruhanga Lawrence, a father of six, committed suicide. Previously, we lost a senior one student who also committed suicide. This is attributed to the lockdown. Could we please have this lockdown lifted?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister?MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the interventions and responses we have undertaken since September when we had the outbreak of Ebola have yielded results because, according to the reports we have now, we have tried to suppress Ebola cases. The Minister of Health is here. Can you please come and elaborate and see how we can help our people? 5.32THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Margaret Muhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Currently, we do not have any Ebola cases in any hospital. All patients have been treated and released from hospitals and we have had 56 deaths since the Ebola outbreak. The problem, which I have also explained to the Woman Member of Parliament for Mubende District, is that we have got to wait 6663THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022for the people under quarantine to finish their 21 days. The 21 days elapse on the 17th of this month, which is nine days away. If we can be patient until these 21 days elapse, and these people test negative for Ebola, then we will be able to open. That is the last day and when we shall open.5.33MR FRANCIS ADOME (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised an issue here a while ago regarding the poor state of the Government-aided schools in Karamoja region. I want to ask the Prime Minister whether the Government has plans of rehabilitating some of these schools because we have had a very big challenge, especially with insecurity. As leaders of Karamoja, we agreed, through the regional council, that one of the ways we can combat these problems is by keeping students in schools. We have a few schools in Karamoja; I especially want to talk about Moroto High school that was built in 1965. To date, they are still operating on the same facilities. I want to call upon the Government to see how they can address this issue. I want to hear from the Prime Minister whether they have any plans to do with the same issue. Thank you.MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Education and Sports can help me answer this. Lastly, my time ended –(Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, today I lobbied you much earlier, in the presence of the LOP, that we have very many issues with of Members, but we are concluding. 5.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank my colleague for raising that matter. I want to pledge that I will be able to bring a statement in line with the question, which the honourable member has raised, not only for Moroto High School; there is also Kitobere - those great schools.The ministry has a plan. Allow me to bring a statement here formally to update the country on what plans we have. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.35DR JOHN PAUL NINKUSIIMA (NRM, Ibanda County South, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I want to help my neighbour, Hon. Francis Mwijukye, to be specific because that is what you wanted from him. There is a UNRA road that connects Ibanda and Buhweju. There is a bridge called Kyangwahanda; it was washed away by running water on the 21st of November. On the 23rd, a boda boda cyclist called Turyasiima Chrysostom, drowned at the same point. If we do not handle this Kyangwahanda Bridge as an emergency, more people are going to die. Kindly, Madam Prime Minister, give me the exact time when that bridge is likely to be worked on.MS NABBANJA: Now that it is specific, I want to thank you. I will direct the minister for - because he knows where to go. Before it was like he would go all around the whole country looking for Kyangwahanda Bridge. He will go to Kyangwahanda Bridge next week.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.5.37MS FLA VIA NABAGABE KALULE (NUP, Woman Representative, Kassanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Prime Minister, I am following up on the Ebola lockdown issue. Yesterday, I was approached by 135 students from the greater Mubende Students Association with a great concern about how the lockdown has affected them. They can no longer access food from their homes because their parents are no longer be able to provide for them and so, they have been chased out of their hostels. They also 6664PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEdo not have what to eat. This greatly impacts the young girls especially those living in the universities in Kampala. My questions to you are two:1. What are you planning to do for our students, so that they can be able to get food relief during this extended time that you were waiting for the lockdown to be lifted?2. The second one is, can you direct universities to stop expelling students from universities that have failed to pay tuition, but also those that have failed to pay accommodation because they have nowhere to go since we are under lockdown and parents -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Most of the accommodation in universities is private. For those that are Government owned, Prime Minister, you can comment.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, now that we have a few days to go, I wanted to request Ugandans to be patient. So, we can save life first. Also, the Ministry of Education and Sports has something to do with the hostels. Please come here and add.5.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): First of all, thank you so much, Prime Minister and Mr Speaker. I would like to implore my colleague, that I am ready to have a chat with her specifically on the subject matter she has raised. The reason I am saying so is that some of you are surprised I know her very well; she is a daughter of the revolution. We know ourselves well, but –(Interjections) - Hon. Musa, can I speak? For purposes of the subject matter she has raised, I am going to take it up with the ministry, and then we will be able to communicate. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I think what is important is first identifying the numbers. The moment you identify the numbers, working with the representatives, then you are able to intervene.5.40MS BRENDA NAMUKUTA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, listen to your member.MS NAMUKUTA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is, in Kaliro District it is now two years since they started connecting electricity. Up to today, we have never seen any subcounty or village with light. My question to the Prime Minister is, when will Kaliro District be lit with power? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okaasai is around.MS NABBANJA:  Hon. Okasaai. Can I direct? I think it is better I direct. I am directing him to go and light up Kaliiro. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please, you do not need to come and - what we need is to ensure that Kaliro is lit quickly.5.41DR MICHAEL LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The General Manager of the National Medical Stores has confirmed to me that for seven weeks now, he does not have money - he does not have medicines and supplies for the various health facilities. Can the Prime Minister, based on this information, tell us what emergency actions they want to do in order to ensure that National Medical Store gets the requisite funding so that they can supply our hospitals with medicine? Thank you.MS NABBANJA: I believe this is not true. As Government, we have channels of communication. I am the Leader of Government Business in this country. I am wondering why the NMS official can call you [Ms Kalule]6665THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022and not I. (Laughter) Members, take that as a lie and I will even investigate him.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Leader of the Opposition - 5.43THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank my honourable sister; today, she has earned her pay for the staying power she has exhibited. Secondly, we missed her for the time she was away – when she went to represent the Minister of Education and Sports in Japan. I can assure you, my sister, that humility will one day take you to the galaxy. (Laughter) So, I thank you. I will respond to a few issues she did speak about; I will not be very elaborate.One, Mr Speaker, the question that was initially misconstrued to have been asked by Hon. Musa Noah – not Hon. Wanzala – remains valid. I think the Rt Hon. Prime Minister should take very seriously the issue of registration of pupils in primary schools.When the Member complained about the distance that parents have to travel to have their children registered, the Prime Minister insisted that actually, the parents should find their way to the districts. Can I challenge the Prime Minister, to some degree of imagination and creativity by the Government; if I were the Prime Minister, I would utilise the young people that are educated with no jobs, put those apps on their phones and send them to schools. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a challenge. Please, engage people to be a bit innovative. You need people to be more imaginative and solve this problem. In my Government, that would not be a problem, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. (Laughter)Secondly, on the issue raised by Hon. Juliet Achayo, Member of Parliament for Ngora, relating to the challenge of education and lack of vocational schools in the community, having given a background of insecurity, I think, again, it speaks to some level of lack of deeper thought on the part of planners in education.I want to invite, for some level of ingenuity, those planning for our education system that our country is not uniform. In Karamoja, for example, there was a well-done programme of basic education that enabled so many children to access education then. Their education was different from the one that was delivered to the children in Masaka, for example, because they are unique.Will the Prime Minister think better about this challenge and challenge the Ministry of Education to think through on how they can best solve this problem, without having to refer this community to a time when the Government will construct vocational schools - because I am not sure how long this Government is going to last? So, we need some immediate solutions. Your Government has been around long and the problem persists. You probably need to think better and offer a quicker solution.Thirdly, Mr Speaker, the issue of the Busoga Central Forest Reserve is a bigger problem. I want to invite the Prime Minister to find an occasion and visit the central forest reserve in Buikwe and Mukono, generally, with Hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga; there is a big problem.  First of all, the NFA is abusing its powers and causing very grave environmental damage. I do not know whether they are being supervised or there are some other entity operating in their own world. I invite you to visit with Hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga - I actually ask him to invite you to go and see the level of damage caused to our environment by the NFA by actually cutting down a natural forest and planting eucalyptus in square miles of land, and they are still doing so in part of the central forest reserve in Buikwe, where there is huge damage. Of course, you know what has happened on Mityana Road – it is entirely down and you see eucalyptus rising; there is a problem.6666PRIME MINISTER’S TIMEMr Speaker, the other issue relates to the matter by my honourable sister from Buvuma – I think she has taken leave - relating to the compensation of Project-Affected Persons (PAPs). Seven years is not actually about the lack of funds; it is actually gross negligence.We know the learned Attorney-General will tell you that if that happens every two years, they have an obligation to revalue these assets. The question is: have they done so? Have they taken care of the social cost of adjustment to these communities and embedded it within the entire cost of compensation? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is not just now about compensation. The delay is inordinate; it cannot be about money. There is a lot of money floating around. Seven years; people surrendering their land? There is a problem. Mr Speaker, as I conclude, the issue raised by my honourable sister from Kamwenge District, Hon. Sylvia Bahireira, relating to a young lady being abused in the Middle East, should hold all of us, in a way, to hesitate.First of all, the Prime Minister needs to inform this House how many citizens have so far been returned and how many have not yet been returned. [Hon. Betty Aol rose_]THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleague, it is not allowed under rule 41. Read Rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure. LOP, continue. MR MPUUGA: So, the Prime Minister owes this House this information, so that we can best understand where the problem is. Of course, to the Ministry of Gender, they owe us an explanation. Why is this continuing? Who is not doing their job because almost on a weekly basis, these matters come on the Floor of Parliament? So, what is happening?As leaders in this country, we shall be held to have let down our people in having an end to this abuse of our citizens. There is no country that can allow abuse of its citizens when they have leaders. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to have a better understanding. Is it just collusion by agencies and our ministries or embassies? Is it negligence? We need to understand that better.On this LEGS - lastly, the question by the Member from Kampala on ambulances deserved a better response. My friend, the Minister of Health, did state that the Government is in the process; process? I did say again that Governments are never in the process. Governments have well-explainable stages. A Government in the process is a non-existent Government. So, are you on procurement? The questions are: how many ambulances? Two, to which facilities? Three, when are they coming? These are the answers Members of Parliament desire to go and speak to their people for them to understand that actually, there is a Government.Mr Speaker, it is not easy to have, in this House, the Minister of Defence – (Interjection) - yes, it is not easy to have him; he is a very busy man - the Deputy CDF, Gen. Elwelu and the Prime Minister at the same time; it is not easy. So, will the three provide a single answer as to whether a General in the name of Gen. Muhoozi is still part and under the UPDF Act or actually, he is an outlaw and, therefore, people should keep guard of his presence in their midst. He is issuing threats. His last was to the effect that when he gets into power, he will crush journalists who are intimidating and insulting him. Therefore, is this gentleman still under the ambit of the laws of the land or an outlaw, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, my brother, the Leader of the Opposition. This is a question that does not fall under rule 41. Rule 41(9) clearly states that the Leader of the Opposition will comment or reply - it does not allow him to ask supplementary questions. Read that rule.[Mr Mpuuga]6667THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 8 DECEMBER 2022Under here, you are commenting as the Leader of the Opposition, not a mere MP. Not anyone can be the Leader of the Opposition. On that, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you do not have any way of replying. However, I know in the corridors today, we have a dance. It is an issue you can discuss. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, because of doing very well, today, we have given you the honour to open our dance. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 December 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 