Tuesday, 11 December 2012

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. On a sad note, Parliament has learnt with sorrow the news of the death of the late George William Kadaga, father to the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga. Funeral details are as follows:

•	On Friday, 14 December 2012, the cortege leaves Mulago Medical School for St Luke’s Church of Uganda, Ntinda, for a funeral service starting at 10.00 a.m.

•	The body will thereafter be taken to the Speaker’s residence on William Kalema Road, Muyenga, near the residence of the Pakistan Consul for a night vigil. 

•	On Saturday, 15 December 2012 at 8.00a.m., the body leaves the Speaker’s residence for Balawoli Church of Uganda in Kamuli District for a church service. 

•	The body will thereafter be taken to the home of the deceased at Mbulamuti for a vigil on Saturday and Sunday.

•	Monday, 17 December 2012, burial of the deceased at his residence in Mbulamuti starting at midday. 

That is the tentative programme. If there are any changes, they will be communicated to you, honourable members. At this moment let us rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Still connected to this, honourable members; those of you who would like to make some contributions to the funeral arrangements to meet the expenses, please contact hon. Jacob Wangolo, Member for Bunyole West, and also hon. Isabirye Iddi, Bunya South. These are the two people who will be co-ordinating whatever contribution we will be making as Members of Parliament to support the family to give a send-off to the father of our Speaker.

PETITION BY VENDORS IN GOMA DIVISION, MUKONO MUNICIPALITY, SEEKING FOR INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT IN MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE SALE OF COUNCIL MARKETS

2.26
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition by vendors in Goma Division of Mukono Municipality seeking for intervention of Parliament in matters pertaining to the fraudulent sale of council markets, plots for public toilets and eviction of vendors from their places of work by Goma Division/Mukono Municipal administration. Your humble petitioners have the following prayers:

1. 	That Parliament investigates or causes an investigation into the manner in which the council markets and plots to accommodate public toilets were disposed of with the view of recovering them and those found to be culpable be punished accordingly.

2. 	That council is ordered to find space big enough and convenient to accommodate the vendors operating on road reserves before evicting them.

3. 	That the officers of Uganda Police Force, who were deployed at Seeta Police Station on the night of 4th December together with the law enforcement officers attached to Goma Division, are found to have acted in bad faith to invade stalls late in the night in the absence of the owners. Therefore, those who sanctioned and led the operation, which caused the said loss, be ordered to take personal responsibility by making good the loss they caused and paying back to the vendors the full amount of the lost and destroyed merchandise plus stalls.

4. 	That Government is urged, through the Ministry of Local Government, Urban Planning and the Ministry of Trade and Industry, to come up with a clear policy about street trading in Uganda with a view to streamline this business other than disallowing it, and putting up practical measures to help the urban poor instead of viewing them as criminals with a calculated motive to disorganise towns.

5. 	That Goma Division/Mukono Municipal Council be ordered to stay these evictions until this petition has been disposed of. They do so pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the full petition and attachments to that?

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the petition is signed by 121 traders and they have appended their signatures plus attachments ordering them to vacate their places of work. I beg that you allow me to lay the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, lay that petition on the Table. Let the records capture it as such. It stands referred to the Committee on Local Government to handle within the timeframe provided within our rules - 45 days - and come back to the House. However, given that Parliament will be going for recess, as soon as Parliament resumes this report should be made available and then we finalise with it.

Honourable members, there are other items on the Order Paper but the honourable member had two other petitions, which I thought would be brought tomorrow. In the circumstances, I alter the Order Paper to allow her present all the petitions so that we can have them disposed of today and we move on.

Just read the title of the petition for the records to capture it.

PETITION BY THE LORD MAYOR OF KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY, MAYORS OF THE DIVISION URBAN COUNCILS AND AUTHORITY COUNCILLORS SEEKING FOR THE INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PROBE OR CAUSE A PROBE INTO MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE MANAGEMENT OF KCCA.

2.30
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition by the Lord Mayor of Kampala Capital City Authority, mayors of the divisions of the urban councils and Authority councillors seeking for the intervention of Parliament to probe or cause a probe into matters pertaining to the management of KCCA. They make the following prayers:

1.That a select committee of this august House be established to probe into these matters with a view of finding a lasting solution to the problems of Kampala and bringing the culprits to book.

2. 	That Parliament orders for a stay of the implementation of all matters of policy that have been passed by the Executive Director, including the rebranding of Kampala City.

3. 	That Parliament prescribes any other remedies as it may deem fit.

They do so pray, Mr Speaker. The Lord Mayor and the said mayors and councillors have appended their signatures and attached several documents to backup their prayers. I wish to pray that you allow me lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition. It stands referred to the Committee on Local Government. The timeframe is 45 days and as I said before, this will be received as soon as Parliament resumes.    

PETITION BY TEACHERS, PARENTS AND OLD STUDENTS OF BISHOPS SENIOR SECONDARY SCHOOL, MUKONO SEEKING FOR THE INTERVENTION OF PARLIAMENT IN MATTERS PERTAINING TO THE MISMANAGEMENT OF THE SCHOOL, ABUSE OF OFFICE AND UNLAWFUL DISMISSAL AND SUSPENSION OF TEACHERS AND OTHER MEMBERS OF STAFF BY THE HEADMASTER.

2.33
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Mr Speaker, this is a petition by teachers, parents and old students of Bishops Senior Secondary School, Mukono seeking for the intervention of Parliament in matters pertaining to the mismanagement of their school, abuse of office and unlawful dismissal and suspension of teachers and other members of staff by the headmaster, one Sentongo Godfrey Sempa. They make the following prayers:

1. 	That Parliament investigates or causes an investigation of the laid down cases of mismanagement, abuse of office and nepotism and those found culpable be punished accordingly;

2. 	That the teachers illegally suspended from their jobs be reinstated immediately;

3. 	That the old students’ body is declared a legal organ of the school and should be allowed to undertake activities that are meant to develop the school;

4. 	That the part-time teachers recruited by the school are found to be a burden to the school and therefore their contracts should be terminated;

5. 	That Parliament causes the reinstatement of the dismissed officers to their jobs;

6. 	That any person who causes the school financial loss takes personal responsibility by making good the loss he/she caused to the school; 

7. 	That the Ministry of Education be requested to stay transfers of teachers from Bishops Senior Secondary School until this petition has been disposed of. 

They do so pray, Mr Speaker, and they have appended their signatures, 20 in number, and the relevant documents are hereby attached. I beg that you allow me to lay these documents on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that petition. It stands referred to the committee responsible for education. The timeframe is 45 days. Please, report accordingly. Let the chairpersons take charge of those petitions.

REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION AGAINST ILLEGAL/UNJUST REMOVAL FROM SERVICE AND BREACH OF CONTRACT BY THE UGANDA PUBLIC EMPLOYEES UNION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chairperson here or any member of the Presidential Affairs Committee who is ready with the report to lay and present?

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ACCOUNTANTS BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am advised that this particular report was already presented, so it is due for debate. Debate open, and the debate is on the motion for second reading on the Accountants Bill, 2012. If there is no debate, I put the question. It was presented already.

Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled, “The Accountants Bill, 2012” be read the second -

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, it is true this report was presented but it is a very important report. I would beg that we actually get some time and get some kind of debate going on so that we do not just pass it because there are issues that we, as Members, should raise. I think today most Members did not come prepared actually to 
-
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Would you like to debate?

MR WERIKHE: Well, if we are given a few minutes to pick copies and then I would. My prayer is that you actually give us some time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, this Bill was ready seven months ago for this House to debate. The motion for second reading was ready seven months ago and I was in the chair when I first called it. 

I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Accountants Bill, 2012” be read the second time -

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a matter of guidance. You can see that after last week, many of our colleagues are not here; it appears they went on recess earlier than envisaged. The guidance I am seeking is whether we will actually be able to transact business today because even for the matter that we are moving on, we must take a decision but I do not think we are properly constituted to take a decision!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kyandondo, really, this matter is a small Bill. At the end of the session, we will be judged on how many Bills we have passed. The committee has examined this and they have made recommendations on what we should amend -

MS OTENGO: Mr Speaker, when we left last week, you clearly stated that we will come back today and you said that we had a lot of business to transact. I think we are going by your guidance of last week. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, really, let us proceed with this business.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: My request, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, who has allowed you to -

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I want to raise concerns attendance here. Members are not supposed to come here just by choice. They are supposed to come here and serve the taxpayers who, according to Ugandan standards, pay us handsomely. 

Also, each party represented in this Parliament has a whip. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if the whips of the various political parties - for that matter I am representing the DP whip - be required to produce their Members so that it does not appear that when there is voting, we turn up in big numbers and vote and then disappear the next day and leave you with an empty House. Can’t this also attract an investigation by the rules committee? That is the procedural matter I want to raise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this House is not empty.

REV. BAKALUBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am also concerned and I am looking at the way this Bill is coming up. This looks like a very important Bill and I do not agree with the minister that we can just go on with it like that. It is not that we have already gone far -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you a Member of Parliament?

REV. BAKALUBA: Yes, I am.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you in Parliament?

REV. BAKALUBA: I am in Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you come to do business of Parliament?

REV. BAKALUBA: I have come to do business -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, please let us proceed. Let us forget about those things.

REV. BAKALUBA: At least if they could avail us some copies so that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The copies of the report were circulated the day it was presented.

REV. BAKALUBA: Most obliged.

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because of the fact that the Bill was presented seven months ago, as you have rightly said, wouldn’t it be prudent that you allow Members -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. The Bill was presented in this House seven months ago, actually 15 February 2012. It went to the committee, which examined it and reported to this House two weeks ago. So, Members have the report; we should proceed with business. 

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, my concern is that if you look at the frontbench – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us proceed with this. I put the question – 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember the day they were distributing the document for the Accountants Bill, the documents were not enough. The person who gave them out said there were about only 14 copies and they were not enough for everybody. So, some of us have not accessed it and we have not seen it. So, there is nothing we can debate on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: According to the rules, the only period of time I am allowed to suspend for debate is for three days. From the day the report is presented to the House, the rules give us three days within which to come back and debate. It is now more than three weeks. I am sure the copies have been made available. Can we proceed? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, as Ministry of Finance and as Government, we have agreed with the committee on all the amendments that have been raised in this report. Therefore, we do not expect any difficulties in going through this Bill. 

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, you called for the chairman of the committee and it is the minister standing up. Is it in order for the minister to stand as the chairman of the committee, because you clearly called for the chairman of the committee to guide us through this debate? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is the minister in charge of the Bill. It is the minister’s Bill, not the chairman’s Bill. The motion for second reading is moved by the minister not by the chairperson. The chairperson has reported and the matter is before the House. So, the absence of the chairperson cannot prohibit this House from proceeding. 

What the minister is saying is that, all the amendments proposed by the committee have been agreed upon to go forward and be adopted by this House. So I do not see any contradiction. 

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, how can we be sure that the minister is telling the truth when the chairman of the committee is not here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have no justification to raise doubts about the minister’s position because the minister’s position is recorded, and the chairman should have been here. Do we have a member of the committee who can steer us through the amendments? 

Honourable members, do we have any problem with the principles on which the Bill is being proposed? If we have no difficulties with the principles of the Bill and the purpose for which it is brought to this House, we can take that vote on the second reading and then it goes to committee. We can then wait for the chairperson to come and steer us through the committee stage of the Bill when we go clause by clause. 

I put the question that the Accountants Bill, 2012 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will not be able to proceed to committee stage because the chairperson of the committee is not here, and I do not even see a single member of the committee. So, it will be difficult for us to proceed with the Bill. However, please give notice to the chairperson and members that tomorrow we shall finish this Bill as soon as we start. It will be the only business tomorrow on the Order Paper. 

Also, you should be informed that on Thursday, the President will be addressing Parliament. The address which was re-scheduled from last week will be coming on Thursday and Parliament will also be going on recess that same day. 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall receive the report and copies will be distributed. We will also schedule a time when we can debate this.  

2.49
THE VICE-CHAIPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fredrick Mbagadhi): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us copies of this report? Okay, proceed.

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Chairman, I rise to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the economic situation in Uganda during the financial year 2011/12.

On page 1, we have the introduction. The mandate of the committee was to scrutinise and report to this House under the constitutional provision in Article 159. On the same page, we have the objectives of the report and we have the methodology.

The committee looked at various documents and among them was the Background to the Budget, the Budget Speech and Bank of Uganda publications. The committee also had consultative meetings with different stakeholders in the economy - that is on page 2. Page 2 also has the background. 

Under 4.1, we have the overview and I think it is very important that I take you through the overview so that everyone gets to understand why we have this report in place. This report provides an analysis of the performance of the economy during the financial year 2011/12. The analysis has been made on the key accounts of the economy that have an impact on the key stakeholders in the country. In summary, the analysis in this report indicates a slowdown in economic activities as the real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by only 3.2 per cent in FY 2011/12 compared to 6.7 per cent during the previous financial year.

On page 3, the committee mentions the behaviour of the macroeconomic parameters across regions and blocks. In there we have the global and regional perspectives. 

Still on page 3, we have the monetary and financial sector developments. The financial year 2011/12 was extremely challenging for macroeconomic management because the economy was hit by major exogenous shocks that depressed real growth and drove up inflation. During the first quarter of the financial year, a sharp depreciation of the exchange rate added to inflationary pressures. Headline inflation rose rapidly from five per cent at the beginning of 2011 to a peak of 30.5 percent in October 2011, the highest level recorded since the early 1990s; while core inflation rose from 5.6 per cent at the start of 2011 to a peak of 30.8 per cent in October 2011. All this is elaborated on page 4, where we also illustrated price movements.

Let us move to page 6. Over the review period, following a tightened monetary policy to constrain demands in the economy, there has been a decline in real currency in circulation. Real currency in circulation declined annually by 13 per cent in June 2012. We have a graph depicting the real currency in circulation from June 2011 to June 2012.

On page 7, you see that we have a graph depicting the movements in domestic credits. That is figure 4. Paragraph 6.2.1 is about private sector credit movements. I would like to report that the private sector credit stagnated from September 2011 as a result of the tightened monetary policy to dampen expenditure in the economy. The stagnation resulted from the fall in shilling denominated loans amounting from Shs 542 billion in November 2011 to Shs 4720 billion in June 2012. In figure 5, we show the private sector credit movements.

On page 8, we report on interest rate developments. Under that we have Bank of Uganda policy rates. Over the reporting period, the Central Bank Rate (CBR), which is the rate at which Bank of Uganda lends money to domestic banks, generally depicted an upward trend as seen in figure 6. Between July 2011 and January 2012, the CBR exploded by 10 percentage points from 13 per cent in July 2011 to 23 per cent in January 2012. However, by the end of the fourth quarter, in June 2012, the CBR had declined to 20 per cent. This is an indication that the Bank of Uganda has eased its monetary policy stance. Mr Speaker, at this point I would like to report to the this House that going by the monetary policy statement of December, the CBR has gone down to 12 per cent, which is a good indication, though of course not in tandem with the rate of economic growth as well as the commercial banks’ rates of lending.

On page 9, we report on developments in commercial bank interest rates. Over the review period, the nominal lending rates generally depicted an upward trend as can be seen in figure 7. By the end of the fourth quarter, June 2012, the lending rates had peaked to 27 per cent compared to 19.9 per cent a year ago. The rise in the lending rates was mainly driven by the significant increase in the central bank rate.

On page 10, the committee reports on developments in the exchange rate market. I would like to ask you to move on to page 11 where we have information on the real sector developments. Under that, we have downstream petroleum (supply and distribution) sub-sector. On this, I would like to report that the downstream petroleum sector has experienced enormous turbulence in the second quarter of financial year 2011/12 compared to the previous year. The situation started stabilising at the end of the third quarter. 

It should be noted that oil prices started rising much sooner in 2012 than they did in 2011. The international prices rose above US$ 100 per barrel in the third quarter of FY 2011/2012, two weeks earlier than last year. Rising oil prices drove gas prices up above US$ 3.5 per gallon as well. This further led to the increase in domestic pump prices as has been indicated.

There is need for Government to consider the earlier recommendations by Parliament to refurbish the Jinja oil storage tanks, in order to check fuel shortages. We have a table that depicts the monthly average pump prices of petroleum products and that is still on page 12.

On page 13, we report on the electricity tariffs. On page 15, we report on the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth. On this we would like to report that the Uganda economy has been faced with a slowdown in real GDP growth of 3.2 per cent in financial year 2011/12 from the previous 6.7 per cent growth. Uganda’s economy is anticipated to register a 3.2 per cent growth by the close of 2011/12 as shown in the table below. The growth is almost twice lower than the targeted seven per cent as envisaged in the National Development Plan. This poor performance is mainly attributed to the high international oil prices coupled with high commodity prices, drought in many parts of the country which brought about high food prices, and high inflation levels that reached a peak of 30 per cent in the second quarter of FY 2011/12.

On page 16, we have table 6 which depicts the sectoral real GDP growth rates. Actually, on pages 15, 16 and 18, the report focuses on the different sectors of the economy - industry, agriculture and services sectors.  Most importantly, on page 19, we report that all sectors that have been discussed by this committee registered a downward trend in output.

On page 18, we also mention government fiscal operations. Under that we have revenues and grants, expenditure and also fiscal deficit and financing. On page 20, we have a table which clearly depicts the central government’s fiscal operations. 

On page 21, the committee reports on the external sector developments. On page 23, we report that in a nutshell, the decision taken by Bank of Uganda to stabilise the economy and control inflation was inevitable. The short term policy measures were seen as a long term solution to economic growth. 

On that note, we now move to the observations and recommendations that the committee made:

1. 	The committee observes that over the review period, the economy went through some turbulent times, justifying the projected slump in growth to 3.2 per cent from 6.7 per cent. In addition, agriculture and services accounted for the biggest share of the country’s economic growth. Major issues in the agricultural sector that tend to lead to limited production include: rudimentary production tools, limited access to credit for production, counterfeits especially in agricultural inputs, limited research and development capacity, lack of effective regulations and policies in place to guide effective research, production, processing and marketing of agriculture.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government strengthens its regulation and controls in the service and agricultural sectors in order to boost productivity in the economy. In addition to supporting agricultural financing, the government must focus on either strengthening Uganda Development Bank to support agricultural industrial development with competitive interest rates or institutionalise a special agriculture bank for farmers.

2. 	The committee further observed that the depreciation of the exchange rate and the high fuel prices greatly had an impact on economic growth. While Uganda’s export receipts have been growing, import requirements have grown much faster. 

The committee therefore recommends increased commitment by Government in supporting efforts aimed at attracting foreign direct investment, export growth and diversification, increased remittances from Ugandans abroad as well as tourism receipts in order to ease the exchange rate.

3. 	The committee observed that high transport costs are one of the major constraints that are hindering economic growth in the country. Such costs are inevitably transferred to the consumer, thereby eroding the purchasing power and increasing the cost of living. There has been some progress in the internal road network but both farmers and industries continue to face the challenge of transporting raw materials for processing to major urban centres that have the privilege of enjoying grid power. 

Many exporters find it difficult to sustain their businesses due to high operational costs. However, new exporters such as those engaged in flowers, fish, horticulture and organic foods require a reliable and cost effective air transport network to supply their export markets efficiently. There has been some commitment from Government in developing water transport infrastructure but a lot needs to be done in the development of waterways and ports as this is critical for providing cheap alternative routes within the country and the region for efficient trade facilitation.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should urgently address the challenge of high transport costs. More effort should be directed to cost effective and reliable transport links in the country. Fast tracking the development of rail, water and air transport will lessen dependence on road transport and promote increased investments and access to markets.

The committee also recommends that Government fully refurbishes the Jinja fuel storage tanks in order to check fuel shocks, which are also adversely affecting transportation costs. The government should work expeditiously on the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline project and the construction of other regional fuel storage tanks in order to fore-guard the economy from often turbulent effects of oil shocks.

4. 	The committee observed that although the restrictive monetary policy adopted by the government resulted in the easing of inflationary pressures, the central bank’s intervention is not sufficient to control inflation because its impact on access to credit is low. There is need for the use of fiscal policy to stimulate production and increase supply so as to help manage inflation from the supply side. This will supplement the strict monetary tools and will eventually continue to ease the CBR.

The committee recommends prudent Government expenditure with emphasis on production sectors as increasing expenditure in our unproductive sectors will only lead to high inflation.

5. 	The committee further noted the high cost of credit that increased the cost of production, forcing small firms that cannot pass on the credit to consumers to suffer losses. Commercial banks too were affected as they started to notice payment difficulties from their customers. Investors too have begun losing their property due to default as a result of the effect of the monetary policy on their loan portfolios with commercial banks. Higher interest rates mean higher costs of production and loss of competitiveness of the local industry.

The committee appreciates that while it is the prerogative of the central bank to make monetary policies/adjustments, these adjustments have circular externalities and may not be conceived in total disregard of other competing macroeconomic objectives or outcomes. Given that monetary policy actions have profound effects on the lives of ordinary people, the committee recommends that Government should strengthen its communication mechanism to sensitise the public on monetary policy choices. 

In addition, the supervisory capacity of the central bank should go beyond ensuring financial soundness of the banking system to also protecting consumers through public awareness on the effect of monetary policies on financial services.

Mr Speaker, we can move on to page 27. I am trying to read out the most salient observations and recommendations. The committee also observed that a good business environment alone cannot deliver or improve the country’s competitiveness. The country’s competitiveness has continued to deteriorate largely due to insufficient progress made to address education and skills challenges coupled with poor work ethics, institutional weaknesses and infrastructural bottlenecks, lack of innovation and inadequacy of technology readiness.

The committee thus recommends that Government should consider allocating more resources to support technical education in order to address the technical skills gap, lack of innovation and technology readiness in the country. We are quite aware that Government has done whatever it takes to ensure that it enhances skills development, but in this case the committee is actually saying that we need more funding in this area.

The committee observed that Government has put in place measures to provide for an enabling legal and regulatory framework including prioritising public/private partnerships to support private sector competitiveness. However, it is important to note that more key commercial laws which would enable the business environment for the private sector are still pending approval for many years to date. The Bills are well enumerated down there -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please read the Bills out.

MR MBAGADHI: The Bills include: the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009; the Insurance (Amendment) Bill, 2010; the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Bill, 2009; Industrial Property Bill, 2009; the Insolvency Bill, 2009; the Chattels Securities Bill, 2009; the Companies Bill, 2009; the Capital Markets Authority -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I thought the Companies Bill was passed.

MR MBAGADHI: Yes, the Companies Bill was passed and even the Accountants Bill is already with us here for debate. You are right, Mr Speaker.

Others are: the Investment Code Bill, 2010; the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill, 2009; Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2010; the Free Zones Bill, 2010; and the Sale of Goods and Services Bill, 2008.

In order to boost competitiveness, the committee urges Parliament to urgently pass the following Bills, which are already with the House: the Geographical Bill, 2008; the Insolvency Bill, 2009; the Industrial Property Bill, 2009; Uganda National Bureau of Standards Bill; Chattels Securities Bill, 2009; Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010.

In addition, the committee recommends that Government should urgently bring to Parliament the following Bills: the Capital Markets (Amendment) Bill; the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill, 2009; Sales of Goods and Supply of Services Bill, 2008; Free Zones Bill, 2010; the Investment Code (Amendment) Bill; the Public Private Partnership Bill.

In regard to the external sector, imports continue to exceed export earnings and the trade/goods account continues to deteriorate. The government must come up with a deliberate effort to boost productivity in the economy in order to expand the tradable goods and services sector to increase on export receipts.

The committee recommends that Government guides and supports local investors to properly plan their investments to effectively transfer their resources from the non-tradable sector to the tradable in order to boost productivity in the economy.

The committee also noted that despite efforts by Government to support the tourism potential in Uganda, there are a number of challenges which still suffocate the steady growth of the sector. These include, among others: 
•	Lack of an operational tourism policy to guide development of the sector; 
•	Uganda’s image in the international tourism market is bad; 
•	Poor road network around the tourist circuits; 
•	Inadequate electricity supply and internet connectivity to major tourist destinations in the country; and 
•	The 17 per cent VAT levied on safaris to Uganda deters the promotion of tourism. 

In addition, the committee noted that a mismatch in the laws and regulations of the tourism sector in the East African Community is not helping much in revamping tourism in Uganda. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that in order to improve on competitiveness of the sector, Government should fast track the development of the tourism policy and regulations to fully implement the Act, so that the sector is able to realise its potential. In addition, the sector should be restructured with the objective of identifying a lead agency in marketing of the country’s tourism sector to avoid duplication of activities and resource wastage. 

The committee further recommends that under the PPP approach, in a bid to rebrand and market the country’s image, Government should urgently consider attaining an airline carrier to fly the national flag with a view of boosting the tourism sector. In addition, Government should provide incentives to the population to encourage domestic tourism.

The committee also recommends that in order to address the mismatch in the legal regime within member states in the East African Community region governing the tourism industry, the government should take steps to harmonise its laws with those in the region in order to raise competitiveness. 

The committee further noted that the government recently decommissioned the expensive thermal power generation and adopted the cost recovery tariff to financially sustain the power sector.  This should, in the medium term, facilitate power generation, distribution and access to energy across the country although it carries the effect of sustaining high tariff rates. 

The committee supports the cost recovery tariff regime to sustain the sector. However, it retaliates that Government should put greater focus on generation than distribution so as to be in tandem with the National Development Plan. Incentives for generation should be improved further and may include equity support by Government on the basis of PPP, which may include issuance of energy bonds. 

Government should also encourage and make laws that mandate use of solar power in homes and small medium enterprises so as to reserve the hydro power for industries. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, in respect of the foregone, the country has continued to maintain relative stability in most of the key macroeconomic variables. However, the economy continues to register a significant mismatch between growth in exports and imports; lending rates stubbornly remain high; inefficiencies in the energy sector are still unattended to; and inflation targets continue to overshoot the programmed limits, among others.    

As an economy that has remained largely subsistence based in spite of registering high growth rates for over two decades now, more needs to be done in order to move the economy to a transformational growth path. For the private sector to be an engine of economic growth in Uganda, Government needs to seriously consider putting more emphasis on policies that will move the economy forward by especially addressing key structural growth challenges such as transport, energy, infrastructure, practical skills for national development, affordable business finance, regulatory barriers due to weak public institutions that support private sector growth, public procurement procedures, tax policy plus trade and non-trade barriers arising from the East African Community regional integration, among others. 

There should also be improved communication from Government to the stakeholders at any given time. Concerns of reducing the cost of doing business in Uganda hence her competitiveness should be reprioritised to ensure growth and development. The national budget ought to focus more on supporting private sector investment, reducing costs of doing business, value addition to farm produce among others to enhance access to ready markets for Uganda’s exports. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. I have some documents, which I would like to lay on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Start with the report itself. 

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on National Economy on the economic situation in Uganda for the period 2011/12, dated December, 2012. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture a copy of the report. 

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, I have a copy of a document from the Uganda Bankers Association clearly depicting the prime lending interest rates for the commercial banks as at 20 November 2012. It is signed by Emmanuel Turyamuhika, Executive Director Uganda Bankers’ Association. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, I also have minutes of the meeting of the Committee on National Economy held on Thursday, 11 September 2012 in the Conference Hall, Parliamentary Building. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the meeting of the committee. 

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, I also have minutes of the meeting of the Committee on National Economy held on Tuesday, 18 September 2012 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Put the minutes together as minutes of the committee. Let the records capture the minutes of the meetings of the committee.

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, this is one of those very important reports. It is on the state of the economy or the economic situation in Uganda during the financial year 2011/12. We have all faced it but we may not have all the details of what actually happened. So, the committee has assisted us in understanding the situation that transpired and how we, as Parliament, can engage in the process of trying to reverse it.

Some recommendations on laws that are before the House have been made. One of them has just gone to the committee now, which we should pass as soon as we can so that we can help the process of revitalising the growth of the economy by creating the appropriate investment condition. 

Members, if we are ready to debate, we could. But if Members want to internalise the report so that we can give it appropriate coverage with details of debate, we could receive the report now and have the debate on an appropriate date, if that is okay.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE INVESTIGATING THE ENERGY SECTOR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, has this report been already received?  Not yet. 

3.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, AD HOC COMMITTEE INVESTIGATING THE ENERGY SECTOR (Mr Jacob Oboth Oboth): Mr Speaker, the report was received. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the size of this report -(Laughter) - I think it is one of those things that you need to get a proper time to handle. As I said, we only have today and tomorrow. On Thursday, the President will be addressing Parliament and then we go on recess until February. So, I do not think we have sufficient time to comprehensively deal with that thing and yet we do not want a segmented debate on this matter. So, I think let us study it so that when we come back we give it comprehensive time. 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 87.1 MILLION (USD 135.0M) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING OF THE WATER MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (WMDP)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have the report. Let the Chairman present and we will treat it the same way. We will get the report, study it and then we shall debate at an appropriate time. Is that okay? 

3.22
THE VICE-CHAIRPESON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fredrick Mbagadhi): The good thing, Mr Speaker, is that copies have already been printed but I do not know why they are not here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, Mr Chairman.

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by government to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 87.1 million which is an equivalent of US$ 135 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing of the Water Management and Development Project.

On page 1, we have the introduction and the methodology. The committee held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the Ministry of Water and Environment; the Parliamentary Committee on Natural Resources; and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. 

The committee further studied and made reference to the following documents: 
•	The brief to Parliament that was made by the honourable minister of the relevant ministry; 
•	The project appraisal document; 
•	The draft loan financing agreement. 

The committee also undertook field trips to some of the project beneficiary towns in the eastern part of the country. These towns included Tirinyi, Kadama, Budaka and Mbale.

On page 2, we have the background. I think it is very important that I say something on the background. Recent studies point to an increase in water stress in Uganda which will affect the country unevenly. It is, therefore, important that Uganda’s development plans factor in the increasing competition for water resources that will become increasingly scarce in the years to come. 

In 1999, the government began a series of reforms aimed at making integrated water resource management the foundation for water sector management and development. The sector is currently taking steps to build an appropriate policy and institutional framework for integrated water resource management. This includes regulatory and development capacity for information management, planning and infrastructure financing as well as operationalising a catchment-based approach. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment has also established four deconcentrated water management zones under the Directorate of Water Resource Management, which will take the lead in developing and implementing the integrated water resource management framework at the regional level.

On page 2, the committee reports on how this project is interlinked with the development strategies of the country. On page 3, we have the project development objectives. The project will definitely contribute to higher level goals of sustaining natural resources, improving service delivery and increasing economic activity. 

Still on page 3, we have the project components. The project comprises of three main components namely:
•	Component 1: investment in integrated water resource development and management. 
•	Component 2: investment in urban water supply and sanitation services and catchment protection.
•	Component 3: strengthening institutions for effective water management and development and project implementation.

On page 4, we have a table that depicts the different components plus their sub-components. Component 1, for example, has three sub-components. Component 2 has two sub-components. Component 3 is also clearly reported on. 

We move on to page 6 where we have listed the National Water and Sewerage Corporation centres under the project intervention. We have the name of the urban centre together with their populations. We have Arua Municipality, Gulu Municipality, Ishaka-Bushenyi Municipality and Mbale Municipality. 

We also have the Directorate of Water Development urban centres under the project intervention. We have Butaleja-Busolwe towns with their population. We have Budaka-Kadama-Tirinyi-Kibuku and Kumi-Ngora-Nyero towns; Rukungiri Municipality, Busia Municipality, Katwe-Kabatooro town, Koboko town and Pallisa town. All together, it is estimated that this intervention will cater for a population of 298,889. Below that, we have the project costs and financing. For the costs, we are talking of an equivalent of US$ 135 million.

On page 7, we have a table that clearly depicts the allocation of resources by component. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, you have the table with all the figures.

We go to the programme implementation. The project will be implemented by two agencies, Ministry of Water and Environment and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. This will be under the oversight of the water and environment sector working groups and relevant governing bodies, that is, National Water and Sewerage Corporation Board of Directors. They will be supported by the de-concentrated regional entities like the water management zones, water sanitation and development facilities, local governments and their partners (district officers, private sector operators) to deliver the output.  

On page 8, we have the loan terms and conditions. These are the usual terms that go hand in hand with concessional loans. On page 9, we have the conditions that are attached to the financing. 

On page 9, we also have the observations and recommendations, which are as follows:

1) The committee observes that the implementation phase of water resource related reforms has been slower and current trends are alarming as wetland areas and forest cover continue to decrease. Pollution from increasing urbanisation and industrialisation continues to threaten several areas such as Murchison Bay, which is the source of Kampala’s water supply. This causes an increased threat to public health, tourism, fisheries and asset values.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment prioritises and expedites the efforts required to reverse the increasing trends in environmental degradation.

2) 	The committee observes that there is limited development of water infrastructure and inadequate water resources management. This is coupled with challenges of hydrological viability and trans-boundary water resources. These have led to the inefficient utilisation of water, rising unmet demands, declining water quality and high vulnerability to water shocks. The committee also observed that environmental degradation and climate change are expected to place additional pressure on Uganda’s water resource base. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government scales up efforts towards institutional modernisation and improved coordination across water-related agencies, strengthening integrated planned activities within and across water dependent sectors and ensuring sustainable management of the environment and natural resources. 

3) 	The committee also observed increased silting and deteriorating water quality along River Manafwa, one of the main water sources for Mbale Municipality. This has led to high treatment and operational costs and unmet water supply demands especially in the dry seasons.   

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government develops a comprehensive rehabilitation and expansion of a water supply system strategy or plan covering all small and large towns especially those that are faced with declining water quality and quantity.

4) 	The committee observed that though new water sources were being constructed every year, the price of rehabilitating old ones is still a challenge to the Ministry of Water and Environment. A number of districts are still unable to rehabilitate broken boreholes and shallow wells. The problem of sanitation and provision of safe clean water to the community, therefore, remains a big problem and may impact negatively on the health of local communities, more so as districts are increasingly being overwhelmed with a number of dysfunctional water sources. This is a bottleneck to priority planning and a source of water-borne diseases. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government steps up the budget allocation for rehabilitation and repair of water points in all districts.

5) 	The committee also observed that some of the activities under this programme involve putting up infrastructure in form of gravity flow schemes and public sanitation facilities in the selected beneficiary areas. Although the water policy states that the location of water facilities is demand-driven and therefore land should be provided by the would-be beneficiaries, delays in obtaining the ownership of land puts government properties at risk of being encroached on by unscrupulous persons. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment ensures that they formally obtain land ownership of these facilities given the huge investments which would be involved. Government should also consider revisiting the policy regarding land acquisition for water facilities.

Local authorities should also participate in resolving project site land rights acquisition to prevent delays in work and prolonged compensation periods, which may help to increase community ownership once an intervention has been handed over. 

In conclusion, the committee has noted Government efforts to strengthen institutional capacity for sustainable integrated water resource management, planning, management and development and to improve access and reliability of water services in priority urban centres. It is without doubt that this project will contribute to higher level goals of sustaining natural resources, improving service delivery and increasing economic productivity in the project beneficiary areas and in the entire country at large.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends that this House approves the government request to borrow SDR 87.1 million, which is equivalent to US$ 135 million, from the International Development Bank of the World Bank Group for financing the Water Management and Development Project. I beg to move.  Rt Hon. Speaker, I also have documents which I request to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please start with the report again.

MR MBAGADHI: Rt. Hon. Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow US$ 135 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Water Management and Development Project dated December 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report of the committee.

MR MBAGADHI: Rt. Hon. Speaker and honourable colleagues, I also beg to lay on the Table a copy of the brief to Parliament, which was presented by the minister of the relevant ministry, on the proposal to borrow US$ 135 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Water Management and Development Project.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report of the committee but that particular document is instructive to the Members; so I order that copies be made available to the Members immediately.

MR MBAGADHI: Rt. Hon. Speaker, I also have some documents and among them I have the financing agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the International Development Association dated May to November, 2012. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Similarly, that particular document is important to inform the debate. Copies are ordered to be made immediately available to the Members. 

MR MBAGADHI: I beg to lay on the Table a document entitled, “Project agreement between International Development Association and the National Water & Sewerage Corporation”. It is dated May to November, 2011. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and copies should be made available immediately to the Members also. 

MR MBAGADHI: I also have a document entitled, “Agreed minutes of negotiations between the Republic of Uganda and the International Development Association” regarding the water management and development programme which is dated May 16, 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and I also order copies to be made available to the Members immediately. 

MR MBAGADHI: As a committee, in the course of carrying out our deliberations as mandated, there were a good number of concerns and questions which were raised by honourable colleagues to the ministry. I have a document entitled, “The Report to the Parliamentary Committee on National Economy and Natural Resources.” Embedded in it is a presentation from the Water Management and Development Project. Actually, we have the responses to the questions which were raised by the committee Members. It is dated November, 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are those responses from the ministry?

MR MBAGADHI: Yes, we have responses from the ministry. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture that.

MR MBAGADHI: We also have the minutes of the meeting of the Committee on National Economy held on 6 December 2012, Room 210 Parliamentary building. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the committee.

MR MBAGADHI: Lastly, I have a copy of the minutes of the meeting of the joint committees on National Economy, Natural Resources and Infrastructure held on 20 November 2012. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those special minutes of the joint meeting of the Parliamentary committees mentioned in the report.

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you so much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable  members, as I said, we have also received this and I think we will get an appropriate date for the debate. If Members could get these documents today, we can see if we can handle this matter tomorrow. It is part of the monies that should contribute to our budget which we have passed. If we can handle it, that will be good. If we cannot, that will be handled next year. But I am hoping that we can be able to finalise with this. Once the documents are circulated, we can handle it tomorrow and finalise with it. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, are we now properly constituted to go to committee on the Accountants Bill? I see now the good members of the committee are here. The hon. Emma Boona and the hon. Xavier Kyooma are here. Can they take us through the amendments? Hon. Magyezi, are you a member of this committee? (Ms Alaso rose_) Serere District, are you a member of the committee? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am not a member of the committee but that day - I suppose last week - when this report was presented here, they brought about 30 copies and we asked them if we could have more copies. Again today, somebody has distributed I think less than 12. I continue to miss every other time they distribute in piecemeal. Even as people are proceeding, honestly I have not read the report because every time the copies reach around here, they get finished before I am given a copy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that so?

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is the report on the Accountants Bill. Do you have sufficient copies? Please distribute because we are at committee stage and we will begin with the amendments. Okay, are we competent to go to committee on this Bill so that we deal with the clauses and the amendments? 

MS ALASO: Rt Hon. Speaker, I recall that the last time we talked about this Bill, it was agreed that we would come back and discuss the committee report, not that we go to committee stage. Maybe because I came in late-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is exactly the issue.

MS ALASO: So, it seems the House has already discussed the report of the committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we have passed the second reading of the Bill. We are at committee now. If a Member could guide us – You see, the amendments which are proposed by the committee are very clear amendments and as the minister says, they are in agreement with the amendments proposed by the committee. So, if we are fully constituted, we could proceed. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Matters on the regulation of accountants in this country should get everyone’s attention, especially the attention of this House, before another accountant does what is happening now. I would suggest that we proceed to handle this at the committee stage, especially now that there is not much dispute between Government and the Committee. What would happen in such a circumstance? Wouldn’t  this be one of those amendment Bills that would go with very minimum challenge? 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I apologise for coming in late. I recall the last time we were here, the reports were not enough and you said you will distribute and then we shall debate – (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, when this report was read, I was here. I am the one who said that all members need to get copies and they read through it before we debate. 

This Bill is very important; it is one of the Bills which will help us deal with corruption. If we do not deal with it very well, we are going to have a problem. So, it is my view that we get enough copies, members read it and then we debate first before we can go to committee stage. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Bill is already at committee stage, honourable member. The only debate that can happen is on the amendments. We are at committee stage. We took a vote on the second reading of the Bill. We can now improve on the Bill and bring all those concerns and address them in the specific provisions of the Bill – (Interjections) – We did that today. 

Honourable members, we started on time and we did some work when you were not here. The amendments are clear and there seems to be harmony between the committee and the minister. So, can we go clause by clause and see how much business we can do? If we are unable to proceed, we adjourn – (Interjections) – It is not the report we are passing; it is the Bill we are passing. The stage of the report is finished. Now there are clauses of the Bill that we should deal with; if there are changes, we change. I really would urge Members that if it were possible, we would go and look at the clauses. If there are very serious concerns, we stand over them. Those ones which are not seriously contentious, we pass them. I have tried to mark those which require amendment; they are not even many. So, can we proceed to committee stage. 


BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ACCOUNTANTS BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, if you go to page 10 of the report, you will find the list where the committee amendments begin. So we will be comparing the Bill and the amendments and we see how to proceed. 

Clause 1

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 1 consists of interpretation. We may get more interpretations as we go ahead. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So we stand over clause 1 because there could be other issues that require interpretation. 

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no proposed amendment from the committee. I put the question that clause 2 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 5 by substituting paragraph (d) of subsection 5(1) with the following: “(d) any other category of members as may be determined by the council.”  The justification is that these are professionals whose membership should not be a policy issue determined by the minister. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us deal with that first. Honourable members, is that amendment clear? Honourable minister, do you agree with this? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I agree to the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment from the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, we further propose an amendment to substitute sub clause (5) with the following: “A person who was a full member or an associate member under the Accountants Act, Cap 266, shall be a full member under this Act.” 

The justification is that the profession in Uganda has grown and the contribution of associate members is well known and recognised. Their categorisation as associate members then, under Cap 266, was transitional. It is now time to absorb the current associate members as full members. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not agree on the issue of an associate member becoming a full member. It is like being a dental assistant and now when you make a law it makes you a doctor. An associate member means they are not qualified professionals. So, such a person cannot be made a member at this time. He should remain an associate until he qualifies to be a full accountant. 

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Here, under such a professional course, if you are an associate member you can be a student, for example. To become a full member, you must pass the exams of that profession before you become a full member. Thank you.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also agree with my two colleagues who have spoken before me. The proposal for the amendment was to the effect that a full member is the one supposed to be absorbed as a full member. However, when they come to the explanation, they want to upgrade an associate member to full membership, which is actually contradictory. 

The categories of membership are graduated in three levels. If one completes the examinations qualifying one to be entertained into membership of the institute, then one is just an associate member. However, you also have other examinations and through examined experience and practice, you can grow upwards until you become a full member or a fellow, for that matter. So, in this case, if by law we just promote associate members to full membership, that would be contrary to the practice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, it does seem that the provision as it exists in sub clause (5) would be proper.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am wondering whether looking at the substitute for sub clause (6) would be helpful, though I do agree  – though I am a para-accountant, if it is –(Laughter). Of course, for the honourable members’ information, every lawyer is an accountant of some sort. 

To legislate for an associate to be a full member, even the wording here, I think is wrong. If they say  “a person who was a full member or an associate member”, then why do you even put the distinction? Why don’t you just talk about a person who has passed this examination? 

Actually, when you look at sub clause (6), which is at page 11, they say that an associate member is the one who does not have experience. I thought there should be some pride in this. Anyway, the Leader of the Opposition and many other members here could help us benefit from their wealth of knowledge in the area of accountancy; can I now associate myself as a full member, as a full accountant?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, does that mean that the trend is that we agree with the provision of the Bill as it is in sub clause (5)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, maybe I should throw some light. I am No.32 in the institute. I was registered in 1993. Qualified accountants were at that time made full members. Now, these others who were technicians, who had done some elementary courses in accounts, were the ones who were made associate members at that time. But even at that time, the definition was wrong. To be an associate member, you should have first qualified, then you train for three years to become a full member. That is practical experience. So, even the naming at that time was wrong. 

The associates they are trying to talk about here are technicians. You cannot make a technician a full member. That needs to be redefined. It is right for (6) to be there because after qualifying, you will be given three years to get practical experience and then you become a full member. You cannot make an assistant a full professional accountant. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So (5) as it is, is okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We delete “an associate”. They are saying, “A person who was a full member or an associate member under the Accountants Act”. They are saying those technicians should now become full members. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Chair. I do agree with my colleagues. If you look at the justification on page 10, they say their categorisation as associate members then under Cap 266 was transitional. If it was transitional, it means that they had to fulfil certain conditions. If by now they have not fulfilled them, then you cannot make them members by legislation. I think it is wrong. This should not be there. Thank you, Chair.
  
MR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable members. I want to first digress a bit from the view that is being advanced by the accountants. I am not one, but I also belong to a profession. 

The way it is being presented here, particularly if you look at the substitute for sub clause (6) on page 11, it says “A person is eligible for membership as an associate member of the institute if he or she passes the qualifying examinations conducted by the examinations board but does not have practical training...” I would like to relate this to other professions, and I will talk about two professions just for the sake of comparison. 

In the medical profession, there is an established system where someone after doing a degree course in medicine will have to do internship. It is a compulsory part of the training, and you will not be allowed to practice until you have done that internship. Likewise, in the legal profession, which I know you belong to, Mr Chairman, until you have gone through the Law Development Centre after your degree in law, you will not be allowed to practice. This is institutionally established. 

Now, I want to know from the members, particularly from those in the accounting profession, whether they do have an institution that is established that enables someone who has attained qualifications in accounts to go through before they become a full member, to move from associate member to full member. Short of that, we shall be simply blocking some people from becoming full members. We have not put in place an institution for them to go through but you do not want them to become full members. Unless we have such an institution in place, I think I support the Bill the way it is. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Mutende should have asked to be educated. When you qualify as an accountant, three years are for practical experience. You go to an audit firm and learn the practice. Every year, they will fill a form. If you have done CPA or ACCA, the person who will fill your form will say, he or she completed this number of hours working and he or she has done this well. If you have not got that recommendation from a qualified professional accountant, you will never leave the associate level. 
In the practice, you do not have any more books to read because you have read all the accounting books and you know how to add and subtract. What you need is to practice in order to become a full member, and that is why you are an associate member. 

In the law they made the other time, they got people who had done UDBS in Nakawa and made them associate members. I think they were in a hurry to make the law, and of course the profession was not well known. When they passed the law, whoever was in that category was made an associate member, and they would also sign accounts, which is illegal. At an appropriate time when shall deal with signing accounts, such people should not or are not supposed to sign accounts. So, hon. Mutende, we have practical experience of three years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, is it clear now Members?  

MS TAAKA: Mr Chairman, the accounting profession is a very important profession and we have to follow international accounting standards. We cannot just set anything and we follow that. As he says, unless you are a full member, a public accountant or a private accountant, you are not supposed to endorse the accounts of any firm. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal from the Leader of the Opposition is that sub-clause (5) be deleted.
 
MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The spirit in which this proposed amendment was made was that sometimes even these technicians are found doing the work of accountants. In the circumstance where they doctor the accounts, the misunderstanding will be that the accountants have done that. However, I agree with him that these technicians are not fully qualified accountant professionals. So, I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, honourable minister, should we delete sub clause (5)?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the proposal of membership under clause 5 stands. That amendment had been moved by the chairperson of the committee. That is why I am saying we can get back to the original position, save for the first one we had already passed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, what the Leader of the Opposition said is that the committee’s position should not even be considered; the existing sub clause (5) should be deleted. Isn’t that what you said?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if we first deal with clause 5 in the amendments and we reject it, we can then deal with the original clause 5 in the Bill because there are issues we want to bring up with that clause. They are agreeing, for example – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, let us process it. So, the amendment from by the committee has been withdrawn; isn’t it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That means we get back to the existing sub clause (5). Should it stand?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, sub clause (5) should not stand because they are saying those who were members will remain members and those who were associates will become associate members respectively. But we are also stating that an associate member is a qualified accountant who will be trained for three years to get practical experience to become a member. This means these ones can be referred to as associates but not associate members. I, therefore, move that we delete the words “a full member or an associate” and not “an associate member”. This is because an associate member will be a qualified accountant but only waiting to acquire the practical experience.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, there are associates who have not done accounts -(Interjections)- They have not completed. Okay, is that clear Members? Yes, minister.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the position as moved by the Leader of Opposition. This is because it presumes that those who are associates would automatically become members. That is not correct. They should first fulfil a prescription of what a full accountant should be. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the proposal is to delete the word “member” after the word “associate” wherever it appears in sub clause (5). Is that clear? In other words, “associate member” in the second line of sub clause (5) and the one in the last line should be deleted. Not so?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Mr Chairman. The first one will remain because in the old Act, these were called associate members. Now this time we just name them associates. So, we should only delete the word “member” from the last line.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, the proposal is to delete the word “member” from the last line of sub clause (5). Is that it? So, he just remains an associate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I am trying to say is that in the old Accountants Act, these people were called associate members but in this amended one, they should be just associates.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, honourable  members, I think that is clear. In other words, the new formulation would read as follows: “A person who has enrolled and registered as a full member or an associate member of the institute under the Accountants Act, Cap 266, and who qualifies for membership under this Act shall be a full member or an associate respectively under this Act.”

MR MAGEYZI: Mr Chairman, within that clause you have the words, “and who qualifies to be a member”. By implication, the associate qualifies to be a member. So, he or she should be an associate member. I do not see any problem with that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then not all associates qualify to be members. That is his point. It is only those who have qualified that become members?

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also would like to seek the same clarification because if we just say “associates”, to me using this word is something definitive, something which is a descriptive adjective. If I am an intern doctor, for example, and you say that I should not be called an intern doctor but an intern, that is not clear because there are very many types of interns. So, I wonder whether there is any difference between “associate member” and “associate”. That is my problem. I still think that associate member would still describe the same transitional qualification of the members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we have some understating on this. The difference is that this is not talking about an associate accountant. The membership is through a process. For you to be a full member, you need to go through some process. So you cannot have some people being called associate members; they can only be associates.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, for accountants, when you qualify, you become an associate member. You can only become a member after you have completed your three years’ training. So, when you begin calling those who have done UDBS associate members, it means they will remain associate members. Some people will begin to take them as qualified accountants who are only waiting for the three-year training to become full members. That will confuse some people. They need to be distinct. Whether such a person did a Bachelor of Commerce at Makerere University or not, they should be called associates; that means they are still in the process of becoming members because they have not done the required training.

ME OMACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I concede to the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now that the minister has conceded, I put the question to the amendment as moved by the Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we substitute sub cause (6) with the following: “A person is eligible for membership as an associate member of the institute if he or she passes the qualifying examinations conducted by the examinations board but does not have practical training prescribed by the council.”

The justification is that there are persons who pass qualifying examinations but do not have the required experience for full membership yet they are serving the public without being regulated. These people ought to be regulated and they should be regulated by becoming associate members of the institute.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, as I said, the chairman is trying to bring further amendments on clause 5.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are right. What the chairman would have done is to handle the first one as (a) and then this one would have been (b) of clause 5. Maybe at an appropriate time we will re-number it. 

What he is bringing up, Mr Chairman, is okay. It is very good. The only technicality, which comes in and which I want to ask the chairman about, is that if you have CPA Uganda and somebody has studied CPA Kenya, which is recognised by CPA Uganda or ACCA, how do you treat that person? I ask this because you are saying “examination body of the council”; what about those who have studied and got those other qualifications and want to become members and in these circumstances have not finished their practical experience?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what do we do now because we took a vote on clause 5 as amended but it seems that there were further amendments on clause 5? Otherwise, it will go back to the thing of-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think he is right. You can leave it because Clause 5 was dealing with members who existed in the old Act and now he is stipulating how they should be treated in this new Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that is not my problem. My problem is that we have already voted on Clause 5 as amended-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is where I am going, Mr Chairman. Now they are creating who an associate member is. So, that one is also separate because an associate member in the other old Act meant someone who is an accountant technician. Now they are bringing the right person. That is why they are creating clause 6, which is okay. I think this is a person who would have qualified as an accountant but is waiting for his practical experience to become a full member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, he is proposing to substitute sub clause (6) of clause 5. That is what he is seeking.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mine says, “substitute for sub clause (6), the following...”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, look on top of page 11.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have page 7.	

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On top of page 11.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, mine is page 7 of 20. It is the one they gave us the other time. Page 11 of 26 is different; so, how many documents do we have?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think there is a problem with-

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the report we were first given is not in tandem with the report that has been circulated today. I have two; the one I received first is the same as the one which the Leader of the Opposition has. The one I received today is the one which is updated to 11 of 26, I think. We should have more of those reports because they are there.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I have also looked at the two reports and the page numbering is different but the content is the same.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is one, which is signed on all pages.

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes, that one is on page 11 or page 7 of the first one. I would like to propose that if you have already put the question on clause 5 as amended, unless you are going to amend the rules, we can proceed with your guidance- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, rule 193 says, “A report of a Committee shall be signed and initialled on each page by at least one third of all the members of the committee and shall be laid on the Table.” I think we did this knowingly. We have a report, which was given and which all of us are basing on and it was not initialled. I am told there is a second report. Don’t you think it would be procedurally right to go and harmonise these reports first before we can proceed? Otherwise, in these circumstances, we shall have problems.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, there is one which is signed on all pages but they are the same, basically. The text is the same except the one that is signed on all pages has different numbering. One is single spaced and the other is double spaced; that is the problem. The one that you have, the initial one, is single spaced and the one which is signed on all pages is double spaced. So the page numbering changes but it is the same text. I do not know why it happened that way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have not got this so I need it to be harmonised first before I can proceed.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is true there are two reports but the current report has 26 pages, it is signed on every page and we have copies. Probably those who do not have the one that is signed on every page can access copies because we have copies available now and then we move forward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, these things are the same; one is double spaced and the other is single spaced but the text is the same. I think let us proceed. 

What I was looking at is the proposed amendment to substitute for sub clause (6) the following: “A person is eligible for membership as an associate member of the institute if he or she passes the qualifying examinations…” That is the same with what you were looking at except that it is not clause 6 but sub clause (6) of clause 5. It is the same text. So, that is where I have a problem because we have already passed clause 5 as amended, so we can only recommit it to take further amendments. That would be the proper procedure to take and that was my problem.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not think we need to re-commit. Clause 5 was dealing with members who were in the old Act and now how do we treat them in this new Act? We are saying that in this new Act, those who were full members will remain full members and those who were associate members will be associates. In the next, clause 6, who is an associate member? An associate member is somebody who has now passed qualifying exams, which was not in the old Act. I think clause 6 stands.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me clarify this without debating. You see, clause 5 is on membership of the institute and it has sub clauses (1), (2), (3), (4) and we dealt with (5) which we amended. So, clause 5 is on membership of the institute. Now you have got it. When I asked whether there were any other amendments on clause 5, they said there was none. I think the chairman thought I was talking about clause 5 (5). That was the problem because it was clause 5(5). So, the confusion is understandable. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, you have rightly guided the House to the effect that a vote has already been taken on that, such that clause 5 (6) stands part of the already passed clause 5. So, we could do the same thing that we did for clause 9 in the oil Bill -(Laughter) – and recommit. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that means clause 5 now stands with only two amendments; in (1) (b) and (5). The rest will remain as they are in the Bill now until we recommit the new proposals they are making in (6) and (7). That will be handled by the recommittal. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have no objection to that, Mr Chairman. In clause 5(1) we should maybe insert in (b) the word “associates” because we have now introduced another type of persons called “associates”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  So, not “associate members”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, because associate members are different from associates.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Mark it there so that when we recommit, we put all those things under clause 5. Is that okay? So, clause 5 is passed as of now as amended, and those amendments are in (1) (d) and sub clause (5). Is that okay? So, when we come back, we shall deal with those specific issues and finalise. 

Clause 6

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose to substitute the entire clause with the following: “The meetings of the institute must be held in accordance with the Second Schedule and regulations made under this Act.” The justification is that there is need to provide a framework on how the meetings shall be conducted in the Act since the meetings may precede the issue of regulations.
   
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the chairman should have informed us that they are proposing to insert a new schedule, schedule two, which will regulate the meetings of the institute because there is no schedule two in the Bill but the committee has proposed to insert schedule two, which will deal with the meetings of the institute. So, they are already making a reference to it in the schedule when it is not in the Bill. Is that okay? 

MS KABAKUMBA: I agree with you but I wonder why the committee has opted to use the word “must” instead of “shall.”  I think it would be better drafting if they said, “The meetings of the institute shall be held in accordance with the Second Schedule and regulations made under this Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, that is the language of the law.
 
MR OBOTH: I thought that the honourable member for Bujenje was spot-on.  We have to investigate from where she is enriched with this knowledge in drafting. (Laughter) I believe the chairman was maybe getting ready to concede. “Must” sounds like an accountant’s language – “you must do something” - but they could substitute it easily with “shall” and it would have the same effect. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, I think “shall” would be perfectly in order. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I withdraw the accountant’s language and concede to the legal language, “shall”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, it will read, “The meetings of the institute shall be held in accordance with the Second Schedule and regulations made under this Act.” Is that okay? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, this is a bit new to me - where you pass a clause referring to a schedule that we have not yet seen. It is like a blank cheque. If it had been circulated –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is circulated; it is in this proposed amendment. 

MR RUHINDI: Is it in the report? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, the text is in the main report. 

MR RUHINDI: Most obliged. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. So, can we pass it? I put the question to that amendment in clause 6.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose to insert a new subsection to read as follows: “The Council is headed by a President and a Vice-President.” The justification is that there is need to provide for the leadership of the council. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where do you put that? Where are you proposing to insert that, because it is not clear from your report? 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, according to the original Bill, clause 7 is supposed to refer to the council and then it is supposed to read: “The governing body of the institute shall be the council which shall consist of 13 members as testified in section 8.” However, in this case, we propose to insert a new section that I have read, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is not clear where you want to put this. Do you want to replace this? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, maybe we could help him out. The first one, which is there, could be (1) and then the second one (2) under clause 7, so that it is 7(1) and 7(2). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the spirit? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think that is the spirit. The only issue I have here – I would like to ask the chairperson why he says that the council should be headed by a president and vice-president. It should be headed by a president and deputised by a vice-president. Otherwise, if you put two heads, there will be a problem. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I find the proposal redundant because when you go to clause 8, it gives you the composition of the council and it says, “The council shall be composed of the president, the vice-president...” Now, do you need to be told that the president is the head? 

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thought the Bill’s clause 7 is dealing with the establishment of the council but the proposal he is bringing in here is to do with leadership and yet as the senior counsel, the Attorney-General, has said, the composition is well articulated in clause 8. So, if we want to talk about the leadership and the composition, then it should as well come under clause 8 so that clause 7 is left to establish the council. So, I do not think this proposed amendment is redundant. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is the amendment necessary, Mr Chairman? That is the question.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, clause 7 is meant to provide for the leadership but the composition is supposed to be catered for in clause 8. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes. So, you are proposing that under clause 7, which is the council, there should be, “(1) the governing body of the institute shall be the council which shall consist of 13 members as specified in section 8; (2) the council is headed by the president, deputised by the vice-president.” That is what you are proposing. 

Okay. That is the proposal from the committee. I put the question to that proposal.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, if you agree that we are establishing the council, I think it should be, “The council shall be headed by the president and deputised by the vice-president.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? If the principle is adopted that that would be a proper capture of the language, is that okay? I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under clause 8, we propose to substitute clause (1) with the following: “The Council is composed of – 
(a) three ex-officio members who are the Accountant-General, the Auditor-General and the officer responsible for higher education in the ministry responsible for education. 

(b) 	two members appointed by the minister, one of whom is a member of a profession other than accountancy and the other from a regulatory body established by an Act of Parliament; and 

(c) 	eight members elected by full members, four of whom must be practising accountants.” 

The justification:
 
a) 	Practitioners interface and acquire knowledge from different sectors in the economy, which is useful for the growth of the profession. However, to maintain a proper balance of experience and expertise, the number of those in practice and those in other sectors should be balanced.

b) 	The accountancy profession in Uganda and the public would benefit immensely if the minister’s appointees to the Council are members of another profession other than accountancy and are from other regulatory bodies in Uganda. This is also best practice around the world. 

c) 	The right to vote for leaders of the institute should be limited to full members. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, why would you start the membership with ex-officio members? You say the members shall be constituted by “(a) three ex-officio members”, and then you go to the other members. I thought ex-officio members would be the last ones. 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, it can be proposed as an amendment. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think we could leave the old one and say that the council shall be composed of the president; the vice-president; eight members who are qualified accountants, four from practising accountants, four who are just like accountants in Government or private business; and then these other three ex-officio members.

The justification is that I do not want the minister to be involved. This is a professional body; why should a minister be involved in a professional body which should be regulated by the professionals themselves?  So, I want us to remove the minister. I agree about the Minister of Education because there is an exam which is conducted, so those ones can be there to assist from an examination point of view. The Accountant-General and the Auditor-General are qualified accountants. I do not even know where the term “qualified accountant” is coming from because these ones should also be qualified accountants as per the Constitution. 

So, Mr Chairman, I propose that the council shall be composed of a president, a vice-president - these also must be qualified; it must be put somewhere that they should be qualified accountants - and eight council members. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You need to number it so that it can be captured properly.

MR NANDALA-MFABI: The President-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is (a)

MR NANDALAL-MFABI: So, (a) the president, who should be a qualified accountant - I think we should put it there. Otherwise, they can bring a president who is not qualified.
(b) The vice-president who should be a qualified accountant;
(c) eight other members, four practising accountants and four who are qualified accountants but not I think practising-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we give you more time to draft it properly so that the proposals can be understood better? Drafting straight from there – (Mr Omach rose_) Yes, honourable minister.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to let hon. Nandala-Mafabi know that the minister only appoints two out of 13, and I think this is fair enough.

MR WAIRA: Mr Chairman, I hope that the amendment brought by the Leader of the Opposition does not make the number go to 15. If you add up, you get 13 and when you include the president and the vice-president, you get 15.   

Two, it is okay for the minister to appoint. This council is a big council and the sitting Government needs to be careful. You never know what can happen. So, the government should have a representative appointed by the minister to protect the government’s interest - (Interjections) 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. To supplement what my colleague has said, in view of what the Leader of the Opposition has proposed, I would like to say that the minister is the political head. Two, in his wisdom, he is also going to appoint people who have got some responsibility or understanding of the whole issue that is going to be discussed. Three, we have to be consistent with the various Bills that we have been passing. How do you look at the councils in other various fields? The presence of the minister is reflected by the members whom he is going to appoint, moreover only two. 

So, by merely saying that the minister should not be reflected or his or her views to reflect the political will should not be reflected, this will not match with the format of other councils we have approved. The honourable Leader of the Opposition knows this. We have been here together for a long time. Go to the records and look at various councils which exist in various Bills, you will find that this is the format. So, we want to be consistent with that. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I agree- (Mr Ruhindi rose__) I will get it; just give me one minute. I want to make my case. I come with experience because I belong to many of these professional bodies. I am a member of ACCA - and I am a fellow by the way - and a member of CPA, Kenya. I want to tell you, with confidence, that there is no role for a political person in those respects. This is because these are professional bodies - (interjections) - Give me a chance. I have been here with you for a long time but I want to tell you that this is not football. This is a profession - (Interruption)    

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, much as I have been here for a long time with my colleague from the Opposition, and much as we are talking about this important Bill that has nothing to do with football, and much as I know that my colleague has just come back from a very hectic election which did not augur well with what he wanted; is he in order to mix issues which are not matching with this Bill and confuse the public, knowing very well that I won a trophy on Saturday of CECAFA, instead of being appreciative?  Is he in order? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Chair is not allowed to read beyond what is said. The honourable member said this Bill is not regulating football and indeed, it is not regulating football. Proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, thank you very much for your wise ruling. I think we need to really separate politics from professionalism. If we want –

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give to my colleague on the Floor is that one of these members appointed by the minister is from a professional body other than the accountancy profession because there must be sharing of experiences. This person is coming to enrich the accountants’ council by bringing in this experience. They need not be political, in my own opinion. The other one is from a regulatory body, again to enrich the council by bringing in experiences from these professional bodies. The appointment has to be formalised by the minister. Thank you. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I just want to share the experience of the legal profession and the existence and functioning of the Uganda Law Society and even the Uganda Law Council. 

Actually, the Attorney-General is the head of the bar. In the Uganda Law Society, there are members designated by the Attorney-General to sit there. I think the essence is that first, Government is the biggest employer. Government is the biggest stakeholder. Even when you look at the component of professionals in Uganda, the greatest number is within Government. The practices, setting of standards, much of it is within Government. So, for any profession to prefer to miss out on that experience and interface would be very unfortunate. I think the Leader of the Opposition may wish to reconsider his opinion on that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am going to take hon. Magyezi but before that, I want to help the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General is a qualified lawyer and the Minister of Finance is not a qualified accountant, but I want to help you out. If you pass this, there is a person called the Accountant-General – (Interjections) – Relax! The Accountant-General comes from the Ministry of Finance. That is why he is an ex-officio to represent the interest of the Ministry of Finance. Please (Mr Magyezi rose_) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is going on now? Somebody, the honourable Member for Igara –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I had given way to hon. Magyezi, not him.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition. Whereas I do not have any problem with that provision of the minister appointing two members, I find it strange that we are actually leaving it open. It says, “One of whom is a member of a profession other than accountancy.” The drivers also belong to a professional group. Really, you cannot say that you leave it as open as that. The other is from a regulatory body. Uganda Wildlife Authority, KCCA and so on are regulatory bodies.

Mr Chairman, my proposal here would be, and I also beg that the Leader of the Opposition buys into it, that we need to have the minister appoint two other members but these should be senior members of the accountants’ profession. We should not leave it as open as it is; otherwise, I think we need to look at the minister appointing. I am still looking for the value of that in view of (a) where there is the Accountant-General, there is the Auditor-General and even the Ministry of Education has somebody there. What is the value of two members from the minister?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us first understand this. Is this amendment proposed by the minister, because it is the minister who proposed this Bill? Can we understand if this involvement of the minister is coming from the ministry, because it is not in the Bill which was refined by the minister? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, this proposed amendment of clause 8 is coming from the committee not from the ministry. 

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition. The Accountant-General and the Auditor-General we are referring to as part of the government are ex-officio. From experience here, you realise that ex-officio members are limited to a certain extent. So, they are not going to exercise their powers as members of the council. The minister should have real members on the council and not ex-officio members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, let me help you. The ex-officio members of the council are not like the MPs who come here, who have not gone through an election. The ex-officio members of the council, like the Accountant-General and the Auditor-General, are qualified accountants. Because they are qualified, they have full voting rights - (Interjections) Yes! You go ahead and you will read. It says ahead that a person, other than an ex-officio member, shall become a member of the council by appointment by the minister or by election by members of the institute.” They are trying to put it across there. 

I am giving you an experience from where I come from because I know how the council has been working. Do not make the law for the sake of it. The reason why the Accountant-General is there is because he is from the Ministry of Finance. That is the reason, to represent the Ministry of Finance. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and thank you, LOP, for giving way for this clarification. Are you saying the Accountant-General is representing the Ministry of Finance? I thought you had just stated that he is there in his professional right to be on that council. Are you trying to mean the same thing, that it would not be necessary for the sector ministry to have two special appointees to represent the views? I would think that as the Attorney-General- 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, let me come in here. I think we are discussing the wrong clause with those amendments because clause 8 is only on composition. The appointment is in clause 9. How they are appointed is in clause 9, and it is clear there that the minister will appoint. So, can we deal with the issue of composition, just composition, in clause 8 without talking about who will appoint whom and then deal with the actual appointment in clause 9. Can we deal with composition so that we do not mix up clauses 8 and 9. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I rose on that because it is on that composition that we have two members appointed by the minister, right from the composition. I think that is how the Leader of the Opposition was bringing it in. I would have benefited from that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am even now questioning the amendment by the committee because it is mixing both clause 9 and clause 8; it puts them together. 

MR OBOTH: I think the chair would be right to question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You see, if you put what should be in clause 9 in clause 8, then what is the purpose of clause 9? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, the committee is proposing a deletion of clause 9. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I see. Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, hon. Oboth asked me about the Accountant-General. I think we need to benefit from the Minister of Finance. The Minister of Finance knows that the Accountant-General is at the rank of I think a PS or deputy PS in the ministry, and he is a member of top management of the Ministry of Finance. So, when they are holding meetings, he should be the person in the docket concerning the institute. We do not want to have huge bodies just for the sake of it. 

Even if you put those members on the council, the council must pay fees and sitting allowance, unless the ministry is saying that they will charge sitting allowance on the Ministry of Finance. Otherwise, the Accountant-General represents the Ministry of Finance. Now, the Auditor-General is not part of the Ministry of Finance; he is an independent person and he audits Government bodies. He is there also to see that the issues of auditing are taken good care of. 

In my view, clause 8 as it stands is only to deal with the president, the vice-president and its eight members. We should find out who these eight members are. I think as you said, we can frame it better. We can stand over it. But on the minister participating in the appointments, I do not think it is necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over clause 8 and clause 9 and consult because we cannot begin consultations now. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, as we stand over these, I have noticed that this Bill is gender blind. I would like to propose that as they go to redraft, they put in an element of gender sensitivity, so that when the council is electing, women and other gender should be put into consideration. 

I would like to propose that as you go to redraft, of the eight, let half of them be women and of the two that the minister will appoint, one shall be a woman. You can fine tune it during your redrafting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Let us stand over these clauses and allow hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the chairman and the honourable member for Bujenje to come up with a comprehensive draft when we resume and then we deal with it -(Mr Oboth rose_) Why don’t you take your proposal there? If we have stood over it, then why debate it?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, not debate. Just as she spoke so well about the women, there are many people here we could also speak for, like the people with disability, who should be considered, just to widen the scope. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Please, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the chairman, Member for Bujenje and hon. Oboth, please sit together and come up with a comprehensive draft dealing with both clauses 8 and 9. So, clauses 8 and 9 are stood over.

Clause 10

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We propose to insert a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The election or appointment of members to the council is based on the principle of continuity as prescribed under the regulations made under this Act.” 

The justification is that there is a need to establish an orderly succession mechanism where all elected council members do not have to retire at the same time. There is need to ensure continuity as well as injection of new ideas. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In other words, the existing clause becomes sub clause (2)? 

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Chairman, I was looking at clause 10(1) and they want to insert a new sub clause (2) and then they talk about continuity. I need further clarification from the chairperson. When they say that in order to ensure continuity and inject in new ideas, the council should not terminate their period at the same time, I would like to know how are they going to decide that X and Y remain, wait for the new breed and let these others leave because their term of three or five years has elapsed. This is confusing me. 

We are appointed in the same period, same date, and the term is three years. Now when we end the three years, you use this provision to say, “Nandala, because you are stubborn-  (Laughter) – I am just giving an example, not necessarily you. They say, “You stop here, let the others proceed because we want continuity”. There is vagueness here. Much as I support the idea of continuity, will it be implemented? Please, make it clear in the law. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the principle is good but it is already inbuilt in this existing provision that has been put in. For as long as there is credibility for a person to be reappointed for another term of three years – By the way, Mr Chairman, we need to put the expression “only” at the end to avoid court battles. 

You see, in that kind of reappointment, the process of continuity is taken care of rather than creating a provision like this, because how do you implement that which is being proposed by the chairman? I know he has got good intentions, but how do you operationalise this matter? I think eligibility is based on efficiency. It is not automatic. For instance, if all of them have not performed well, you cannot sustain the principle of continuity; you put them aside and elect others. So, it is already inbuilt. 

MS KABAKUMBA: To resolve this lacuna, I know that in this House we have passed Bills that have this principle and what we said was for the pioneers we put a certain number, say eight, and out of the eight maybe three will serve for only two years and then they will be eligible - (Interjections) – This is not the first time we are doing this. If you want, tomorrow I can bring evidence and lay it on the Table. We say that they will serve for two years and then they will be eligible, so that at the end of the six years those who served two will finish after five years and those who served three will finish after six years, so that there is continuity. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, my problem is this - this law was made at the time when accountants were few and now they are many. Let me give an example. If the president is going to serve for three years and then the your vice-president becomes the next president and serves for another three years, in 30 years it will only be members of the council serving, and that is very dangerous. 

I want us to change so that these people serve for one year, just like in the law society - (Interjections) - or two years. We will have to reduce this because three years are very many. Mr Chairman, we need to harmonise this. I want to request the chairman of the committee that we look at the practice in other professional bodies. I think with lawyers, they are few and that is why they put two years but accountants are very many. With three years, it means that some of us will never be president. (Laughter)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Let me start with this; a council is not a swimming pool, that because there are many who want to come and swim, you spend 30 minutes there. That is not the purpose. They make policies. Surely, you are not serious – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I respect my brother, hon. Bakkabulindi, because I have been with him for long and I know him. What I know about him is that in his life, he has no profession. You do not belong to any professional body. (Interjections) Maybe pick pocketing! I know many councils. I know that a council is not a swimming pool. Is hon. Bakkabulindi in order to say that I, Nandala-Mafabi, understands a council to be a swimming pool and yet I know that the council of the institute of accountants consists of qualified professional accountants? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Again, I am not going to read beyond the statements. I will take the statements as they are. The honourable member is the minister in charge of sports. So, he is making allusions to things that he understands very well.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I will not drag my colleague to tell him that I am a Masters Degree holder, and not just that but by being a minister, I am also in charge of appointing boards on which you have never been. So, when I talk, I am talking with experience. 

That aside, what I want to say is that the tenure of office, say three, two or one year as he wants, which is impossible, is subject to renewal. When we say it is subject to renewal, that means at the end of the period, in the wisdom of the minister or the appointing authority, you see those who have performed and then add on more force, other than drafting it the way it is here. That is what I wanted to propose.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a problem when we get to adopt this drafting style. Whereas I understand the principle - the intention is good - but having a law of this kind would even tempt Parliament, for the sake of continuity or the principle of maintaining or retaining institutional memory, to start amending even the Constitution that would take away the powers of voters and electors because we have said you cannot vote out everyone in Parliament. 

I think that freedom should be left to those who are going to elect. Really, if we get to legislate on this, Mr Chairman, the fear is that this would be seen as a manipulation by those who are intending to get into power. If this Parliament gets to approve this, there is no harm in moving a proposal to amend the Constitution so that we continue with those who are there in Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this clause is also stood over. That makes three clauses in a row stood over. This would be a proper time for us to suspend these proceedings. 

While the honourable minister is coming; the people I have assigned, do consultations, including on clause 10, and we see how we can harmonise on this.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Accountants Bill” and has considered clauses 2,3,4,5,6,7 and has stood over clauses 8,9 and 10.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have passed those clauses with amendments, clauses 2 to 7. 

MR OMACH: Clauses 2 to 7 have been passed with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will proceed with this Bill tomorrow. As I instructed, let us do those things so that when we come back to committee, we can move quickly.

I have some requests from Members. I have the honourable Member for Serere and hon. Majegere.

5.10
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek both assurance and clarification from Government in regard to the status of payment of pensioners. 

We all know that the last few months have been very difficult months for pensioners. For some of them, we got to know they had spent up to six months without getting any pay and then we hear some have been paid and others have not been paid. Mr Speaker, these are very distinguished citizens of this country. They served very faithfully. I am sure the reason they cry for their pension is that they really did not pile up wealth elsewhere. So, they must have been very honest people. 

Now the Christmas season is coming. I would like to know from the honourable Minister of Finance or someone in Government whether they are up-to-date, whether they have been paid up to this month or last month. Two, I would like to know whether they will give them prompt payment so that they can also enjoy Christmas like the rest of the people in this country. 

I think they are entitled to their money. The amount of pleading that these pensioners go through to get Shs 100,000, which is like pocket change in this country, is really not necessary. If Government could assure me and indeed the pensioners, that by Christmas they will be able to afford a kilogramme of meat after being paid their pension for December, I will be very grateful. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have something to say?

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I can only report back on this matter after consulting. However, to the best of my knowledge, the Ministry of Finance has already made the releases. So, I have to consult with the Ministry of Public Service to get the latest data. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, will that be tomorrow? Okay, thank you. 

5.13
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This matter is to do with the Musita-Namayingo Road. This road is in a very bad state. Besides serving farmers, it is also an international road because it is an alternative road to and from the Kenyan border.

Secondly, the guest we are expecting in this Parliament on Thursday, while in Busoga in 1996 promised to tarmac the Musita-Namayingo Road –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By saying the guest we are expecting, are you referring to the President?

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Yes, His Excellency the President. Mr Speaker, in 2001 when the President was in Busoga, he again promised to tarmac the same road. In 2006, he made the same promise and the same happened when he went there in 2011.

As Busoga leaders, when we visited H.E. the President at his home in Rwakitura, this road issue was high on the agenda. In his response, the President promised to tarmac it this financial year. However, we are in December now and almost halfway the financial year. I have been talking to the Minister Works and Transport on telephone and personally in corridors, but only getting varying answers.

Mr Speaker, I now beg that the Minister of Works and Transport – unfortunately, he is not here – to take immediate intervention, given the current state of the road. Two, he should explain to Ugandans or update us on the status of tarmacking the Musita-Namayingo Road. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Those are the two issues I was notified on. For Members who are rising now, when you want to raise a matter of national importance, you have to first see the Speaker. I cannot allow discussions that I have not been consulted upon. That is unprocedural. So, I will not allow any. 

Honourable members, please, take the message to the Minister of Works and Transport that there is this question on that road in Mayuge District, which should be handled. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 December 2012 at 2.00pm.)


