Wednesday, 2 February 2005

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, on 16th November 2004, proceedings of this House for the first time in Ugandan parliamentary history were broadcast live on a private television station, Wava Broadcasting Services (WBS). On that occasion, many of you raised concern that the coverage could not cover your constituencies. Indeed it was restricted to television coverage only. The Parliamentary Commission took your concern seriously and caused action the result of which is that effective today, Radio Uganda, Uganda Television, will broadcast live the proceedings of this House countrywide (Applause). There is now established a permanent link between Parliament and Uganda Television and Radio Uganda studios. The Government of Italy provided funds to procure the necessary equipment under the project to improve the Parliamentary Information System, which is being implemented through the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.  

On that note honourable members, I wish to recognize the presence of His Excellency, Maurizio Teucci, the Italian Ambassador to Uganda and the Director of Italian Development Corporation – (Applause) and through His Excellency, thank the Italian Government and the Italian Chamber of Deputies for the assistance rendered to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause). Parliament wishes to thank the Department of Information in the Office of the President as they work tirelessly to effect the new development.  

Honourable Members, Parliament will not meet the cost of the live broadcast because the fee that would have been charged has been waived by the Ministry of Finance. (Applause).

Parliament is extremely grateful to Wava Broadcasting Service Television (WBS) for having pioneered live broadcast in Uganda, limited as its coverage was until now when Uganda Television and Radio Uganda have come on board.  This is indeed a very important step towards bringing together Parliament and the people so that the people will be following what is going on here. Thank you very much.

On a sad note, I have received information from Pan African Parliament concerning the death of Al Hajji Abdul Aziz, fourth Vice President of Pan African Parliament. It is with deep sorrow to announce the tragic death of Abdul Aziz on 11th January 2005 while on official mission to Accra, Ghana.  Therefore, I think it is proper that we stand to observe a minute of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

2.56
MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Aware that this country entirely depends on revenue from tourism and given the endless efforts by the Government to attract as many tourists as possible to this country, I become constantly disturbed by some companies that are taking advantage of this work. For example no one can understand why if people are going to Bujagali falls are charged much money just to go and see that site. 

Through my investigation, I found out that it is one single company which apparently is run by Mr Sudhir or others that any tourist who has to go and see these falls, assuming it continues to be like that before we build the dam; you have to pay money. As if that is not enough, there is actually nothing that is provided on the ground from which the company can claim that it needs money for the services it provides. 

So, Mr Speaker, I just wanted to join other people in claiming that these people are actually robbing Ugandans and foreigners for no good reason. Assume they charge Shs 3,000 per person to see the falls and Shs 2,000 per car that passes there, and assuming that there is nothing on the ground that is provided, it is none other than broad day theft, Mr Speaker. That is why I would like to call upon the Government to look into this matter.  

There are also other sites where tourists are charged, including Ugandans by the way, to see their own natural resources, for example, the source of the Nile. But when you look at the source of the Nile you can see something on ground, for example, the lawn is well cut, the hedges are well trimmed. So, you can see that at least what is charged, there is something that is done out of the money. But when you look at Bujagali Falls, Mr Speaker, if you have never been there, take time to go there you will see how people are robbing money from Ugandans. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Since we have a committee dealing with the subject, it should examine this and then advise us.

2.58
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make just a small comment regarding the Communication from the Chair, especially regarding the issue of the Vice President of the Pan African Parliament, whom you have recognized and we have observed a minute of silence in his honour.  

Mr Speaker, the Pan African Parliament has a President and four Deputies, who represent regions, and for the sake of the East African Region where we have the President, it is not represented by a Vice-President. So, we have Vice Presidents in charge of Northern, Western, Southern and Central; and the person who passed away, the one we have just recognized, was representing Western region of Africa. He has been very industrious; he was a lawyer by profession and was a very able Vice Chairperson, who in our recent session played a very vital role in steering the work of the session.  He died in Accra on official duty.  Given that we are not full time, while we are away in our countries, it is the practice that the Vice Presidents can transact business on behalf of the Parliament; and it was on such duty in Accra where he was representing the Pan African Parliament that he met his death. 

So, on behalf of my colleagues, I would like to thank you for this gesture, for having even initiated the idea of this Parliament recognizing this Son of Africa who has played his own part in making a contribution to the continent, and putting it on record of the Ugandan Parliament. I would like just to express our gratitude and to put it on record that it is indeed something that we are very proud of.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.02
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just returned from my constituency last evening. When I was there I was confronted with two matters, which I thought would be of importance to this Parliament. The first one is the non-payment of salaries of LDUs. Everywhere I went there have been lots of complaints and yet we as Parliament have passed money to cater for the Auxiliary Forces. It would be important for Parliament to bring this to the attention of Government so that these people, who are sacrificing so much, get paid on time.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in the year 2000 there was a move to register former soldiers from the colonial days. In places like my constituency that is far from Bombo, people sold goats and things like that, borrowed money with the expectation that they would come to Bombo get registered and would get some kind of terminal benefits. When I went home I was extensively confronted with this because they are saying that they are again being told that they should come to Bombo to register so that their benefits are paid. It would also be important in the early stages now for Government to say something about this so that we can tell our constituents either not to borrow money or not to unduly build their expectations that they will get money soon.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, in the functions that I have been to, something out of the ordinary continues to happen. I had in my meetings deployed what they called military informants, who were there to record what I was saying, and to transmit this to the Army Command. In one of the meetings in Pader District near the Fifth Division headquarters in a place called Arum, I actually sat with a full Lieutenant and an intelligence person. Yesterday on my way I was called that, that Lieutenant was summoned to go and submit a report on what I said in the meeting. I met hon. Ocula in Gulu and I found - he is here, he could probably speak for himself - that at one stage he was even stopped from continuing to a rally that he had scheduled.  

I raised this because arising from what happened to us, Mr Speaker, it would therefore seem important that the committee that you set up does its work quickly so that the people on the ground, particularly in our areas there, understand that we as Parliamentarians have the right to meet our constituents and explain to them whatever we are supposed to as Members of Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we spent two hours on this, now we are starting all over again. I will stop on hon. Kidega.

3.05
MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I also returned last evening from my constituency, in particular Gulu.  Mr Speaker, I am rising on a matter that came from your communication. I would like to add my voice to thank the Parliamentary Commission for hooking the Parliament on the network of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television. But, Mr Speaker, you remember it was on this Floor that hon. Wadri Kassiano very categorically put it to the Minister of Information about the absence of Uganda Television network in the North. While I was consulting with my electorate I explained to them the achievements of Parliament, one of them being Parliament being televised live in this country. I was almost lynched by my voters because they said I was lying.

Mr Speaker, it is on a very serious note that I like to put this plea to the Minister of Information, that in this era of technology and globalisation, how can almost a quarter of a country remain in a total blackout on a television network? The North is already dogged by a lot of social evil, now the Parliament is on Uganda Television, but our electorate are still going to remain in darkness; even Radio Uganda is very scanty. I think we should take this as a matter of urgency. I know it could be beyond the jurisdiction of the Commission, but the ministry should do something.  I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE WHITE PAPER

3.08
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I am standing up to make a contribution to the report of the legal and Parliamentary affairs on the White Paper and constitutional review and political transition. Mr speaker, I want to begin by wishing you a happy new year although belatedly and to all Members of Parliament.  

Secondly, I wish, on behalf of the people of Kagoma, to thank the Sempebwa Commission very sincerely for the wonderful work it did in collecting ideas from all over Uganda and making recommendations on possible constitutional changes.  I also want to commend the work of our legal and the Parliamentary Affairs committee for the good work they did in sensitising both the Ssempebwa Commission report and the Government White Paper.  The committee did a great job for which we should all commend them. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda has had not less than five constitutions within a space of 42 years only.  This means that on average we have had one constitution for every eight years, which in itself may be contributing to some political and social problems in this country. Hence, my first appeal to all honourable members is that we debate the anticipated constitutional changes with great care.  

Mr Speaker, in case some Members are not sure of the five Constitutions we have had since independence, let me remind them of these constitutions. There was the 1961/62 Constitution for internal self government, there was the 1962 Constitution which Milton Obote discarded.  Incidentally, he swore on 9th October at Kololo Air-strip “to maintain and uphold the Constitution of Uganda”. In 1967 we had another Constitution and today we are debating the 1995 Constitution.

Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way, Dr Nabwiso. Since you are talking about the history of this country, every serious Ugandan values constitutionalism in this country. Therefore, the information I want to give you is that there was also another Constitution known as the 1966 Pigeon Hole Constitution, we should not jump it because it is important and significant.

DR NABWISO: Thank you for reminding me about that, it is 1961/62, 1966, 1967 and 1995 Constitutions.  Mr Speaker, in my contribution I would prefer to focus on three issues because this is a very -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Incidentally, honourable members, we should agree on time; it will not be open ended. I think you should take about seven minutes, because eventually when we come to the real Bill, you may have to agree on ten minutes. [Hon Members: Ten minutes.]. Ten?  Okay.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My first point is on page 3, it is the point that the committee made regarding the need to show national interest above self and party. The committee said, we therefore, resolve from the outset that our supreme guiding star unchanging like the true North of the magnet would be the enduring interest of the people of Uganda. They went on to say prejudices were abandoned as we discovered how much we cared about our people. 

Mr Speaker, I believe that this Parliament cares about the people of Uganda, 25 million people today. But I wish that the committee had also looked at the observations of the Ssempebwa Commission on our national Motto and I would like to read those comments. Mr Speaker, the Commission said, this is on page xxiii, one memorandum proposed that the country’s motto be changed from for God and my country to go for God and our country. The reason given is that the nation is pluralistic and composite term. The motto should therefore be made to reflect the collectiveness of our national being. 

Mr Speaker, many people in Uganda believe that this motto has changed; that the emphasis is now for God and my stomach. I would like to emphasize that this is extremely important because I am beginning to read very scaring remarks for Members of Parliament. Of course, we do not want to quote newspapers, but today in the Monitor one Member of Parliament is alleged to have said that power should not leave western region of Uganda. If that is the spirit in which we want to run the affairs of this country, I think we should give up and leave this country to run to the dogs. Mr Speaker, I believe that all Members gathered here will never allow this to happen. 

When I joined the National Resistance Movement (NRM) in 1981, it was because I was assured that the NRM was started to fight all forms of dictatorship. I was not given the impression that the NRM was going to be a tribal thing, and I would like to appeal to those who believe that they want to use the Movement to support their own tribal or ethnic interest, to stop that kind of thing; we should all be nationals -(Interruption)

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, I would like to correct the impression, for some of us who come from Western region, that those are – the Member of Parliament who is being quoted in The Monitor, hon. Muzoora from Rwampara - that those are his views -(Interjections)- well, I do not believe it, those are hon. Muzoora Kabareebe’s views. If he thinks NRM should belong to a clique of westerners, that is his view or his views; it cannot be a view of all westerners. Thank you.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, the second point I want to focus on, and which will be my concluding point, is from page 27 to page 29.  Mr. Speaker, this concerns the issue as to the limit on the number of terms the President can serve.  Mr Speaker, I have been reading a lot of documents and there are a lot of contradictory statements; and I would like to make an appeal to this Parliament and to you, Mr Speaker, and if it is possible that His Excellency, the President, comes to Parliament or uses the State to the Nation Address in May to clear these contradictory statements –(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Point of order. Mr Speaker, in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, we have prescribed codes of dressing in terms of attire to match with our dignity as Members of Parliament; and it has never come to me that a Member of Parliament, apart from what is prescribed generally, could endeavor to wear a kisanja in his coat pocket.  My neigbour here –(Laughter)- carries a kisanja in is coat pocket, and I wanted to know whether it is a new style of attire.  So, is it in order for a Member of Parliament, far from what is prescribed in our code, to dress in a manner, which gives an impression that he is either a wizard or –(Laughter)- and being so close to him, could I not bewitched? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, it could be a new form of dressing.  What rule does it contravene?  Proceed.  

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I was making an appeal that His Excellency, the President of Uganda, should come and clear these contradictions because they are derailing this country. The issue of the proposal to delete Article 105(2) is causing a lot of problems in this country. The President in his own book, Sowing the Mustard Seed on page 215 said among other things, that as early as 1997 there were already people of presidential calibre in this country who could run this country. In 2001, in his manifesto he said he was standing for the last time. In another book called What is Africa’s Problem? he said one of the problems in Africa is people who want to remain in power.  These issues should be clarified, does President Museveni want a third term or not? Let the man speak for himself, the Kagoma people have asked me to seek clarification.  

Mr Speaker, my last comment is that since the Prime Minister is here he should also help to clarify –(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Point of order. Mr Speaker, can you please protect me here. One Member is accusing another here and there is a big battle. Can you, Mr Speaker –(Interjection)- one is accusing the other that, “Your boss Obote did not want Lutwa to give power to the West and I was quoting Obote” - I am confused, Mr Speaker, please help us.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you are protected, but let us be courteous to hon. Dr Nabwiso and listen to his contribution.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I was appealing to the Prime Minister also to clarify if it is true that it is sycophancy ruining Africa as reported in The Monitor and what advise he can give to this country on how to deal with sycophancy so that we can let this country move in the right direction.

MRS KAROORO OKURUT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, some of my colleagues are rightfully pointing out the linguistic issue in this House. What does the word to “cling” mean? To hang on, to cling means you are doing so without the peoples mandate - absolutely. Mr Speaker -(Interjection)- in all the dictionaries.  

Mr Speaker, the issue of asking the President whether he wants to go for a third term or not - it cannot be people to ask him. If you got a party - I am just giving an example - say “Forum for Dangerous Change”. This is hypothetical. Mr Speaker, you cannot –(Interjection)- if such a party existed, you cannot ask people whether they are standing or no; it is the party itself to choose it’s own candidates. So, to say that the President should be asked whether he is standing or not is erroneous.  He cannot be the one; it is the Party to choose its own candidate and we should put the record straight –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, thank you my hon. colleague. Could you kindly tell me and the august House whether in the Movement, especially NRM “Zero”, you have anybody at all capable of replacing Museveni.  Do you have anybody at all?

MRS OKURUT: Mr Speaker, first of all, there is no NRM “Zero” as my hon. colleague is putting it –(Interruption)

MR MUTUMBA: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. But the Constitution refers to a person whether he is in a certain party or he is in a Movement or he is in a bus or it is a person who is referred to in the Constitution. Once you have stood twice, that is the end of you and then we go for another one.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you for that clarification. Mr Speaker –(Interjection)- yes, but there are so many other articles which are under review. Any article can be amended; it can be debated.  So, what is so particular about this one?  

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you hon. colleague for giving way. I do believe people who have learnt environments and the global trend we are in, it is normal and natural to a human being that change is a fact of life and I believe one of the constitutions which have lasted long, the American Constitution, has lasted for almost 200 years. It has been amended 27 times. That means every seven years they amend depending on the environment of that particular country. So, I find no harm that if Ugandans feel there is something to change within the Constitution which has lasted 10 years, I think they are much obliged to do that. 

MRS OKURUT: Thank you. I am winding up, Mr Speaker. And ours is just a young nation.  So, the question of asking the President to declare is not within his powers. The NRM shall declare its presidential candidate when the time comes. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala):  Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. I want also to take this opportunity to thank and congratulate the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for a very detailed report. I want also to congratulate them upon the method of work they adopted and on the way they related with each other, such that they were able to bring this very balanced report.

Mr Speaker, allow me also to appreciate the Minister of Constitutional Affairs then, hon. Janat Mukwaya who was able to bring before this House the White Paper and also appreciate you Rt. hon. Speaker who gave us the opportunity to go back to consult our constituents.  

Mr Speaker, I had the opportunity to consult my constituents.  (Interjection)- Yes, I got the money. (Laughter).  Yes, I got the money and I have no regrets because I used that money.  Mr Speaker, I have five divisions in Kampala namely Kampala Central, Nakawa, Lubaga, Kawempe and Makindye. But in there, there is Makerere University and Kyambogo University and normally they are treated as constituencies.  Mr Speaker, I had an opportunity to hold consultative meetings at divisional levels in all the 8 constituencies I have talked about and I had a very, very impressive turn-up.  

Mr Speaker, I wanted to give this information on the Floor because as you hear Members talking about the Shs 5 million, they do not recognize how much is put in this consultative process. A lot was put in.  (Interjection)- Accountability, is true.

Mr Speaker, the White Paper was a technical document. I appreciate that there was a lot which was relatively simplified, taking on the recommendations of the Constitutional Review Commission and bringing in what the Government responds with that respective recommendation.  There were many recommendations some of which were direct, others relatively contentious, and others very contentious.

Mr Speaker, the approach I used enabled me to be to derive some relative consensus on some of the contentious issues. But what I also appreciated was that many of our population or electorate were not properly informed about many of these issues. That is why even the White Paper itself was in some quarters termed a Black Paper which in itself is a process of delivering what has been generated at a level of a commission report up to the level of coming to Parliament as a Bill. It is within that process, but in some quarters it was termed a Black Paper.

Mr Speaker, in the process of consultation I was able to list some of the issues which were contentious which had been derived from the Ssempembwa report and which Government had responded to. Among the many included the change from the Movement System to the Multi-Party Political System, the relationships between the arms of government namely the Executive and the Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary; the operation of Parliament which included basically the qualifications of Member of Parliament, the remuneration among others. 

These were very contentious issues: The Presidential term, the Parliamentary and Local Council elections, the decentralization concept vis-à-vis the federal, the death penalty; the question of dual citizenship and many people in Kampala were so interested in it; the issue of traditional and cultural leaders; and those of land, national language and others. 

Mr Speaker, I went through that list to say that the committee did a commendable job, but of course within the very little time of two weeks we had, we may not have been able to touch on all of those aspects.  

I want to report, Mr Speaker, that when it comes to the relationship between the Executive. My electorate respects the concept of separation of powers, and they think that it would be prudent that the Executive and Parliament, and Executive and the Judiciary should exercise their independence in doing their work. But more importantly, there must be a relationship, which is cordial and reciprocal. 

On the issues of dissolution of Parliament, my electorate were of the view that it should not be the President to dissolve Parliament, but it should be a question to be put. That very question, which is contentious, should be the one which should be put on the referendum; and then at an appropriate time after the results, that is what should determine who should be the loser in that context. And circumstantially they maintain that the Parliament and the Executive should have their independence.  

Mr Speaker, also the issue of elections became very contentious, but more importantly where the Army could be called upon to assist in the election. Many of my voters were of the view that it is true that this country may not have the adequate Police capacity to monitor all the polling stations. But it is also imperative that when you introduce the Army in the election process, it may, for instance, reflect that there is a case of insecurity or insurgency. So, they think that Police capacity should be built to the maximum so that Police is in position to man all the polling stations.  

Mr Speaker, my electorate were very keen on seeing to it that the qualifications of Members of Parliament are maintained, particularly when it comes to the issues of the Uganda National Examination Board vis-à-vis that organization, which is to verify the qualification.

Mr Speaker, also my constituents were very particular about the term limit. They said, it is good that the Sempebwa Commission and Government agree on the issue of the term limit to be lifted, but they say let this question be put to the population. 

Mr Speaker, I am bringing these issues because of the opportunity you gave us to consult. They say it is true that Parliament has that mandate, but it is also equally true that this issue has become contentious. And since it is contentious, can the population be given the opportunity to be consulted on this matter? And since we are looking towards the population for consensus then that should be the way to go.  

They asked, finally, that the issue of traditional leaders is so central but there are highly mixed up with the form of governance, namely, federal and decentralization. They applaud the decentralization process and policy, but they still feel that for areas, which can look at the federal arrangement for governance, they should be considered. They think that there can be such arrangements, which can be derived by amending Article 5 of the Constitution and those powers are given, and maybe not to use the word ‘regional’ but be given federal arrangements similar to what is happening in Nigeria and other areas.

Mr Speaker, they applaud the national language, that -(Interjection)- the people of Kampala, and I have the number of those who attended. But specifically the youth said they were disappointed that all these issues do not attract the question of employment policy or they do not talk about the welfare in terms of provision of their employment and employment security. That is quite unfortunate because at the time of making of the Constitution, issues of peace and governance were very crucial. Today, they think that these issues are more or so guaranteed, what about the question of employment, which is so central? They think that the youth, the Army, and the women should be left in Parliament as the status quo remains.  

As regards the size of Parliament, they think that let the Government proposal remain, let the size of Parliament remain; and they think that when it comes to the women, let the status quo remain.  What was proposed by the Sempebwa Commission and what was proposed by Government was an exaggeration, it is not realistic; and as you go on the ground, it will be seen that we should not be able to create super constituencies -(Interruption)

MR OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to understand from you, Mr Speaker, if we are delegates or representatives, because the way hon. Zziwa is presenting her report is like she is a delegate. But I would imagine there must be a difference between delegates and representatives or Members of Parliament. So, probably you guide this Parliament how we should proceed, because besides the views of my people, I hold certain individual views and in any way I should not be sacrificed that and say your people think that way. So, are we quantitative representatives or qualitative representatives?

THE SPEAKER: While I appreciate the difference between a delegate and a representative, because I happen to have been a delegate, I participated in the formulation of the Constitution. I was a delegate, now I am a representative, but the only contradiction is that a representative could disagree with his people and there is no harm.

MRS ZZIWA:  Mr Speaker, as I started I appreciated you having accorded us this opportunity.  This is going to be a very good feedback. We did not have the opportunity to go back to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to make our input at that juncture.  This is the time when we make a feedback of what we had to meet when we went out.

I want as I conclude, because my colleague thinks that as we come to debate the bill we shall be able to now deal with the issues as they are.  But now we are dealing with this report with all the views, which came to the people given to us, because we even did not have the opportunity to discuss the Constitutional Review Commission Report as given to us by the Minister, as laid on that Table.  So, I think this is the very opportunity and my people of Kampala have the right in this House to have their views heard.

As I wind up, I want to – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But let us abide with time we have agreed on.  Wind up then.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to wind up by thanking the Committee and also asking that my constituents still feel that the issues of human rights, issues of death penalty, issues of children and other marginalized people’s rights should be critically addressed.  Many of these issues were sort of overlooked.  I thank you Mr Speaker and at an appropriate time I will make amendments.

3.45
MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari county, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am Retired Major Kazoora from Kashari- (Laughter)-I would like to thank the Committee for this wonderful behaviour in the report and I believe my honourable colleagues will read it and internalise it.  

On page one of the report, the second paragraph, it reads, “The Constitutional review process that we are embarking on is a major political landmark in the political history and economic development of our country.  The outcome of this process will be judged on whether or not it promotes national stability, good governance, constitutionalism and economic prosperity for our country.” I thought this is a very important opening statement and I only pray and wish that my colleagues will appreciate the impact of this observation.  

On page 3, just the subtitle: “Reason as a guiding principle.” The Committee agreed that members would use reason and sound logic in tabling their positions. As we start this debate, I want to state that I agree with this position, that let us put prejudices aside, we are about to determine the destiny or the future of this country, and it should be reason and logic that we follow.  

I say this with a heavy heart. On Friday we are going to re-bury two citizens of this country in my cell in Kashari, one being the former Army Commander of NRA and his brother the late Martin Luther Mwesiga.  This goes all over the country, instability and some emanating from Parliament.  You can imagine a Member of Parliament standing on the Floor of the House and say, “I have not read the Pigeon Hole Constitution, but I support it.”  It is sad, we should learn from our history to avoid this blood shade in this country.  When we are starting this debate, because I saw the kind of exchanges that had started. You are talking of a Constitution; you are tying it to an individual; that is cheap.  Let the individual fit in the Constitution not the other way round.

Mr Speaker, on same page 3, “National interest above self and party”.  This committee did good work, just about in the middle they say, “As individuals we have interests and even as members of political parties we are party to partisan positions.  These interests, we found occasion to declare boldly before the Committee - and this is the emphasis – But when decision time came, we measured them alongside the national interest and more often than not the national interest rang true and all of us without exception, faced moments when we had to abandon strongly held positions when the bright light of reason and national interest was shown.”  Another important statement as we start this process, the nation is calling on us and we are duty bound by national interests and nothing else.   

The report is big and the White Paper is also big. I will just highlight some few issues and leave the rest for the bill.  But let us look at the background of the White Paper from the Ssempebwa Commission set by the Executive Arm of Government under the Inquiry Act and in the White Paper for those of you who have it, the references to the Commission are on page 3, they run through page 4 to page 5.   

Government gave a duty to a certain commission and it appointed the commissioners.  Then before the commissioners could report to Government, Government took their views led by His Excellency the Vice President.  What is this process, because it is susceptible; and I want to congratulate you, Mr Speaker, because you prevailed on us and said this report is coming to Parliament, we are going to debate it.  Now if you take your views, how would we debate?  If they put in their views, they should leave this House and then we debate it because they have already taken sides on this matter, and, therefore, this cannot be the question of national interest. 

Mr Speaker, I will talk about the issue of third term, but let us look at other issues before we go to the issue of third term. The issue of good governance, which is put here in the opening remarks of the committee, and let us reflect because you have just told us what we know, that you were delegate in the Constituent Assembly, why the Constituent Assembly precisely prescribed roles of Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary.  Now, what is recommended shamelessly by Government in the White Paper that the President should dissolve Parliament; and you see Members of Parliament who have been in school supporting that position.  What was the purpose?  

You know, Mr Speaker, you were the Chairman of the Commission, those of you who were in the Sixth Parliament, you know what we went through to establish the Administration of Parliament Act; there were reasons and Government shamelessly proposes that let there be a remuneration committee.  They want to pull your “other things” I do not want to mention here.  You cannot debate independently when your remuneration is determined elsewhere; it cannot be with you or with other people to come.  There must be reason for good governance; this is done everywhere in Commonwealth countries.  

Look at the White Paper, it is essentially targeted against Parliament- dissolve Parliament, determine the remuneration of Parliament, reduce the powers of Parliament to censure a Minister - what am I here for?  I am here as an overseer of the people of Kashari, therefore, you cannot say that the power should be taken elsewhere, why?  Then somewhere they say, “Give the President some legislative powers” and they mention quite a number of fields.  Why does he or she not stand for a Member of Parliament if she or he wants those legislative powers because the roles are very clear, you are either a President or you are a Member of Parliament. I would be surprised if time comes and you members support that kind of position, it will be sad for this country. 

Then on page 18 in the White Paper, they talk - of course, this has been a contentious issue of whether ministers -(Interruption)

MR AACHILLA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to my Colleague, hon Kazoora, that while he is discussing this report, it will help the House that most of the comments you are giving about the White Paper or what Cabinet has given in the White Paper, discuss it along the report of the Legal Committee so that you see the opinion of the Legal Committee, and then take your own independent position, because the way you are presenting them appears as if you are starting another debate, as if we in that Committee did nothing.  Please, can you help us?

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you my colleague, Retired Major John Kazoora.  My expectation was, that while you make cross-reference to the White Paper, essentially you are supposed to be debating the report of the Committee; and if you really read and internalised the recommendations of the Committee, you will find that most of those issues you have raised were actually at variance with Government proposals.  So, in my opinion, you should be congratulating us saying that the Committee did a good job by refusing this position of Government.  But now you are getting annoyed at Government, referring to the White Paper instead of actually debating the report of the committee; it is unfair to the Committee and us.  The Hansard is going to record what you are saying and the population is seeing.  So, you should give credit to the Committee.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have been following the contribution of the honourable member. I think he read your comments on page 1 and he says that the outcome of this process will be judged on whether – then he went to page 3 and talked about national interest above self and party. He was really appreciating that you did a good job, you made broad statements; actually this debate is to prepare you before you tackle the real instrument, because if you go to tackle the real instrument when you think national interests should surface above this one, then I think you will properly do it.  

He has mentioned that when you are dealing with the Constitution, deal with the principle because some people who were talking about the third term, they were personalizing it, when actually it is about discussing the demerits and the merits, because you lose track when you personalise these matters. The issues will only come after the Constitution has been made, so I think you deal with the merits and demerits. So, my appreciation is that he is really praising this committee; I think so- (Applause)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, that is why I gave you my vote to be a Speaker because the guidance of this House is by the Speaker.  Certainly if you thought I was getting out of way, you would have put me out of order.

PROF. BUKENYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and my good colleague, Retired Major Kazoora, for giving me way.  He mentioned that the Executive presented some issues to the Constitutional Review Commission.  We did so with good faith because of two reasons.  First of all, the experience of the Executive implementing the Constitution gave them certain loopholes which needed to be corrected.  For example, we all have heard this outcry of the management of funds in the districts, especially, with the CAO to such an extent that for me, I have been in my constituency and found a new UPE block cracked.   Therefore, these experiences we wanted to present them to the Constitutional Review Commission.

One may argue that, “Oh, but this was your Commission, they are going to report to you”.  It would have been perhaps scandalous for us after receiving the report, then to import in ideas or issues that we wanted to be seen in it.  But when we gave him a chance and presented our petitions, actually they took almost 50 per cent of it, the rest they rejected it and I think that was a fair way.  So, I wanted really to clarify on that so that people see it in good faith rather than as an imposition to the Commission.  That was not my intention.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with His Excellency, the Vice President that we are friends and that we were together Members of the Young Parliamentary Association in the sixth Parliament and that I worked hard for him to become the Chairman of the Movement Caucus and was appreciated, he is now the Vice President.  I am happy he still treasures this relationship.

The information he has given me is good, I would have appreciated it if you were not part of the House that was going to debate this, and you would fear that your views would not be taken care of.  But in your position, I really find that as a conflict of interest absolutely.  

I was concluding, Mr Speaker, on the White Paper, page 18 where Government does not agree with the Sempebwa report, that ministers should not be Members of Parliament, because you were in the sixth Parliament, Mr Speaker, and you remember the Onapito motion.  The argument of the Executive is that, it is to create harmony between the Executive and the legislature.  

Mr Speaker, why doesn’t Cabinet sit in the Judiciary so that there is harmony also between the Executive and Judiciary? -(Laughter)- because we keep losing a lot of cases and the Government losing a lot of money. There would be good harmony.  Mr Speaker, you know the problems you get as a Chairman of the Parliamentary Commission, which these members may not appreciate.  They just see the results, but they do not know the kind of trouble you go through, even when the Prime Minister is a Member of the Commission and does not bother even to come and sit in the Commission.  Why doesn’t the Speaker, therefore, also sit in Cabinet to cause harmony if that is the case?  It cannot be a one-way traffic.    I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I hope you will give me the chance when the bill comes. Thank you very much.

4.07
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like, first of all, to begin by thanking the committee for a work well done.  I believe it was not easy because there are already a lot of loopholes in the so-called White Paper.  I say “so-called” because it technically does not measure to what a White Paper is supposed to be.

In this House, there are many Members of Parliament who have been former bureaucrats and among other schedules they carried, was to prepare Government White Paper for their respective ministries.  Therefore, when I look at this document it falls far, far short of what technically as White Paper is supposed to be.  A White Paper technically is supposed to be the synthesis of the overall document.  But what has happened in this particular case is that, the Government has given its own opinion.

Number two, why do I say that it has technically failed the yardstick of a White Paper?  Government, when the Sempebwa Commission Report was on, became partisan and an interested party and it took an opportunity and submitted its own opinion and views.  Therefore, it was wrong for the same interested party who after having submitted its own views, to go around again to the drawing table and become a judge in its own course.  That is why technically this document falls far short of what a White Paper is supposed to be like.   However, ­–(Interruption)

MR KITYO: Thank you very much my Colleague for giving way and thank you very much hon. Speaker.  The information I want to give to the hon. Member is that, the response to any Commission, selected by Government is given in a document called a White Paper, and therefore, the views in the White Paper are the views of Government in response on the Commission selected to carry out the duty.  Thank you very much.

MR WADRI: My senior brother, if I am to, with due respect, to teach you in civil service procedures, you must know even from the British system that we derive our principles from, a White Paper is supposed to be preceded by a Green Paper and the way you have talked, with due respect you have talked out of ignorance, you do not know what you are talking about- (Laughter)- I think- no wonder you have presented your views as a former Chairman of Uganda National Farmers Association, not as a technocrat in this field.  

Mr Speaker, having said that, we as a country are at the crossroads -(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA:  Mr Speaker, the explanation of a White Paper given by the hon. Member from Mawokota is the correct one.  Is it in order for the hon. Member from Terego to stand on the Floor of the House and oppose, because some of us have been handling Government documentations?  A White Paper is a documentation made by Government by Cabinet out of a report from the Commission set by Government, which exactly the member has explained.  Is he in order to be indisciplined and expose his ignorance about the explanation of a White Paper from Government?  Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, so many times I have commented on what that White Paper is, but it seems everybody has got his own interpretation.  But what I can say, be courteous to each other, using those strong words as ‘ignorance’ –(Applause)- I think you can express something differently without using such a word; it becomes offensive and somebody becomes – so what I would advise that let us desist from deliberately annoying others by using improper language.

MR WADRI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.  Some of us have been at this game for some time and have got a track record of what we did and left in the Civil Service.  Mr Speaker, we are now at crossroads, and as we are at crossroads one of the most important things that we need to bear in mind is our allegiance to Uganda as our motherland first and foremost.  

A few of us here may be thinking that this Constitutional amendment is a matter of life and death, and I think it should not be that way.  But rather we should debate these proposed Amendments with all the sober minds and with all the sincere feelings for this country the way the people have entrusted us with this responsibility.  

Mr Speaker, if this was a white paper as it has been said to be, one would have expected that this would be seen as a Government Paper; and as a Government Paper, it would have received wide consultation and distribution without any discriminations, and that is one of my third pillars to say this document falls far short. But having said that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, as I see the Order Paper, the item is about the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Report, why don’t we concentrate more on our committee’s report than the other-

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry if my preamble has been rather long, I am most obliged –(Laughter)- one thing that we need to ask ourselves is, why is a Constitution very important for this country?  A Constitution is meant to be a yardstick, which will guide us in the manner in which the political and economic development of this country will be channelled.  Therefore, if that yardstick is to be what it is meant to be, it, therefore, means that we should as much as possible respect the feelings of the 25 million Ugandans who have entrusted us with the responsibility of deliberating on their behalf. 

If you look at the Committee’s Report and the Sempebwa Report, there are glaring areas where the public has come up openly with its views. Look at the issue of the size of Parliament; I say this probably at the risk of a few of my colleagues heckling me. If you look at the report, the populace is saying the size of this Parliament is unnecessarily too large; it is causing a financial drain on the already poor economy of this country.  

People have come to this Parliament with a mandate of various numbers of electorate. In this Parliament we have districts with a population of 34,000 like Kalangala district; three Members of Parliament represent it.  In this Parliament we have got some constituencies, which have over 200,000 people, and one Member of Parliament represents them. People are now asking, can’t we as a country have a yardstick, which will rationalise the creation of constituencies? 

For example, even when you look at the affirmative groups, we have got a Member of Parliament for the Youth, say, my brother, hon. Dan Kidega, who has just gone out; he is in charge of 19 districts. We are now in our fourth year of this Parliament’s lifespan and I am afraid he has not come to the constituency of Terego yet, and I do not know when he will come.  So, people are asking, why do we have all these amorphous creations where the electorate are not going to have a chance of interfacing with the people that they have elected?  These are issues, which they have raised.  

Then there is also the issue of Article 105, which is so contentious.  In 1994 when the Constituent Assembly met and deliberated diligently to come up with what is in this Constitution, it took a lot of facts into consideration.  It looked at the stability of this country, it looked at the past political performance of this country, and it wisely came up with a decision that if there has to be stability then we must be able to fix term limits so that a person does not overstay in power to take this country for a ride as it were.  

If we said this article was put because of the turmoil political history that we have gone through, what safety net do we have that we cannot go back to what we were before the coming into force of this Constitution?  

I think these are some of the issues that we really need to reflect on very seriously and passionately, and for that reason the people of Terego County have borrowed a statement from Latin, which says, “Cod ascribo, ascribo“ meaning that, “what has been written, is written.”  That is the view of the public; that is the view of Ugandans.  

Why should, by a stroke of a pen, by a stroke of a decision of a few people, either in Kyankwanzi or in Cabinet, come up and say, “We feel we are now stable enough to lift this term limit.”  Have we given ourselves enough time to assess as to whether without term limits there can be security, there can be stability guaranteed in this country?  I think those are some of the issues, Mr Speaker, that we need to take seriously into consideration –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much Mr Speaker.  I just wanted to seek clarification from the hon. Colleague.  He has just quoted a Latin provision that, “Whatever has been written has been written, therefore should not be changed.”  But, Mr Speaker, there are other provisions of the Constitution that we aspire to change to enhance, for instance, pluralism in this country, and it has also been written.  Now, under what circumstances should that principle work and not work, the principle of “ascribo, ascribo”?  I thank you.

MR ERESU:  On the same point, the hon. Member has given us a Latin statement meaning, “What is written is written, and therefore should not be changed” as my predecessor has just said.  Is he, therefore, indicating, and he should clarify as to whether the exercise of Constitutional Review should not take place.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleagues for seeking that clarification.  When you look at the Constitution, not all articles much as they relate to one another have got the same weight. Some articles are so important that you cannot just wake up from sleep and say that I want to change them without destabilizing this country; and I was so specific to Article 105(2), and that is where I made a reference to the Latin phrase which I have already explained to you. 

Mr Speaker, - (Interruption) 

MR ERESU:  Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  Article 259(1)(a) of the Constitution reads that, “A bill for an Act of Parliament seeking to amend any of the provisions specified in clause (2) of this article shall not be taken unless - 

(a) It is supported at the second and third readings in Parliament by not less than two thirds of Members of Parliament; and 

b) It has been referred to the decision of the people and approved by them in a referendum.

And Clause 2 states that,” The provisions referred to clause 1 of this article and part (f), which is Article 51(2), would refer to a referendum.  Clause 15(2) does not require therefore a referendum to be carried. The member on the Floor has stated that what is written is written. Is he in order, therefore, to mislead the House to state that certain articles in the Constitution cannot be changed?

THE SPEAKER:  No, honourable members, it is very, very clear that we shall be in order to review the Constitution because, we have the mandate under the written Constitution to amend the Constitution.  But I agree with you that what is written is written.  Yes, we shall have the mandate to review the Constitution in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution attaching the amendment.  Therefore, there is no single article of the Constitution, which cannot be amended so long as there is a procedure, and there are merits for changing it- (Applause)

MR WADRI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance.  Another very contentious issue which has been reflected in Ssempebwa report and in the Committee’s report is on the issue of elections.  I am very happy Government has concurred with the population and concurred with the views of Ugandans that Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Council V elections be conducted on the same day.  

Why do I say so?  When you look at the Order Paper, there are provisions which are going to cater for the numerous election violence’s that we have gone through and many times these violence’s that were experienced were because of Presidential and Parliamentary elections taking place on different days.  

Many candidates to some extent as it has been reflected in the report that is already in our possession especially if you reflect and recall the provisions of the statements which were carried out in the election violence report, many people tendered their candidature and sailed through by riding at the back of the President who has already been elected and many turned Government machinery to their favour and use it very unfairly to oppress other candidates.  

Now that this has been agreed on, I believe it will not raise any contention and we will go with a position as put across by the people in the Sempebwa recommendation and as also agreed by Government in its own view submitted in the Ssmpebwa report.  I think that will go a long way in ensuring that each person on that day will be canvassing his own votes and, therefore, having little time if any to witch hunt others.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR OCULA:  Mr Speaker, arising from what I have observed, the length of time taken to contribute on the floor of Parliament, definitely 7 minutes is not enough.  I do not know whether you could use your position to vary to make it about- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  We agreed on 10 minutes, honourable member.

MR OCULA: 10 minutes is not enough, what has so far been given -(Laughter) So could you vary the time to be about 15 to 20 minutes so that we can discuss exhaustively?

THE SPEAKER:  No, I think for this debate let us try 10 minutes and we see.  But when we come to the bill, the instrument itself, we shall assess the position and see whether to spend 10 minutes or 15 minutes, but let us try 10 minutes and see how we work.

4.26
MR JOHN ALINTUMA (Bukoto County East, Masaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like many fellow members, I would like to commend the work done by the committee and obviously I am very thankful to the Government for the initiative they took with the new trend taking place in the country, if they also sat down and did not do anything about it by presenting the White Paper which is the focal point of our discussion, I think the situation would have been different.  

So, now we have the guidelines, both from the Government and Parliament.  Before I could bring my report, I would base my argumentation on what I obtained from the constituency as I was doing my consultation combining it with what I read here as recommendations from the Committee. 

I would like to begin by saying and by reminding this august House that not every law is good.  For example, take South Africa during that time of De Clerk.  It was against the law to sit and have coffee with the Whites, you would go to jail, but as the political situation changed, the South Africans recognised that some laws had to be amended and therefore one of the laws that was amended in the Constitution of South Africa was to allow Blacks to sit at the same table with the Whites.  But still when the policemen were harassing blacks, they would always tell them, “Look, you have broken the law” and everyone had to take on to the law.  

So, now having said that, I come down to what came up from my constituency in Bukoto East.  The first thing that they came up with was, they want their federo and I did not have a big problem with that because the argumentation was very good and outstanding.  

For example, today everyone is complaining about colonialism, saying you know these British colonialised us and other tribes were marginalized and were sidelined by the British. But with due respect to other tribes, the Baganda could proudly say that Buganda was left intact and the reason for that, why the British could not manipulate our way of living was, because we had our structures which were headed by the King. The King was so strong because he had his followers whereby whatever the King proposed to administer or to bring the best way of running the Kingdom, the Baganda would simply follow.  

Today as we see, the King of Baganda is saying, “If you want me to be your good King and to make this institution of the Buganda to be one of the strongest in the world, the best way to do it is to have federo.”  Now, based on that, the people in Bukoto East said, and I agree with them, that “You go and discuss your own thing, have your names, do your Constitution and so forth, but for us we want federo.”  Mr Speaker, with pleasure I have the honour to tell you, with pride of my tribe and my constituency, that the people of Bukoto East will not be compromised; they will always stand by what their King says, and that is federo.

The second point was about dual citizenship.  They argue that during the time the Constitution was made, which was not allowing people to have dual citizenship, we experienced many problems which- thank God today under the leadership of President Museveni it is possible for anyone to leave this country at will and go and live elsewhere.  But during those days when the Constitution was made, people would be followed, they would even have a register to know who is leaving the country and who is coming back; even getting a passport was a big problem, and besides that we did not have this globalisation.  

Today our President, the Government and all the people of Uganda talk about investment.  You see, whereas we look at the whites as being the main core for investment in the country, including Asians, we also have blacks that are Ugandans and have the potential and the capability to invest in this country.  But then they are always so afraid of losing their citizenship.  

To make matters easy for them, therefore, it could have been a very decent thing for the Parliament of Uganda and the people of Uganda to accept dual citizenship so that there is easy flow of investors, whether former Ugandans or whites or Asians. And many of them were saying, “Many of our children are all abroad, some of them left a long time ago, we are not able to see them again.  Let them come back and have the chance to become Ugandan citizens.”  So, they strongly want dual citizenship.

When it comes to the issue of Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), many of them were speaking at their heels, they were angry and emotions were going on. They said that if you have a person who is handling so much money and it becomes so difficult to tame this person, then you would hardly be able to fight corruption in the districts.  Therefore, they recommend- and I also see the Committee Report- they did not have a problem with CAOs being accountable to someone who is a little bit higher than what they have today, and to make it easier for them to be interdicted or stopped or checked if they play around with public funds.

But this is a personal input I could put in this.  I would have been very happy in this Committee Report and even in the White Paper, if the issue of the Town Clerks was also included.   There are situations where we have so many Town Clerks who are very incapable and very bad, but we are not able to get them out.  I will not mention but, Mr Speaker, welcome aboard, you must be knowing what I mean by that.  So, the issue of Town Clerks should also be included.

Finally, among other things, they were obviously too many and I would be lying to myself to say that I can even mention a quarter of what happened; but they strongly became very angry at the reluctance of the Government of not checking the spread and the use of pornography in this country.  There was a Penal Code obviously –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean all this should be included in the Constitution?

MR ALINTUMA: Exactly.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed

MR ALINTUMA: I see this can be very minimum, but as I conclude, there was one man who almost dropped his tears that he was very busy trying to get school fees for his children and he was so shocked to see that one of the things that these children first put into their suitcases were these magazines and newspapers, which included The Red Pepper.  

So, in conclusion, they are saying they are not concerned or so much disturbed by removal of term limits on condition - Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I had forgotten, they had a saying that, “Mpa nkuwe” in Luganda, which means, “You give as you take.”  So they said, “If our King in Buganda was not tampered with, we will not give anyone a problem with the term limit.”  Other conclusions can be made, but the King and the term limit could be a very good compromising point for them.  Thank you, Mr Speaker, and have a very good day.

4.36
MS JOYO MINDRA (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I bring you New Year’s greetings from the people of Moyo.  I also commend the committee for the report well done.  I am particularly happy that they did express that they handled this issue without personal consideration or political affiliation consideration.  I think that is a very good nationalistic feeling, and I am very happy about it.

Now, concerning this report combined with what we did when we went back to the people to consult them on the Government White Paper. The people of part of my constituency, that is, the Gimara, Aliba and Reri who had not been included in the 1995 Constitution, have now been recommended to be included because they are indigenous and they are very happy about it.  

Apparently, the problem is that the people are not really aware of what is in the Constitution. Many people do not know the Constitution, even the learned and then coupled with that, the Constitution is not interpreted in many languages. I think the Constitution is written in few of the local languages. So, Government should do something to ensure that the Constitution is interpreted in some of the local languages say Madi, so that more people can read the Constitution and be aware of what is in there.  I am very happy that the report has recommended that Government will also bring in the teaching of the Constitution in institutions so that all the Ugandan citizens may be aware of what is there.

Concerning the change to multi-party, the people very much welcome that because they say, “Let everybody participate” whoever the people support will win an election and the one whom people do not support will be left out. 

Considering also the electoral process for the President, the MPs, LC V Chairmen, they say it is good idea that the elections are held on the same day so that they do not waste a lot of time. However, there was a minority who said that the election should be held as many times as possible so that they get a bit of money here and from all those who are campaigning. But the majority accepted that it should be held on the same day.

Concerning the term limit of the presidency, they say that it is the election which will throw out whoever wants to stand. So, whoever is there can stand many times, let the voters throw him out if they do not want him and if they want him he will be supported and he will win. So, my people have said it should not be limited but it should be left open.

Concerning decentralisation and the position of the Chief Administrative Officer. The majority of the people accept that the Chief Administrative Officer must be appointed by the Public Service Commission centrally and not by the district service commission because within the district, the politicians there will have a lot of influence on the Chief Administrative Officer. So, he will be sort of a stooge to the leadership there in the district, so he should be appointed centrally by the Public Service Commission. 

But then they also cautioned that he must be monitored even if he is appointed by the central government so that he will not also be influenced by the elite, the civil servant may now think that is their turn and also influence the CAO greatly.  The central government should closely monitor the CAO if he is appointed centrally and he should not be allowed to remain in one station for too long. There should be at least a time limit of how long a CAO can remain within a certain area however good he may be.

Concerning the functions of the Inspector General of Government, they say Inspector General of Government position should be retained but his roles must be clearly defined. And when cases are reported, they should quickly investigate and not delay in handling cases because in the end, cases become stale and they become meaningless.  

Finally, the issue of women election. It was proposed that the women should be elected by adult suffrage. The majority of the people do support that because they say, when it is an electoral college, it is subject to manipulation and when a candidate has passed to Parliament, it is only those few who think that is their Member of Parliament and not Member of Parliament for everybody else. So, those are the few remarks from my constituency. 

Sorry, one more point. The LC I councils complain that they are doing a lot of work at grass root but they have no remuneration at all. Government should consider something for them and some brilliant say that, why do you give so much money to the Members of Parliament, you cut some money and pass it to the lower council so that they can also get something from the national cake. Those are some of the views that we have, but we as lawmakers we may be able to make some law which may be sort of affirmative action for them but not forgetting also our needs. Thank you.

4.43
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As the majority of my colleagues have said, we should debate during the time of constitutional amendment with clear and objective mind. I would have thought when Cabinet was making the White Paper they should have put the country first. I have my reservations on this because, there are so many things they have put in the White Paper, which I think in their mind, they were thinking they would remain Members of Cabinet without going to the public where life belongs. I will give, an example, which my colleague Wadri talked about. 

The population of Uganda is 24 million, we have 305 Members of Parliament, we are creating districts every now and then and wherever we are creating a district we are creating a Woman Member of Parliament and that means the number of Members of Parliament is going to increase. In the Sempebwa report, all the views of Ugandans say the size of Parliament should be reduced and Cabinet should be reduced and nobody in Cabinet came up to talk about it. 

We are talking about inflation; we are talking about interest rates going high. If public administration is too high, I want to assure you there is no way interest rates will not go high, there is no way the people will not become poorer. I would have been happier if Cabinet thought about it as nationalists by saying that Cabinet be reduced, Parliament be reduced, as the people said. Even now and then you are saying the peasants are right, why on this one were the peasants wrong? 

Mr Speaker, you can see for yourself that always this House is full only when there is something contentious; short of that, the House is bare. Mr Speaker, if you had very few numbers, you would know who was present and who was absent and that would be the best. I believe even in your mind, you do not want the big numbers for administrative purposes. 

I want us to look at Article 105 (2) of the Constitution very objectively not with selfish minds. Supposing we amend the Article as you are saying - because we want to discuss it and amend most likely, as you want - and tomorrow you put in a President who is a killer, what will happen? Did you vote out Amin? (Interjections) Mr Speaker, I told you how the Cabinet thinks, all the voices descending on me are from the front bench. But I want to ask all of you that let us look at these amendments of the Constitution very objectively. 

Article 4 of the Constitution says that the Constitution will be translated in all languages and it will be taught to the people. I have never seen the Constitution for Lugishu and we are amending a Constitution, which the people have not known as yet, and I think that is a very big mistake. The first thing we should have done is to go and tell the people what the Constitution says.  We should translate it, we should teach it to the people and they should know why we are amending it.  But here we are trying to amend the Constitution without the population knowing what it is. I agree we represent them, but their views are very important. Why should we use them for the sake of our own benefit instead of telling them what belongs to them?

Mr Speaker –(Interjection)– I am waiting for the one in Lugishu because - hon. Byaruhanga, if you are saying that you got Shs 5.0 million to go and tell them about the White Paper, for us we never got. Mr Speaker, I am being disturbed by Dr Byaruhanga, I hope he will be given chance to talk.

Mr Speaker, if you look in the White Paper on page 120, Article 244(1) talks about all the minerals but it says “except petroleum” that the only private item, which is going to be in Uganda is petroleum and that can be in anyone’s land.  All of you are aware of what is taking place in western Uganda in Semliki. If that is the plan that we are making the laws to safeguard a few individuals for their own benefits, I think this is very dangerous.  I want all of you to go and read that Article very well, and if you believe that Cabinet is right, then I am sorry, I do not know what Cabinet we will be having, which does not take interest in Ugandans.

On the issue of mobilization of the population, I know very many people have talked about it, but I have heard people saying they are multi-partists and others are movementists. I do not know when we amended the Constitution of Uganda to say that the others have gone multiparty. I believe all of us are still in the Movement system and those who are in NRM-O, who are now multi-partists, are there illegally because we have not as yet amended the Constitution of Uganda –(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA: Mr Speaker, I cannot deny it, I am a member of the NRM-O, and I know very well that my colleagues here in Parliament can also identify themselves as FDC, DP and UPC, and I am aware also that before you can iron a piece of cloth, you have to wash it first. The clarification I would like hon. Nandala Mafabi to give me is, does he expect party politics to come when people have not prepared and identified themselves? I just need that simple clarification because he said that we are now illegally identifying ourselves with parties. Thank you

MR MUZOORA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the presence of the parties was guaranteed by the Constitution, Article 72.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Nandala Mafabi, further that actually NRM-O is a political party, but it continues to pretend that it is still the Movement.  So, there is a distinction –(Interjections)– they are pretending and appearing as if they are still the Movement. Thank you.  

MR ERESU: I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Nandala Mafabi, further that the Movement exists and is in Government, and that is the Movement to which hon. Nandala Mafabi and other Members, including myself, belong to. But also, parties have been formed and there is NRM-O party, therefore, the NRM-O party is not synonymous to the Movement.  

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, for that education. I wish that is the education you would be taking to the public because if I go –(Interjection)– Professor, I know you are a Professor, but I do not want to say something bad, thank you.  

Mr Speaker, it would have been very good if we go telling the public that NRM-O is different from the Movement system. That would be the best. But you are going to the public to tell them that you are the Movement system and all the good things and bad things, which were done in the Movement system, belong to NRM-O. I want you to know that because –(Interruption)

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the Member holding the Floor that the party, which was registered was NRM not NRM-O.  

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I have seen how we can play with English and how to tell the masses lies.  As far as we know, when we were registering NRM-O, it was National Resistance Movement Organisation.  Now, why are you removing some letters? To do what?  If you saw it is very dangerous, please accept –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The position is, there is no NRM, what is there is the Movement. The law, which was made, is the Movement; before that Act was made there was National Resistance Movement, but when the Act was made it is the Movement. I think now when this issue of parties has come in, they have resurrected the name, which was dropped when we had the Movement, and they have adopted it as a party name.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now, is it like a football match? We have all played football, the team has been winning, then when we decide each one of us to go –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague, hon. Nandala Mafabi, that he should not develop a headache over this. If a tiger is painted white and it rains and the white paint washes off, the stripes will come out. So, this is what has happened with National Resistance Movement.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much my colleague for that information. Anyway, I will not have headache over that, but I want to tell my colleagues that now we know the tiger, it is being washed and it will become a tiger.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of dual citizenship, I have very many problems with it.  A person is born of one mother and one father. If we have a man having more than two homes, I am worried there is going to be danger. In fact, the people whom you are thinking will gain out of dual citizenship, the people washing cars etc all over the world, are not the ones because those people are hiding. They are there mostly in an illegal way. But if we are going to make a law for few individuals, I am worried we are going to promote what we call white-collar crime. 

For instance, I am here a Ugandan, I can commit atrocities here tomorrow I am a Kenyan and there will be nothing because I have gone to Kenya I belong there I am a citizen of Kenya. Well, maybe you are talking of federation in East Africa. Let me go further, I have gone to Egypt there is no federation, I have gone to China there is no federation. We must look at this issue of dual citizenship with care.

MR ALINTUMA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to inform hon. Mafabi that one of most undistributed democracy of the world is the United States of America and it has the dual citizenship. I can also mention Great Britain; German has also just woken up, now they have also adopted dual citizenship. 

I can also mention the greatest democracy of France. South Africa is also now coming on board. You cannot say that because you have very few relatives that are abroad and, therefore, you think that making a law that allows others to have dual citizenship is not necessary. So, the information I wanted to give is that, we are not going to be the first ones to bring dual citizenship and we are not going to be the last ones, everyone is coming on board. Thank you.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much. I know very well why we want dual citizenship at this time. There are many people who are committing crimes in Uganda who will want to be dual citizens so that they run away, but be careful when you are looking at it.

Mr Speaker, I want to ask the Cabinet, which is drafting the amendment Bills, to look at the views of the population. Consider what they said about the size of Parliament, what they talked about Cabinet so that when they come here they will be really nationalists instead of putting their self interest first because short of that we are in danger.

Lastly, I want us to look at this White Paper further, why did it come in this form, whom were you trying to promote? If we are going to promote the few individuals, I am worried for this country.  You can all see for yourselves that even our own property on which we have spent the tax payers’ money are being given away at zero cost, and what does that mean? Please look at it. Diary Corporation has gone for zero, others are yet to go for zero, UCB has gone for zero, mention it. Thank you very much.

5.00
MRS MASIKO KABAKUMBA (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this report. I would like to thank the committee Members for the work well done, and by and large the recommendations of the committee fit in with what my people gave as their views.  

Mr Speaker, I consulted widely in my constituency, and I would like to thank this Parliament for the facilitation, and also to thank the NRM for the extra facilitation. I say this because I consulted half of my constituency immediately we got the White Paper, and when I got the extra facilitation I covered the other half. So, Parliament, NRM and others facilitated me.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to say in line with the report that Government has got a very big challenge and that is why we are having some of the problems because Government has not carried out public awareness on this Constitution, which we are about -(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Is it in order for the speaker on the Floor to mislead this House that Parliament facilitated Members of Parliament to go to their constituencies, to explain the White Paper without substantiating when some of us are not aware about that facilitation because this can be misunderstood by our constituencies. Let her substantiate, what was that facilitation from parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Is it a point of order? Well, if you are asking me how Parliament facilitates Members, I would only say that we give two round trips every month; maybe that is one of the facilitation we do. (Applause)

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, you really deserve my vote and you deserve to be in that Chair. That is exactly what I meant, routine facilitation and I considered it my responsibility to go and consult my people about this White Paper within the framework of Parliament facilitation.  The NRM facilitation was just bonus. So, Parliament facilitated me also, thank you very much. 

I was saying that Government has a big challenge of sensitising our people, the population about the Constitution and constitutionalism. I tell you, some people did not seem to understand what we were talking about but definitely after explanation they would follow and contribute meaningfully. So please, I want to call upon Government to take this recommendation seriously and ensure - and really this would be very easy. We have FM radios, Ministry of Information through other regulatory authorities could direct these FM radios everyday to air a verse in the Constitution and educate our people - that is about five minutes only. So, I do not think it is a matter of resources, but let us reorganize and really carry out massive public awareness about the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, about the political system, I will tell you, Masindi suffered so much at the hands of individuals under the multiparty political system, and as I consulted, some wanted us to remain in the Movement system. Yes, they were divided, but me as their leader I will say, because I even informed them, what the House would decide and eventually we decide in the referendum will be what Masindi, Bujenje County in particular, will go by.  

Mr Speaker, about the traditional and cultural leaders. Many people know the history of Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom and the misfortunes we have gone through. The people and myself are saying, it should be clearly stated in the Constitution and other laws how the kingdoms relate to the centre and how they should be facilitated. The people of Bunyoro are not supporting the selective federo, which is being talked about. If it is going to be standard for everybody and every part of Uganda, and before then, they are saying their land should be returned to Bunyoro. You know, even in the report, issues of land have been commented on –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)- I wish hon. Ken Lukyamuzi could let me develop my point then you ask later, I will answer you. 

Mr Speaker, Bunyoro has been marginalized as a kingdom. Their land was given out because it refused to collaborate with colonialists - and if you want me to mention, it was given to Buganda - there is nobody who does not know the history of Bunyoro and as far as land is concerned. But even when they returned the properties, land which falls under forests and it was agreed that it should be returned to the kingdom, has never been de-gazetted to be returned to the kingdom. We are saying, this thing should be clearly rectified in the Constitution and other subsidiary laws.

Mr Speaker, about compulsory acquisition of land and property –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable Member for giving way. The issue related to federalism is an issue, which should not be distorted in my presence because I have laboured to understand the complexity of federalism. I am seeking clarification, when the Member says that, “We do not want that selective federalism, we want federalism for all” the report on the White Paper she is discussing has not stated any federalism; it leaves it in space. So, why do you confuse people?  Tell us the federalism you want so that we can promote it ideologically and structurally, and we have no worry about that. And the federalism we are advocating for is for all regions not for selective regions, all of them with equal powers. That is our position. 

MR KALULE SSENGO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my colleague that it has been clearly stated that federo will be given to those people who want it.  Since it will be given to those who want it, I do not really see any problem. If the Banyoro do not want the federo, let them do not have it; but the Baganda want it and we shall ask for it. I thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much. I was expressing views from Bujenje in Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom, they do not want selective federal, and it is even in the White Paper. Besides, I was very clear that under the Buganda federo, one of the things they are demanding is the mailo akenda, and some of that land is in Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom. So, it should be returned before you claim your mailo akenda. Thank you very much.

Mr Speaker, people were worried about compulsory acquisition of property and land, and this one was worsened because they said land should be acquired compulsorily for investment in addition to the other issues in the Constitution. They said the status quo in the current Constitution should remain and they were a little bit sceptical, why is it that the powers they want to give to the President, the limited legislative powers, are almost the areas of investment, public health, environment and historical and archaeological sites are almost the same reasons for which they want to acquire property compulsorily, that is public safety, public order, public health. They thought there could be foul play if the President is given these legislative powers and they also tie in the reasons they can, us to acquire property compulsorily.  

In short, they did not support the view that the President should be given legislative powers.  Where there is Parliament and it is fully functional, there should be clear separation of powers and in line with that, if Parliament does not agree with the President, my people are of the view that this should be referred to them because it is them who elect the President, it is them who elect the Members of Parliament, let them decide who should remain and who should not, and it should be sorted out and I am happy the report also agrees with that. 

Mr Speaker, on presidential and parliamentary elections, they agree that both elections should be held on the same day. But the LC5 Chairmen should be voted on the same day with other local government representatives, the councillors and the Chairmen LC3. We should not mix the national elections with the local government elections –(Interjection)- I am about to wind up sorry, I was interrupted.  

The Chief Administrative Officer’s Office, they said, should go to the centre because leaving the centre to appoint only the CAO may not solve the current problems because the CAO does not work alone. But they talked of the CAO’s office, that is the assistant CAOs and the others, they should be appointed and monitored and be transferred by the centre.

Lastly, about the size of Parliament. My people were of the view that Parliament is big. I appreciate the recommendation of the committee and the White Paper that we should retain Parliament as it is, and I suggest that this chapter should not be closed because everybody knows that certainly the size of Parliament is big. But where we are going wrong is when we say that we should reduce the size of Parliament. 

The areas we want to cut are those already marginalized groups. That one they did not agree with. They said we should find a way of reducing Parliament, but the marginalized groups should be represented. It may not be for the immediate next Parliament but it can happen in future to reduce Parliament and if you want my sincere view, Mr Speaker, I would like to say a Parliament of exactly 112 Members would serve us maybe less than call it 120. One woman, one man per district and you can put in the other groups to make up 120.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, this is the information from the Chair. This issue of size of Parliament is not new. This matter came in the Constituent Assembly because when we had the Constituent Assembly, the NRC had been determined by way of counties and the population in these counties were not the same. 

I just want to give you an example of my county whose population was at that material time 350 people and was being represented by hon. Ssendawula. When we went in the Constituent Assembly, the argument was that a representative to represent people we should use the quarter, that is the population to determine the constituencies. That was discussed in the committee where I was. But the problem was that, once we do this and we depart from counties, the system that was being used, there are many areas of Uganda that would be marginalized. I cannot mention them but I know they were mentioned because we had the figures. So, this is something, which is not new but I think something, which we will have to address.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that very useful information and that is exactly why I am saying each district should have two representatives. We can never be uniform all through. That is almost impossible unless we want to bring everybody to represent himself/ herself in Parliament. But if we found a formula like mine, one woman, one man and Masindi is not a very small district but while I was a woman MP, I did perform.  That is beside the point.

Mr Speaker, the special interest groups women, youth, persons with disabilities and to some extent workers and the others are saying that let Government drop its idea of scrapping the non existent Equal Opportunities Commission. Instead it should expedite the process of setting it up, because the marginalized groups it is supposed to address and serve are still within our communities.  

Finally, the most contentious, the term limit. My people did not have a problem with this. They are saying, ”If we want our person, it is okay. Give us the powers to elect that person in or elect that person out.” In short, they are supporting the lifting of the term limits. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been advised by our technical people to notify you that the Hansard electronic staff are going to activate the automatic switch-off of the microphones after 10 minutes allocated to each Member. (Applause). So, when you experience this, do not be surprised.

5.18
MR JOHN WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, while we appreciate the new mechanics, which will govern our speeches, it would be in the interest of Members of Parliament to be notified at least two minutes before the end of a speech.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to the debate of the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, which I think is a very excellent report. I wish to add my appreciation to the committee for a job very well done because, they have assisted this House immensely by shifting our such items that will need constitutional amendment and the others which will not be part of the constitutional amendment process, which I think helps to sort of clarify the situation further and allay the fears that there is so much to cover that there will not be enough time to cover all.  I wish the Government will be good enough to take the recommendations of the committee very seriously.  

In fact, Mr Speaker, yesterday when the issue came up as to whether we should debate this report or not, I was a bit sceptical. But after listening to my colleagues’ contributions, I am convinced that this report and the comments of the Members can help Government immensely in amending its draft Bill for constitutional amendment.

Mr Speaker, allow me to appreciate the work of the committee particularly, in addressing the proposed amendment of Article 1 and I beg to quote from the report of the committee: “The intended amendment by Government would provide that where a referendum is held under any Article of the constitution, the result of the referendum is binding on all organs and agencies of the state and on all persons and organisations.” The committee did a lot of research. They went ahead to define the evolutionary nature of referenda and they concluded that the constitutional provision in the 1995 Constitution was enough. 

Indeed I can add that under the communist revolution in Russia, referenda were common practice. The tendency was that after a referendum, any citizen who was of contrary view was branded as being anti-people. Importation of such a practice in Uganda would be the beginning of a dictatorial regime, which would look at any dissenting member of society as being anti-society, anti-people and therefore subject to being ostracized from society. I think the committee has performed very well by refusing the proposed amendments, and I hope this will help the Government to inform the people correctly when it talks about power belonging to the people.

The committee further says that sovereignty, in the early stages of the state’s existence, belonged to the centre of the state. The people are sovereign but their sovereignty is implemented by the legislature, which is elected by the majority of the people. These are very far reaching statements. They are far reaching in that they uphold the sanctity of the legislature as the people’s voice. And by that the powers and the sovereignty of the people are safeguarded. We have had experiences in this country where the results and process of referendum were being questioned in court, and the rulings of the court on these issues are very clear. This clearly indicates that a referendum on its own can also be subject to quite a number of flaws and, therefore, cannot be conclusive in itself.

One other issue that came out very clearly and which I want to commend the committee about is the issue of compulsory acquisition of land. The people of Uganda own their land wherever it exists. They do not share the view that government should put up itself as a broker to identify land for investors. Our people are mature enough to negotiate with the investors and be able to get as much as they can out of these investors. Besides that, the rates, which are paid by government when land is compulsorily acquired, have proved to be very low and unrealistic. Therefore, they are not sufficient incentive for the people of Uganda to give land to government for whatever purpose. And the people of Buikwe think that the provisions of Article 26 as currently provided for in the Constitution with regard to land acquisition are sufficient and therefore need no further amendment to that effect.

During consultations it was evident that the people had not been allowed to understand their Constitution. Article 4 had never been implemented by government and yet the provisions of Article 4 are very clear about translation and teaching. It is on this point that I disagree with the committee when it sides with government that it should be re-phrased in more vague and wider application. If government has not been able to do specific activities like translating, how do you expect it to act in a more vague manner that is not comprehensive to the citizens? In fact in my view government should first of all be apologizing to the citizens for its failure to translate the Constitution in the local languages so that the people know the supreme law under which they are being governed.

Finally is the issue of monetizing politics in the villages. The issue of the Shs 5 million has caused trouble. When I was consulting about elections being held on the same day for the President, Parliament and Chairmen LC V, some villagers did not want it because they will lose out in the money, which they expect from the presidential candidates, from the parliamentary candidates, from the LC V chairmen. This has been made worse by our colleagues in NRM/O bragging that there is more money, which they are going to send –(Interruption)- let me -(Interruption)

DR NABWISO: According to the Constitution of the NRM, chapter 2, the NRM is supposed to do the following; “The principles of transparency, accountability, integrity, consensus building and merit as a basis for accessing positions of leadership within the organs of NRM shall be observed by NRM.” 

If people get bonuses of Shs 5 million without telling us where the money came from, and they go on to acquire positions in leadership –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Mr Speaker, the honourable member is quoting the NRM constitution. As far as I am concerned, and I am a Member of NRM and he is not, the so-called Shs 5 million was given in a transparent manner. It has been accounted for and it still remains an issue of NRM. If perhaps anyone is aggrieved by that, the recourse would be going to court for action. Is he, therefore, in order - not knowing very well how NRM functions - to come here and mislead this House on how we must do our business when we have done it very well and in a democratic manner? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, and I think I have said it before, as the chair and Speaker I would not like to enter into internal administration of parties. But as a person who also knows how parties function, parties are going to make their own arrangements. There will be parties that will have the ability to facilitate their members; and I have no doubt to say for instance that you cannot compare Uganda People’s Congress, which has assets, with the Conservative Party of my dear friend, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. (Laughter). 

Therefore, we have to be used to these things. These will be internal matters into which outsiders will not be allowed. We have to accept this. We must ready ourselves to accept these situations. So, I do not know what you are talking about. If that is the constitution of a party called NRM, the accountability mentioned here is to its members. The accountability will not come to Parliament because that is an internal administration within a given party. Please, let us accept it. If we are going into the multiparty system, these are things that are going to happen.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Finally, I would like to address myself to page 18, which talks about Article 72 - the right to form parties. I note what they have observed that the transition to the multi-party system should be driven by commitment, tolerance, dialogue and complete liberalization of the political space. Unfortunately government has not moved fully towards the liberalization of the political space. Tolerance is still lacking and you have areas where even civil servants in the persons of resident district commissioners threaten to arrest political activists. 

There are even Members of Parliament in this House who have said that multi-partyists are like snakes. Others have even advocated that women should deny multi-partyists sex.

5.36
MR KITYO MUTEBI (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for producing a very good report. I also want to thank you for giving time to Members of Parliament to go and be able to consult on this White Paper. I widely consulted my constituency with 60 meetings and I was able to cover all the corners of the constituency. 

Before I give my contribution I want to give a warning. I want to give a warning to government officials and Members of Parliament to stop marginalizing farmers and belittling them. We are the producers of food in this country; this country has never gone totally hungry and we have never massively imported food to feed this country. I have been a farmer’s leader for 12 years but I am a graduate of Makerere University with an upper second class degree in education. I also have four diplomas in different branches of agriculture. Therefore, farmers are qualified and you should stop calling us peasants. The best phrase we should use is “civil society” not “peasants”. Mr Speaker, I have two institutions of higher learning in my constituency. I have Nkozi University and Mitala Maria National Teachers’ College. 

Also, my electorates are worried about the speed at which we are going to amend this Constitution and they are of the view that we should amend what is required us. We should have elections in 2006 and leave the rest for the Eighth Parliament because if we move too fast, we may leave out certain sections of the Constitution. Or, we may move so fast that the Eighth Parliament or the Ninth Parliament will still amend the same Constitution.  

About the term limit, my constituents are worried about giving an open cheque to an African President in Uganda. They are equally worried about tagging an amendment to an individual. Mr Speaker, at an appropriate time I will move a motion to amend the Constitution the way the people of Mawokota South have ordered me to do. What they have in mind is that we can still have the two term limits unchanged, but we say that with the advent of the multi-party system in Uganda, any President who will be elected can serve two terms and the rest remain the same. But I am going to move that amendment at the right time.  

The issue of federo in Buganda is a very strong issue. I know most Members of Parliament from this part of the country must have received strong recommendations from their electorates to advocate for federo in this House. I want to obey my employers because my employers are my voters. I want to obey them and tell you that the people of Mawokota South would like federo and they wish that other parts of the country also got federo.  

About the size of Parliament and Cabinet, the people of Mawokota South are saying the numbers are okay as long as they can keep stability in this country. The moment you start to reduce the size of Parliament, you will affect certain sections, which feel that they are ably represented in this House. For the stability of this country let us leave the size of the Cabinet and the size of Parliament as it is today. Immediately after the recent Cabinet reshuffle, people did not look for the name of those who had been made ministers but they were looking for their regions, what they have been able to be given and how many ministers were from Buganda, Ankole, the Eastern or the Northern region. That principle shows you that people want equal representation; each section of a part of Uganda needs to be represented.

About multi-partyists, the people of Mawokota South are scared of the return to multi-partism. As you know, most wars in this country have been going through my constituency. The Tanzanian war against Amin and the fight at Katonga - Katonga was the stepping stone to capture Kampala - these fascists were so beaten that after Katonga they came here and even scared their friends to run away. 

So, we have been at the turn of the wheel and we know what it takes to have a war in a disorganized multi-party system. They are only worried about the omnibus referendum, but if we get a clear referendum on multi-party, I can assure you that the people of Mawokota will reject the parties’ come back.

Mr Speaker, I also noted the feelings of people of Mawokota South; they are talking about the rampant poverty. One of the biggest failures of the NRM Government is the failure to make money to enter the pockets of the rural people. The people of Mawokota South are very poor. When you visit them at night you will find them eating from outside, using the moonlight. Others are using reeds to make fire. This type of situation is unacceptable, and I want to call upon government to do everything possible to put money in the pockets of the civil society, not peasants.

About food security, this country had a short drought in June, July and September and we are experiencing another drought now. The food distribution in this country is a problem. There is a lot of grain in Mubende, Kiboga, Kasese and other areas but there is a lot of shortage of food in Western Uganda, Buganda, Eastern and the north. It seems there is no food policy for this country and that coupled with poverty makes the living standards of the people to drop. Something must be done about food security. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.44
MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (Woman Representative, Pallisa): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, allow me thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and present the views of the people of Pallisa. Pallisa District is composed of 28 sub-counties, and I did consult all the sub-counties. I am going to summarize their recommendations.

On the issue of Article 74, the people of Pallisa are saying that we should use Article 74(1)(b) where Parliament should come up with a resolution and then we have a referendum so that they are also involved in determining the fate of this country. The majority of them still have the conviction that the Movement Government has done well.

On the issue of having elections for president, Members of Parliament and LC V chairpersons, the people of Pallisa are in agreement that these elections can be conducted on the same day. 

On the issue of the Chief Administrative Officers (CAO), the people of Pallisa are saying that the CAOs should be appointed by the Public Service Commission. As I talk now, the district has failed to put a CAO in place.

The people of Pallisa say that they are very comfortable with decentralisation. They also do not have a problem with those areas that are interested in having federo having it; but for them they support decentralisation.

Secondly, they are supportive of the official language being Swahili, especially when we have entered the East African Union. They feel Swahili will facilitate trade between the three countries.  

They do not have a problem with dual citizenship. They feel that this will be one way of promoting investment - allowing their sons to have dual citizenship - so that they can be able to develop their country.

The people of Pallisa feel that in case of a deadlock between the President and Parliament, the issue should be referred to them so that they decide on it through a referendum. 

On the issue of Article 105(2), they are saying they do not see any problem using their vote to determine which President should govern them; other than limiting the terms –(Interjections)- these are people of Pallisa and I have to present their views as given to me.

On the office of the IGG, my people say that they should be given extra powers to prosecute the corrupt people other than just writing a report about them. 

The issue of marginalized groups being represented in Parliament, the people of Pallisa have a conviction that the army, people with disabilities, and the youth, are in the best positions to talk for the people they represent. They do not see any reason why they should be scrapped. They want them to stay –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, I am not going to take any clarification because I am speaking for the people of Pallisa.

On the issue of having public servants and army officers resigning before seeking political office -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, in our Rules of Procedure we are entitled to clarifications, and if you want to enrich debate on this White Paper and take decisions from informed positions, people should take clarifications.

THE SPEAKER: Well, in our Rules of Procedure, the right to give way for you go give information or seek clarification is entirely in the hands of the people holding the Floor.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I am a bit worried about the trend the debate on this very important subject is taking. If it were a question of presenting the views of our constituents, I think that should have been a collection of views going to our committee or another body to synthesize them, add value to those views and bring here some kind of report for further debate.  

The problem I have really is, at what stage then are we going to add value to these views, which are being presented from each and every constituency? We are a body of Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What you do not appreciate is that we are dealing with a very sensitive programme of reviewing the Constitution. I think the members themselves – it was raised by somebody here whether Members of Parliament are delegates or they are representatives. He had a reason why he was asking that. I said I know there is a difference between a delegate and a representative, but there is no problem with a representative moving together with his constituency. That is expressing things as if one is a delegate. 

As I have said, this is a sensitive matter and my assessment is that Members of Parliament would like the people who sent them, their voters; they are articulating what they told them. Of course at the end of the day when we come to amend the Constitution you will not be matching from house to house before you decide. That is the work of the Members of Parliament. They will have to decide there and then. But at this time let them take into account what you have said and it will be reflected in the Bill. That is something, which we have to appreciate, honourable members.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Point of procedure.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: When you want to make a point, it is up to the person holding the Floor to yield it; it is not me.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Procedure?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What point of procedure?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, while I appreciate your wise advice, it is also important that this plenary session the order it is taking, it is supposed to move in a progressive formation. In other words, whatever we expect to achieve as a result of the constitutional amendment should be related to what we are discussing now. So the interventions should intellectually be acceptable if we are to move forward.

THE SPEAKER: What you are suggesting is for us to revisit our Rules of Procedure and change them? What I have told you is that when a point of information is raised, it is the person holding the Floor to give way and allow it or not. I cannot say, “Sit down because somebody is making a point”. But I think you have a point. Therefore, we should revise our rules to provide for that.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the procedural concern I have here is whether it is possible for the Chair to assure the members who get the opportunity to speak that if we make interventions as they deliver their constituency positions, they will be compensated in terms of a few minutes or two? I guess that is the primary reason holders of the Floor are denying the rest opportunity to seek clarification. 

Secondly, I would want to get this clarification from my honourable sister, because Pallisa and Soroti have a lot in common and as she presents the position of Pallisa, does she want my support on any matter? If it is not clear to me at the end of the day, how do I handle what Pallisa has said without getting a clarification?

THE SPEAKER: I think she is trying to do. As far as I see she is influencing those who are drafting the Bill that they should take into account the views expressed. That is what she is trying to do because here we are not going to make any decision with this motion. We are not. Otherwise, what implication will it have? Let the voice of the people of Pallisa be heard so that they can adjust.

MR OGOLA: Kindly assist me to understand the stage now, especially following the honourable member’s submission, Sir. What stage are we at now? And what worries hon. Ruhindi is this: we had the commission of inquiry by Sempebwa, and they traveled throughout the country. They went to our constituencies and we gave them the points of view, which they then processed into a report. The report went to Cabinet and Cabinet produced the White Paper. 

The White Paper came to Parliament and Parliament has produced a report. Our worry is that if we now go back to the stage at which we started with Sempebwa, we would be duplicating work for no reason. We would like to focus on the White paper and the report of our committee so that we can move faster. But if we allow interventions now and what each constituency says; how far do we go, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: The Sempebwa Commission was set up to make enquiries; they traversed the country. There is no guarantee that Seempebwa talked to each and every person in the country, whether they got views of groups and so forth, they did their work. They had a timetable, went here and there but this does not mean that they were so comprehensive that whatever is there is what actually people - if it were, then what is the purpose of this? We would say people have already expressed those views. 

The Members of Parliament are in charge of constituencies and are entitled to go and cross check with their constituencies, and make any additions. This exercise is not going to take long and as we heard the other day, by the 15th the Minister in charge of this will present the Bill and then that is the instrument we will use later. I have always insisted that is the instrument, which they are going to use to make changes. Here we are getting reports and there is no way I can direct people as they try to deliver their substance.       

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, if my colleague from Pallisa is bringing the views of her people to the House, it is important that through me my people of Madi-Okolo should be clarified on certain matters. The people of Pallisa need to convince the people of Madi-Okolo to go along with her because there are certain positions taken by the people of Pallisa, which we could in Madi-Okolo go along with if certain matters were straightened up. I am not allowed to get that clarification yet she needs my support when the time comes. How will she solicit it? We should devise a better way of handling this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not have to disagree with you but at the same time I do not have to repeat myself. It is in her best judgment to accept or not to accept your clarification.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I thank you. The reason that hon. Alaso advanced on the issue of time is the very reason I am not allowing members to eat up my time. I know it will not be compensated.  

On the issue of public servants and army officers resigning before seeking political offices, the people of Pallisa are divided. The civil servants do say that they should seek leave and when somebody has gone through he can be able to resign. But the people who are not civil servants welcomed this idea of the civil servants resigning. So, the majority of the people support the White Paper and say that since we are going into multi-party politics, civil servants should resign before seeking political offices.

On the issue of the death penalty my people support the idea of those who commit murder, robbers and kidnappers facing the death penalty. But, Sir, they say that for defilement the years should be reduced to 13 before one is to be hanged. The reason is that they have seen many young people in prison and if we pass this law as it is at 15 years, then we are going to have many young people hanged.

They also wonder why we do not have a law so that the old women who go with young boys face the same fate? So, they propose that the old women, the sugar mummies, who also go with the young boys, should also face death penalty.  

Mr Speaker, the people of Pallisa are supportive of the idea of establishing a salaries and remunerations board so that the salaries of all civil servants can be catered for by one body. 

My people also support the idea of retaining Kampala as the capital city of Uganda because they believe every Ugandan has contributed to its development. 

On the issue of the vice-president being a running mate as proposed in the Sempebwa Report, the people of Pallisa are in disagreement. They support the position in the White Paper where the status quo should be maintained. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Is it time to end?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable members. These are very good ideas and I am sure we are being equipped to handle the matter when it eventually comes. So, I think this is appropriate time to adjourn. We shall continue with the debate tomorrow and see how to proceed. We should start promptly. If possible let us start at 2.00 p.m. promptly, or at least 2.15 p.m., then I think we will be able to cover many of you. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.04 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

