Wednesday, 9 February 2005
Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS  

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am delighted to inform you that after the elevation of hon. Nyombi Thembo, who was the Deputy Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, that committee sat yesterday, Tuesday, 8th February 2005, and elected hon. Ahabwe Godfrey to be the Deputy Chairperson. So, hon. Ahabwe Godfrey is now substantively the Deputy Chairperson of the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I now put the question to his appointment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the document - Mr Nandala Mafabi’s report? Hon. Nandala, had you gone for the pink paper?

2.23
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker, copies of the reports are ready and I hope everybody has read them. You should now give me permission to present it to the House. Thank you.  

This is the status report of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request before it, and other works. Under our Rules of Procedure, and Article 138 of the Constitution, the Committee on National Economy is supposed to scrutinize matters relating to national economy generally, finance and any other matters referred to it by this House, and thereafter report back.

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, I just want to be sure from the chairman whether this is a report of the committee. The copy we have is not signed by anybody; this is not to say it is a committee report, but I want an assurance from him that actually it is a report of the committee.

MR MAFABI: If you read the Order Paper, they say, “The Statement from the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy” and he is representing the committee here on the issues of the – and I am talking as a committee.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, a status report of this nature is a very important matter. It is unfortunate that while it is being presented, we have no member of the executive responsible for the economy in this House; no member or person representing the Ministry of Finance, nobody representing the sector of works. We have said this one. Why does the Executive not take the work of this House seriously?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately today is Cabinet day and Cabinet is finalizing the Constitution Amendment Bill, which is very crucial this time around. I am here precisely to take notes and hand them over to the relevant ministers to do research because I am aware that very important issues are to be raised in this report. Even if they were here, they would not have been in position to address these fundamental issues. They need some little time to do research and come and respond. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, in our Constitution we have representatives of the Cabinet as Members of Parliament, we even made accommodation for those who did not make it in the elections to be members of this august House. It is a well-known fact that whenever we raise issues here members of the Cabinet are supposed to respond accordingly. There is no such a thing as a member of the Cabinet representing the entire Cabinet when they are in session elsewhere. Is my honourable colleague in order to mislead the august House that one Minister of Parliamentary Affairs shall represent the Cabinet when serious matters of the state are being discussed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, she is representing the Leader of Government Business. I see some difficulty here because the issues here are actually crosscutting; they run through several ministries. Hon. Nandala Mafabi, do you mind if we defer this? I am sure members will want answers.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see how serious the Cabinet is. If they were interested they would have been here but since you have said that in the interest of the whole country, I think we better defer it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, Leader of Government Business, we are deferring this matter to tomorrow so that the ministers of all these sectors can be here to respond to members’ concerns.

MR AWORI: Really, for us to let them off like that is not adequate. (Laughter) This is not the first time. As hon. Ben Wacha put it, they have done it repeatedly and we keep accommodating this kind of delinquency on the part of the Government. Really, I suggest we move a collective 118. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The 118, must be taken per individual; I do not think we can do it collectively. However, I hope the Leader of Government Business has noted the concern of the members, so let us prepare for tomorrow. You are welcome to sit there, Mr Nandala. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, the report says it is a Status Report of the Committee of National Economy but when I look at it, it is like a personal statement. There are no signatures appended to it. So, I want to know really whether it is a report of the committee or somebody’s personal statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think it meets the requirements of a report under our rules. It is really supposed to be just a statement by the chairperson of the committee. So, perhaps you might wish - when you are presenting it – to alter the heading to reflect that it is not actually a report of the committee but a statement from the chairperson.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the National Economy Committee. We discussed this issue in the committee and we mandated our chairman - because it is not a report per se - it is a statement. It is not a report, get the clarification, it is a statement. Even on the Order Paper it reads, “The statement by the Chairman …”, not a report. It is a statement by the Chairman, Committee on National Economy and we have mandated him to make it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked the Chair of the National Economy tomorrow when he is presenting to amend the heading of this document, because it is not a report.  

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE WHITE PAPER

(Debate continued.)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence on a matter pertaining to the debate on this report. Do we have a rough idea of whether we should continue until later, or are we winding it up today? Some of us have not had opportunity to contribute and we do not want to be springing up and down trying to catch your eye. If we had an idea, we can continuously sit down and wait for Friday or Tuesday. When do you plan to cut it short?

MR AWORI: Hon. Awori, even if you do not stand up, you do catch my attention. Yesterday I had indicated we would probably end the debate today but afterwards I received presentations from members who said that they had not had an opportunity to speak. So, we shall go on until tomorrow afternoon, I do not think we will go on until next week.  

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity you have given me. I have risen on a point of guidance. I do not think it is prudent for the backbenchers to debate the White Paper when actually almost none of the frontbenchers is around. There is only one person, one out of sixty. I am a mathematician. When you take one out of 60, the ratio is almost negligible. So, I am of the view that the intention of this was to guide the Front Bench when they are making the Bill.  But -(Interjection)- no, the Bill has not been presented, I think there is need for them to be around such that they can follow the trend of the debate and guide them on how to make the Bill. 

I do not think it is in good faith when you appeal to members to be present and all the Front Bench is empty. The Minister for Parliamentary Affairs actually belongs to the Back Bench. So, it is not a good image. I am just appealing to you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. Can plenary continue without any member of the Front Bench?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure members of this august House that hon. Babu, myself and others who will be joining us shortly are in position to take down all your concerns and take them back to Cabinet so that they could be incorporated into the Bill. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are putting me in a bit of a dilemma. On the one hand I would like your constituents to hear you speak. I understand when I keep you here at night you say, “The Deputy Speaker keeps us here at night”. So, I do not want to keep you into the night. We should decide whether we start work now and finish at 7.00 p.m. or start at 3.00 p.m. and finish at 9.00 p.m., which I am prepared to do.

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM: Madam Speaker, let me hope I got you right. Are we debating for our constituents to hear us or we are debating to guide the Executive in making the Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is both. We sent you out to get their views, so they should hear you say what they sent you to say. The Executive part of it is here but if you want us to delay then we shall sit until 9.00 p.m.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: When the hon. Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs was giving an answer to one of the issues that had been raised, she categorically stated that most members of the Cabinet are not here because they are finalizing the Constitutional Amendment Bill. I think I heard her correctly. Then why are we debating it? Unless we are debating, as you have just said, for the sake of our constituents to see us and to hear us say something, but not to influence the input in the Bill that is going to be tabled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, the Bill is going to come to this House. It will come to our committees. What is the problem? 

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to assure hon. Wambi that this debate started nearly a week ago and most of the concerns that have been raised on this Floor; we have taken note of them. As they discuss the draft Bill now, many of the concerns raised are being taken on board. So, nobody should fear. Even in the committee, before we looked at the concerns in the report, we took note of all your concerns. Whatever you raise now, it is not yet too late and as the Speaker rightly put it, even at the stage when the Bill is brought you have the opportunity to go to the committee, present your views, and come and discuss it here. So, the door is still wide open. Thank you.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I now come to understand why the White Paper is being debated: that our people should hear us. This brings me to the question I raised when this debate started. I said that this debate is of no consequence in as far as I am concerned because one; we are debating in anticipation of a Bill that is going to come. The things that we are saying now are the same things that we are going to debate when the Bills comes. 

So, the earlier the debate on this motion is concluded the better because –(Interjections)- these are my views. Even if this House adopts this report I can decide not to be bound by the contents of the report and take a totally different direction when the Bill comes. So apart from debating for our people to hear us, I do not think we are doing anything more serious.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the people of Uganda are entitled to know what you are doing in this Parliament.

2.39
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to contribute to the report by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the White Paper. At the beginning of this debate we were told that we are making our comments known so that we will be able to influence the final content of the Bill that is to be presented to this House. I still hope that is the case. I have heard the minister say it is in the final stages. I hope that my views will get into these final stages.

But before I make my comments I want to note that this is a very important process. I also want to observe that the Constitution we are amending has a context to it. So I thought it would be prudent to remind ourselves this afternoon that we probably needed to have started as a team, by reading the preamble. This Constitution is not just hanging. In terms of Articles, the makers of this Constitution knew that some day a group would sit somewhere and think that it is important to make changes here and there; and here tonight we sit to make changes to this Constitution. But I thought - and I still believe - that reading the preamble to this Constitution is the best thing we will do to ourselves.

The preamble says, and I want to quote it; “We the people of Uganda, recalling our history, which has been characterized by political and constitutional instability…” and it goes on and on to the extent that I think if anybody is reading any Article, whether it is Article 1 or 105, you have to read the preamble first and stop and begin to know that that Article is attached to this preamble.

I want to echo the fact that the Constitution is cast on a historical background. I have heard in this House members stand up and say it is not cast in stone. This is a “dot-com” age; maybe with time we will not even have it cast in paper, but it is cast in the history of this nation. It should be in our minds, it should flow in our bloodstream that what we are doing is very important and it has a background.

Having said that, let me make a comments on a few issues. I have read the report of the committee, for which I want to thank them, and the committee looks at the proposed amendment to Article 1, the sovereignty of the people, and that a referendum should be binding. The rationale of the amendment, according to the White Paper, is to return power to the people. Madam Speaker, I find this proposal very suspicious. It is a very suspicious proposal, it is a deliberate move to overturn institutions in this country knowing that you can manipulate the peasants, knowing that it is easy to play around in the days of rigging, the way we always do it in this country. I find it very suspicious! 

The peasants we talk about, the sovereign people of this country, whom we always refer to, are the very people who sent us to school. They gave us the mandate and said, “You go and be medical doctors, make medical decisions on our behalf”. “Go and be lawyers, go and be teachers like Alaso, and teach the children on our behalf”. We are still making decisions on their behalf. So when I find a situation where there is a proposal to say that this is binding, a situation that is subject to manipulation, I think this is very serious and very dangerous to the future of Uganda. It is a move that should be shunned by every one of us. Actually this proposal is the most dangerous proposal that has been presented to us as the people who are dealing with the constitutional amendment.

The second issue I want to comment on, Madam Speaker, is the proposed amendment to Article 105: the question of lifting term limits. I have heard comments here to the effect that this should not be pegged to one individual. Who said it should not be pegged to one individual? We are talking about ineligibility. Out of the 25 million Ugandans, there is only one person who is going to be rendered ineligible by this Article. And that is the reason why all of us are being asked to amend this Article. Let us be honest! Let us face reality! There will be only one beneficiary of this amendment here. The rest of us still have the mandate; we can stand. We are not barred by the Constitution.  

I have also heard colleagues say, “You see, local  councils have no term limits”. I think this is ridiculous! How do you equate the power in the presidency to the power in the local council I? Since when has there been a coup in this country to overthrow the local council I or to overthrow a Member of Parliament? I challenge anybody to stand up here and show me a coup, prove from our records that there was a coup to overthrow a local council I. I find this ridiculous!

Madam Speaker, we have to be honest. Uganda is not a supermarket where we do things just for the good of the manager of the store. This is bigger; it is bigger than one person, and I want us to reflect on the current situation. On Saturday President Eyadema died and the chaos in Togo, the uncertainty, the anxiety - I think Ugandans should even ask themselves, “Why did Eyadema die at the time when we want to Eyademise Uganda”? Why? God called Eyadema at the particular time in which we are amending our Constitution to show us that if we still have the courage to learn, we should learn something before we plunge into this type of chaos. I am glad, and I am thankful to God that he has sent us a warning in our time. 

Madam Speaker, the other thing that I want to point out is the proposal on compulsory acquisition of land. This is very disturbing. I cannot even imagine that somebody thought about bringing such an outrageous proposal to this House, and I want to challenge the ministers here to prove that they are committed to this. Let any member of the Front Bench stand up and donate their land to government for investment. If there is anybody who believes in this amendment, let them stand up on the Floor of this House and say, “I am giving my land to government for investment”. There is nobody! 

They do not believe in it yet we are making the peasants believe that that is the right thing to do? Madam Speaker, investment is a business. You get profits from your investment. Show me an investor who wants free land and I will show you a pseudo investor. Here is a person who is not going to do genuine work. We are presiding over a country where we have watched a botched privatization process. Yes! There are cases of privatization over which we cannot even account to the people. We have seen a situation where this Parliament had to literally rescue land, the Butabika hospital land. If somebody has the guts to go for land, which has been allocated to try to alleviate the suffering of the mentally sick people, how about the land of the miserable peasants? 

Madam Speaker, history tells that in 1789 a revolution took place in France. This revolution, among other causes, was a result of the failure of the aristocracy to address the needs of the peasants who dominated the countryside. In Uganda the poorest of the poor live in the countryside. These people barely have what to eat; struggling to meet their day-to-day needs. Those are people whose land we want to legislate out in the pretext of investment? I want to warn this country. There was once a king, a powerful one who had everything he wanted. One day he went to a poor man’s wife -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute.

MS ALASO: The Bible says David was judged for taking Urea’s wife, and so you dare not go for the belongings of the peasants. We are the very ones who have failed to turn peasants in this country to investors and now we want to grab the land? In this House we have continuously said, “Give them the credit they need so that they become investors in their own right”. I want to urge us that come the time when you pass the Bill, there are certain things I want to suggest that Cabinet even deletes them. The intention to amend Article 105 should be abandoned; they should abandon the one of land; and amending Article 1 should also be abandoned. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.51
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the White Paper discussion in the House. Also, allow me to thank the committee for a good report and in my view this report is very comprehensive and well balanced. It helped me to guide my constituents ably while discussing the White Paper. 

Before I go further I would like to implore this House that the recommendations we make and the proposals we are trying to make should be those to unite the people of Uganda, to bring about stability in this country and further develop our country. I urge my colleagues that the decisions we take should be decisions that are going to bring down the poverty levels in this country, that are going to promote social justice in this country, that are going to make the voices of the marginalized be heard even more.  

Before I comment on the recommendations that were discussed in my constituency I wish to get clarification from the committee about page 57 whereby government - it is the fifth paragraph - government response. “Government notes the recommendation and is of the view that elections of persons with disabilities should be held together with elections of other representatives of interest groups like the district woman representatives.” 

I would like clarification on this point because on the issue of holding elections on the same day, they talked about the presidential elections and those for Members of Parliament. So, I would like to know whether they are referring to only male Members of Parliament or whether the female Members of Parliament are included as well. When I look at this page 53 the women Members of Parliament are put together with the elections of people with disabilities.

If the recommendation is that we have presidential elections and those for Members of Parliament - meaning both male and female - and LC V chairmen elections on the same day, I wish to support this recommendation because of the following reasons. It will reduce election costs in this country and it will further reduce election fatigue. While I was discussing the White Paper with my people they showed concern over the long period of electioneering in this country that has caused under development. Most of the time people are engaged in politicking and have little time to contribute to the development of their areas. I would further support this recommendation because it will minimize the bickering and undermining of other candidates.

My people also support this recommendation because of the reasons I have enumerated. However, there was a section of the people who said or who preferred that elections of the President be on the same day while that of the LC V chairperson and his councilors should be on the other. But these were just the minority. The majority support the Government recommendation that the elections for President and the Members of Parliament, and I insist both men and women; and the LC V chairmen, should be held on the same day. 

On the issue of opening up political space by invoking Article 74, my people overwhelmingly support this recommendation. I also overwhelmingly support this recommendation because the right of the people to adopt a political system of their choice should be respected. In any case after listening to the recommendations of NEC in March 2003, most of the people were convinced that the political space should be liberalized. 

However, my people and I feel that in order for the people of Uganda to appreciate this need, we need to do massive civic education so that our people internalise, appreciate and understand the reasons why we are going multi-party. Otherwise, as the Sempebwa Commission stated, over 70 percent of our people are still interested in the Movement System of Government. If we do not do massive civic education our people will continue to associate multi-party politics with the –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. I appreciate the views of your constituency on the matter of civic education. In the event that we are unable to meet the timetable - because according to the law civic education is supposed to take place six months prior to elections - in the event –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that gesture and thank you, hon. Aggrey Awori, for giving way. I would like to give the following information. The referendum law that we passed recently in this august House provides that civic education will need two months. It does not provide for six months. And according to how we are working out the revised roadmap, we will be in time. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleagues both the Leader of Government Business and fellow backbencher for the information and for allowing me to remain on the Floor for two more minutes. However -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I hope you are not smuggling in a submission.

MR AWORI: However, in light of the honourable colleague’s two months, what if we cannot even meet the two months, do you think your people will agree that we extend the life of Parliament for three years?

MRS RWAKIMARI: I would like to thank my colleagues, especially the honourable minister for elaborating on the point very well. I have no doubt that government knows what it is doing and maybe there will be enough time to carry out the civic education. However, I would like to urge government and other stakeholders like civil societies, to embark on this exercise seriously so that our people can make informed decisions on this transition. Otherwise, the people of Ntungamo District support the opening up of political space or invoking Article 74 of the Constitution.

Finally, on the issue of deleting Article 105(2) of our Constitution; since power belongs to the people, I feel that they should be left to express their will and consent on who should govern them and how they should be governed, through regular and fair elections. This is one way our people can keep good leaders at the same time getting rid of bad leaders.  

The people of Ntungamo District appreciate or support the deletion of Article 105 because they do not see the relevance of this Article in the Constitution since we are going into multi-partism. And in any case Uganda will not be the first country to have open term limits for the presidency. Both America and Europe do practice both term limits.

3.01
MR UMAR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I bring you greetings from the people of Kalungu East and their thanks for accepting to be there: the President and the Speaker, plus the Members of Parliament, on the 5th of December 2004.  

I want to thank the committee for actually going by the guiding principles, which your office has continued to give this House ever since we started.

On the issue of opening up of political space, I consulted my people widely and they agree with this but with caution that the turmoil days should not have a repeat in the future of the country.

On the issue of the election process, Madam Speaker, they totally disagree with the Government proposal for the elections to be held on the same day for both national and local electoral posts. Their view is that the national elective posts, that is for presidential and Parliament, should be held on the same day; and the district or local level elections should also be held on another day. Reason being that with the voter apathy, which we are experiencing in Uganda, you find that the electorate is more concerned with the chairman of the district. So, if they are left alone, the turn-up of the voters will be very high.

Concerning the issue of the chief administrative officers, they agree with the Government proposal that the CAOs should be actually appointed by the centre. It carries no logic for the money to be sent from the centre without an upper hand as to who is controlling the funds at the district. So, they appreciate the decentralization policy but a mechanism should be put in place to increase the capacity building in the districts.

On the issue of powers to the President to dissolve Parliament, actually here they ridiculed the Government because they said that government lacks seriousness on this point. They said that in the first place it should not have even appeared in the White Paper. They are the ones who elect the President, they are the ones who elect their Members of Parliament, therefore, their powers or their sovereignty in this aspect is circumvented.

They entirely agree with chapter 6 of the Constitution, save for Article 84 where you said that their right to recall should be eased up. They want to enjoy this right. 

They also said that the issue of voting by proxy as given by Article 76 should be operationalized by Parliament so that it can also be put into effect. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of legislative powers to the President, they are aware of the fact that the President is the chief executive and they say that he should devote all his power, or his efforts, to developmental aspects as far as the executive powers are concerned, and he should leave Parliament to actually handle legislative aspects. 

On the issue of interest groups, they argue that actually they appreciate this point but they said that the representation is not well felt on the ground. So, a mechanism should be put in place to see that these interest groups like the youth, the persons with disabilities and the workers are ably represented at the lower levels as well.

When it comes to acquisition of land they said that Article 26 covers this area very well and there should be no change in this Article. They said that with the liberalisation and privatisation policies, those are enough to cover it. There should be a ready buyer and a ready seller and both of them should agree on what should be done.

When it came to the removal of cultural leaders from their offices, here they also laughed and ridiculed the Executive. It lacked logic to them so this one should not even be heard. 

When it came to federo, this is where crux of the matter was. They said that among the objectives or the necessities that formed the background of the CRC, were those aspects, which were left unresolved. On this I would like to say that the committee did not do its job well because they said that both the Government and the people did not handle this aspect comprehensively. But the people know what they want and actually they argue that power belongs to them. Where did the 90 plus percent in 1994 go? And countrywide, the 67 percent of that time, where did it go? This time around the 30 percent is not a small figure, so this one should be resolved once and for all. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the time is now and I appeal to you to actually give the people what they are demanding for. It is a genuine demand and we should actually look at it seriously. The people know what they want; they do not want this diluted regional tier; they want federo. 

We tend to confuse federalism with monarchism. This is not the kind of federalism we are asking for. We are asking for a federalism well knowing that monarchism is no longer applicable. So –(Interruption)

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, honourable member for giving way. Yesterday I was here in this House when hon. Alintuma Nsambu was giving information. In fact he was demanding for federo for the kingdom of Buganda. I want to be clarified on this. You are moving very cautiously and I think you are making a very good contribution. What type of federo do you want? Is it federo for the kingdom of Buganda or a federal system for Uganda?

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, leader of the opposition from - Madam Speaker, the framers of the questions as the CRC was going out to consult the people had this question: “Should those regions or should the people who want federo be given the federo system”? Actually this is the concern of the people. In 1994 the 90 percent who agreed with this kind of question thought that federo, or federalism, should be given to those areas that want it. 

Buganda is not actually agitating for federo in Buganda alone. We are arguing for federo in the whole country to those areas that want it. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, hon. Mawiya for giving way. To enrich debate in terms of information about the distinction between decentralization and federalism, let us borrow a leaf from a distinguished scholar of federalism by the name of Prof. William Riker from the University of Florida.

He has this to say; “A constitution is federal if two levels of government rule the same land and people with each level have at least one area, which is autonomous, and there is some guarantee, even though merely of settlement, in the constitution, of the autonomy of each government in its own sphere.” Riker is saying, when you talk about federalism you are talking about specifics, powers being constitutionally shared between the center and the regions, without mincing words.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you for that information. (Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Mawiya for giving way. I have followed some of the debates over the FM radio stations around Buganda here and I have always heard people say that the type of federo Buganda wants is known by the Katikkiro of Buganda. Whenever someone asks, “What type of federal …”? They say, “The one the Katikkiro wants.” Unfortunately, I have not had close interface with the Katikkiro. I wonder when we shall have that close interface so that we understand very well the type of federal the Katikiro has. (Laughter). Otherwise, we get lost because hon. Lukyamuzi has his version and others too. 

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to find out whether the speaker on the Floor is not out of order to think that actually the Baganda who are asking for the federal system of government do not know what they really want. I want to find out whether he is in order to do that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All of you have come here with different positions. Ultimately a vote will have to be taken so it is up to you to convince your colleagues about the thing you are selling. So, the “lost counties” are saying they have not understood what you want. Please, try to canvass support. Do not be aggressive, hon. Mayiwa, but your time is up –(Capt Babu rose_)- you know the federo? Okay, Capt. Babu.

CAPT. BABU: Madam speaker, thank you very much. The Constitutional Review Commission, when sitting, were given the requests by the people who represent the Baganda. It is in a booklet, and the Constitutional Review Commission received it. It is those points that were given that are continuing to be the basis of negotiations and talks between Buganda and the Government. All these other things that are heard over the radio, some of them are basically not on because there is a complete write-up, which was given to the Constitutional Review Commission. The commission, in their report, also reflected on it and that is the basis upon which we can debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the booklet available to Members of Parliament? 

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Further information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On federo?

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Yes. Madam Speaker, I remember an occasion in Kampala here when hundreds of people led the Katikkiro of Buganda to submit the views of Buganda to the Constitutional Review Commission. I vividly saw it. So, if the people of Buganda are saying it is those views submitted by the Katikkiro, I do not see any contradiction. I personally received a copy of that submission and I know many Members of Parliament should have received that copy, which was submitted. It is a public document. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mawiya, I am sorry your time is up.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, you should actually be lenient and compensate me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, because I was refusing and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the one who gave way.  Please, wind up.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Actually the report, or the federo, which he is talking and which is being agitated for, the Katikkiro himself is not far away from the views of the people. What he is presenting are actually the views of the people as enshrined in that document, which is a public document.

People are also asking that there should be one council. I do not know why actually government did not come up with a solution to this, or a position to this? Government has conducted consultations with the Mengo Government and even other –(Interjection)- I have one minute -(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please, hon. Mawiya your contribution has taken 15 minutes. 

3.13
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join members in commending the work of the committee. 

I want to talk about the issue of the chief administrative officers. I agree with the committee’s report that the CAOs should be centralized, but I wish to urge –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. A former CAO is submitting on that important matter.  (Laughter)

MR WOPUWA: I wish to urge that when the position of the CAOs is being handled, it should also be handled together with town clerks of municipal councils. I also want to urge that when you are looking at the position of CAOs, unless we are able to prepare this, we are going to go back to the same problem. The chief administrative officers do not work alone. The performance of a local government under the chief administrative officer is dependent on the structures that exist: the heads of departments, and the political leaders.

If you look at the history of decentralization in Uganda since 1993, apart from one chief administrative officer, all the others have been swept away by hazards. So, the Ministry of Local Government should be able to strengthen itself. When a CAO is posted to a district and the district rejects that CAO, what is the responsibility of the Ministry of Local Government? We have had situations when sub-county chiefs are posted and the sub-county councils reject them.

Lastly, we should note that the turbulence the CAOs are having - because there is a tendency to portray CAOs as embezzlers, corrupt, but that is the challenge the whole decentralization is facing. When you are looking at the corruption in districts, most of it is linked to the center and the Ministry of Local Government has not been very good in guiding local councils.

On the issue of elections for president, Parliament and LC V being held on the same day, I have a lot of doubts. One; the commission is weak. If you look at the election violence we have had, in Mbale we lost eight people during elections and that was only during the Parliamentary elections. 

During LC V elections the chairman of the District Chairman of the Movement task force for Museveni then, had to be ferried and hidden in Tororo because the violence was so much and yet we had a central police station nearby. Now the Police Force is still at 15,000, do we have the capacity to manage all these elections on the same day and manage them well? Most of the polling stations that we have now were set up ten years ago. So, that is an issue I think we should be able to look at. 

Our people are still illiterate –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, could you please allow the member to contribute?

MR WOPUWA: On the issue of Article 1, regarding giving the people power, through a referendum, to decide on everything, when you look at history, especially the French Revolution, most of the people who said they had gained power for the people: Marat, Danton, all of them sentenced the people to die at the guillotine. 

Recently we had a problem here. The press was able to manipulate people in Mbale and if these Bugisu Members of Parliament had gone to Mbale at that time, they would have been sentenced to death. That is because we are talking about giving power to the people. Even in Athens, the source of democracy, not everybody was allowed to participate in everything. So, I am a bit cautious about giving power, everything, to the people to decide. Their decision will depend on who is convincing the people.

On the issue of regional tier, the people in Bubulo East do not support it. In fact Bubulo East, Bubulo West and Manjiya, we are pushing and lobbying for more decentralization so that we can have a district. But when you take it higher to combine the people we gave independence to, Kapchorwa and Busia, it is like we are going back to those days and we used not have a very good relationship. We almost lost Mbale as a town, to Bukedi. So, they reject it and they think it will not work.

On the issue of the term limit, Bubulo East supports it because the argument that we have now is that when you look at our history in Uganda, we have not had chaos in Uganda because particular leaders have ruled for a very long time. Obote II was only here for four years, Amin ruled without a Constitution, Obote I was removed in 1967 after five years. We have instead had stability under a long regime when we have one long government staying in power for a long time. So, we are saying that let the people be given time to choose who they want.


As I wind up, the people of Bubulo East strongly support the opening up of term limits, and we do support them. We hope that will be a basis for developing our country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already recognized hon. Kubeketerya. Before hon. Kubeketerya makes his contribution I would like you to join me in welcoming the councilors from Yumbe District who are up in the gallery –(Laughter)- led by their speaker. They are also accompanied by students from Yumbe at Nkumba University, Makerere University, and Kampala International University. They asked me to thank you for giving them a district in 2000 and they say they are doing well. You are welcome. The visit was arranged by their Members of Parliament, hon. Tiperu and hon. Alonga.  

3.20
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues of the committee for the work well done. I would like to give you the views of the people of Bunya County East.

Regarding Article 1, the people of Bunya County East support the idea that power should be consolidated and given to the people. But the argument is - I think I will be making an appropriate amendment - because the question was, “when is a referendum supposed to be held”? Could it be that a sub-county can come up and if it has something then a referendum is carried out? I would like to urge government that as they bring the Bill here, they should actually specify when a referendum that will make decisions that will not be tampered with by other arms of government will be carried out. They should actually stress that. Otherwise, the people of Bunya agree that they need the power.

Madam Speaker, can I be protected from the hon. Member for Busongora South?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the revolutionary leader to go back to where he normally sits? (Laughter)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you much for that ruling. 

On the issue of change from the Movement Government to multi-party, the people of Bunya County East and I agree on this one, only that we had problems convincing them. I would like members to agree with me that in as far as the dangers of multi-parties are concerned, our region was affected. By then we were under Iganga and clashes went to an extent that people would use saws to murder each other. So, they reluctantly agreed to move from Movement to multi-party. I think that is something that we should put on record.

About the issue of chief administrative officers, the people of Bunya agree with government’s position that these ones should be decentralized. We went ahead to even say that let us have all heads of departments decentralized. The argument is that in countries like Ghana human resource was not decentralized. I want members to agree with me that we are not just punishing the chief administrative officers but we are also protecting them because there are situations in which they unethically perform their duties due to duress from either councilors or from other heads within the district. 

In any case, if somebody has lost a job say in Mayuge, that is the end of him or her. Whereas, if we decentralized them, these are fellows who would be warned by the center and could be re-deployed. So the argument is actually two-way. I would like to urge members that when this one comes, let us have decentralization of chief administrative officers and even heads of departments, because we could be losing resource personnel.

On the issue of traditional leaders, I would like to submit that the people of Bunya County East do not support the position that Parliament should have the powers to sack cultural leaders. Their argument is that since we have a Constitution, this matter should be resolved by the Constitutional Court but not Parliament. Most of us are from kingdoms so on the Floor of the House you cannot say that we are standing up to vote against the Kyabazinga or against the Kabaka. So they say the Constitutional Court should handle this matter expeditiously.  

On the issue of the regional tier, I would like to mention that the people of Bunya County East, myself inclusive, do not support the regional tier. The argument is that we already have a Busoga Charter and before we get acclimatized to the Busoga Charter we cannot move to the regional tier. So, in as far as this is concerned, we are in for the Charter and not the tier. This is very clear in as far as the views of people from Bunya County East are concerned and that is also my own view.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Clarification.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Okay, let me allow one clarification from you.

MR MAWIYA LULE: Thank you very much for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from the member is, can he draw a line for me between a charter and the regional tier? 

MR DOMBO: Clarification.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Now my time is being taken, Madam Speaker.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR KUBEKETERYA: I have not allowed you, hon. Dombo from Bunyole County. Can you give me time to answer hon. Mawiya? Hon. Mawiya would like to know the difference between a charter and the regional tier. I wish I were with you when I was consulting the people of Bunya County East. In a way I think the center has a lot of stake in the regional tier whereas for the charter, it is districts that come up and manage their own affairs jointly. That is briefly what –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much honourable colleague for giving way. The clarification I want to seek from my friend is that since the debate on this issue of federalism and the charter started on this Floor, I have listened to a number of colleagues who represent districts of Busoga. I have heard one of the colleagues, hon. Ochieng representing Bugiri, say that the people of Bugiri, which is part of Busoga, do not subscribe to and do not want the charter, which my colleague is talking about. Under what circumstances would these variations come in so that we can make an informed decision on the Floor of the House?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much. Hon. Dombo, the people of Bunya County East are different from the people of Bugiri. So, they are entitled to their views and these are views of the people of Bunya County East.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Further clarification.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am not allowing any more information. Can you allow me continue? I would like to tackle another issue, which is in the White Paper and the report. This is regarding Article 105(2) -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with a lot of humility I am standing on a point of order.  It is on record that through hon. Martin Wandera a petition has already been filed in Parliament from the people of Busoga protesting against the sanction of the Charter, and we have records here in Parliament.  

So, is the hon. Member in order to imply that the people he is representing have already subscribed to the Charter when the Charter has already been officially negated in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, no one has negated that Charter.  It is lawfully lodged in this House, and until a decision is made, it is valid - that is the position. So you are out of order.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling.  On Article 105 about term limits, we the people of Bunya County East say we have no problem of lifting term limits in as far as this proposal is concerned. 

I would like to urge Colleagues here that, if we do not lift the term limits, we shall be violating Article 258 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda -(Interjection)- yes, because we are allowed to amend the Constitution, and if we say that Parliament is not worth amending this Article, then who is supposed to do it?  

So, the people of Bunya County East do support lifting the term limits given the scarcity of good leadership.

Madam Speaker, about dissolution of Parliament by Government, the people are of the view that this one –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I am very reluctantly rising on a point of order because I think when we are making a point in this House it should be relevant and consistent.  

In the Constitution, we have so many limits and limitations, including the limit on the age of voting, it is 18 years and above; the age for marriage is 18 years and above, for being a President, if you defile and so forth.  

So, is the hon. Member in order, he is a legislator, to say that giving a term limit within the Constitution, when we have so many limits of so many things in the Constitution, to the presidential term to two terms is unconstitutional?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that what you said?  No you did not; I do not think that is what he said. 

MR OMARA ATUBO: He said we shall be violating the Constitution, which means the same thing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, hon. Members, he is reporting what the people of Bunya East said, so let him tell us what they said.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I do not want to be misquoted.  I said if we think this Parliament has no right to amend the Constitution, then in itself we shall be really violating the Constitution because there is provision for amendment.  That is what I said.  

3.34
MRS VICTORIA SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Before I present the views of the people of Kayunga, permit me to say thank you to you and the Speaker for the good work that you are doing and unbiasly steering this august House.  

I am going to read this because there are the people’s views. I would like also to recognise the job well done by the Former Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hon. Janat Mukwaya, and the Members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for the good report.

As a district representative, I carried out consultations in conjunction with my fellow members throughout the district.  I travelled with Members from Ntenjeru North, Ntenjeru South and Bbale County.  

Then on the 27th of January, I had a meeting with all Religious Leaders, with all District Administrative Officials and almost everybody in Kayunga; I had 300 people that I consulted.  I am giving you this background to show that the views I am giving are the views of the people of Kayunga.  

The people of Kayunga embrace both the White Paper and the Sempebwa Report or the Constitutional Review Commission Report.  I will not repeat issues aforementioned by my other Colleagues because every issue has been articulated -(Interruption)

MS KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from my hon. colleague because she is saying she is going to read what the people of Kayunga have said; and now she is saying, “Madam Speaker, I will not repeat the views that other people have mentioned.”  

Was this also part of what the people of Kayunga’s report, or she is interjecting with her own words. Because surely the people of Kayunga did not know that other people would have reported what their views are.  I seek clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, the Sempebwa Report and the White Paper have a lot of issues.  There are some issues that the Members are not touching at all, so that is what she wants to address, what has not been touched.  That is how I understand it.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the good ruling.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, a Member who would wish to read any written literature needs to seek the permission of the Speaker.  I wonder whether procedurally the hon. Member on the Floor has sought your permission to read her text.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She got permission from me to consult her notes.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank you for your wise ruling, and I will concentrate on the contentious issues that the people of Kayunga picked in this.  I kept cancelling the ones that have been talked about.

The Presidential term limit, the people of Kayunga say that society is the best judge; law comes in later.  Once the society rejects a leader they will organize themselves and outset that leader.  

The point in place is that people’s protracted war brought the Movement system in place, a home grown people’s initiated system of governance.  


Again, the people of Kayunga say that the Constitution of 1995 has stood the test of time, which is ten years, and since society is not static, a review of the Constitution is welcome.  As a leader – (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: Guidance. Madam Speaker, I am referring to our Rules of Procedure on page 74, Rule 56(1), which says: “A Member shall not read his or her speech, but may read extracts from written or printed documents in support of his or her argument and may refresh his or her memory by reference to notes”. 

To me it seems this is a document and she is behaving like a news reader and we have not even got a document to follow whatever she is reading we may even get lost.  Therefore, I need your guidance in this matter as far as this Rule is concerned  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba, I think you should just listen.  She is consulting notes, which she has made- (Laughter)

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am referring to notes and I got permission and the Speaker has already ruled.  For the people of Kayunga – (Interjection)–I am not accepting any clarifications.  

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Many times in this House your Chair has advised that people should not switch on the microphones without having permission from the Chair.  Is hon. Cecelia Ogwal in order to switch on and interrupt the Member on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when we begun this debate last week, we did say that every Member is entitled to 10 minutes.  The question of whether to yield the Floor or not lies with the Member except on a point of order; so, if the member has not yielded the Floor you do not touch the microphone.  We are going to mess up these machines. I would really appreciate if you do not switch on.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  For the people of Kayunga they say that President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni as Chairman of the National Resistance Movement Organization as a political organization should stand and lead the people of Uganda, because you say that power belongs to the people to choose their leader.

On affirmative action, Madam Speaker, my consultations leads to say that this should continue for all – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: However, gender balance should be operationalized in that other than one third to be women on all decision-making bodies, the position of the Vice Presidency should be entrenched in the Constitution. That is to say, when a man is a President, a woman should be a Vice President and vice versa- (Applause)- This would safeguard the affirmative action in the true sense.  What if there is a President who is anti women?  

On Kampala, the Buganda issue, Madam Speaker - I see people are heckling me. I know the Rules of Procedure and I know when I am supposed to read and not to read.  

Kayunga District is mindful that Kampala is in Buganda, but they wanted to know if it is the Capital Buganda efunamu etya (What does Buganda gain?) 

I explained by giving the examples of Washington the capital and the city of power and the Washington District of Columbia. Another example was Nigeria, Lagos and Abuja.  When Lagos was the capital and then it moved to Abuja people moved to Abuja.  

Therefore, the people of Kayunga feel that Parliament has not – sorry I skipped-  (Laughter)- Another example - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have one minute.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: I am reading verbatim that is why I skipped and I do not want people to heckle me.  Another example – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have one minute, hon. Member.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Okay.  Madam Speaker, in short, they say that Kampala should be in Buganda with Mengo Municipality and the powers to be given to the regional tier.  There was some dissenting voices in that some people said they wanted the regional tier; others said they did not want it.  

The institution of traditional and cultural leaders, the Kabaka, the Rukirabasaija of Toro, the Rukirabasaija of Bunyoro, the Kyabazinga of Busoga and all cultural leaders should not at any time be involved in party politics since they are figures of unity and a symbol of excellency that yield an overwhelming influence.   

3.57
MS SARAH KIYINGI (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I will start by thanking the Committee for the good work they did. I want to especially thank them for being so decisive on some of the very contentious issues and also for being what I would call cool-headed in rejecting some of the most crazy proposals by Government.  

Proposals like amending Article 1, to allow what I would call jungle law, to be above the law of this land.  I think it is very commendable that the Committee was bold enough to reject such a crazy proposal.

I want to thank the Committee for rejecting also the proposal that the presidential powers need to be increased to the point that Parliament can be dissolved by the President.  

I also want to say that it is very crazy that Government thought that they should bring an amendment proposing that there should be established special courts for almost every little thing that they thought cannot be handled by Parliament.  I want to thank the Committee for rejecting the proposal of a court for terrorism.

Although, I was a bit disappointed by the Pontius Pilate attitude that the Committee took on some of the hottest issues like amendment of Article 105 where they said here are the views; so let there be a vote.  

They do not seem to be sure where the vote should be, whether it should be here or it should go to a referendum.  Otherwise, I think the Committee did a very good job.

I will go to the issue of the size of Parliament.  The Constitutional Review Commission had recommended that Parliament be reduced, and Government in the White Paper was of the same view, and the Committee also agreed with that amendment.  

In fact on page 26 of the White Paper, Government says that the constituencies should remain as they are and that Parliament should remain as it is.  It means that Government is of the view that Parliament should neither increase nor decrease.  

But lately I have been disturbed. When the President is going round the country, he is telling the villagers, everybody who wants a district is told - in Bulamogi, in Yumbe, in Nakasongola, they are told they will have the districts.  

Now, has Government thought about the fact that when you increase the districts, you automatically increase the size of Parliament, or is Government going to propose that the newly formed districts should not have representatives in the House?  I wonder whether Government has -(Interruption)

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable colleague for giving way.  

I am seeking clarification from you.  When people in Yumbe asked for a district - Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from her because she mentioned Bulamogi and Yumbe, and I want her to tell me when the people of Yumbe demanded for a district from the President.

MS KIYINGI: The hon. Member was giving me information, but anyway I must say it was a slip of the tongue because Yumbe is a district.  But nevertheless, my point is -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you meant Koboko.

MS KIYINGI: I am sure I meant Koboko -(Laughter)- Now, my point is, has Government thought about the fact that when you increase the districts, you are increasing Parliament, even if it is by the Woman Representative of the House?  

So, I see a problem here; Government knowing exactly the right thing, namely, that Parliament is too big we need not to increase it but we need to reduce it if anything, or at least keep it the same.  But at the same time Government is telling the people what they want to hear, where shall we end with this kind of talk?  

Surely, why don’t we tell the people the truth that Parliament is too big, we cannot make any more districts.  But we can not go on like this, people need to be led and to be guided on some of the things that they are asking; if something is impossible, we should tell the people that it is impossible.  

So, I challenge Government to be bold enough to tell people what must be told and not to misguide them with talk, which they just want to entertain.

I want to move on to the removal of term limits.  I observe with curiosity that Government recommends that Article (1) be amended in the way that they suggested to return power to the people.  

But at the same time when it comes to the matter of term limits Government says that, that issue should be voted on in Parliament. I was curious as to the game that Government is playing, but I will leave it at that. 

I noted with concern -(Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank hon. Namusoke Kiyingi for giving way. 

The information I would like to give hon. Kiyingi is that, Article 105(2) of the Constitution is not an entrenched Article, meaning that, the power to amend that Article in accordance with Chapter 18, the amendment Chapter, lies with Parliament. So precisely Government is observing the procedure for amendment as prescribed by the Constitution under Article 158.

MS KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, I will not challenge the Minister because I could, but because there is limited time I will just leave it at that; we can discuss it outside. 

But I will just go on with the point I was making.  I was saying that I had noted with concern the report.  The report says on page 29, there is a paragraph there, which begins with, “Even if the vote is secured in Parliament, it will set the stage for an additional President’s short-term in which the President will have to be more oppressive and less tolerant.” 

Then it also goes on to say in the middle, “But there is also considerable potential for turmoil in the event that the measure is defeated in Parliament.  Will President Museveni accept the verdict of Parliament?”  

Madam Speaker, that is a very pregnant paragraph. But I will point out one thing–(Interjections)- I will point out that the potential of the Army to cause chaos and influence the politics of this country still casts a very big shadow over the people of this nation. 

I believe there are people who take decisions or who are going to take decisions, not because they believe in those decisions, but because they want to be safe and to baby-sit the Army so that it is not annoyed. 

I am sorry I am saying a lot of this “baby and pregnancy”, but I am sure honourable members will understand.  So, this is something that we need to think about; Government has to come out and really be clear.  

Are people of Uganda confident enough to really take decisions that they ought to take? When you look at – we are calling on investments, we are asking investors to come, no amount of words are going to impress investors as long as they know that we have this potential to cause chaos in our nation.  It is not the words; it will have to be actions that will convince investors that there is need for this country to be invested in. 

And when we talk of these so-called Asian tigers, what we need to remember is that the Asian tigers developed under that kind of that tight leadership when nobody minded about democracy.  

Today the world is different, there is emphasis on democracy and good governance; and as long as there is no such environment, we are not going to get investors here because investors and our donors who give us a big percentage of –(Interjection)- the funds are buddies with investors more than they are buddies with us. 

Please, if we do not do things the way the rest of the world is doing, then we are going to lose these investors and no amount of talk is going to convince investors to come.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.08
MRS WINFRED KOMUHANGI MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this debate.  I would like to join Colleagues to thank the Members of the Committee for the work well done.  

I am proud to be associated with the people who thank the Committee for the efforts they put in mainly because when they were being put in place as a Committee, many people scorned them and many thought they would not do the work, to an extent of some actually, rejecting to be Members of the Committee.  

But I am happy at this time that nearly every Member of this House has thanked them for the work well done.  Therefore, I really want to thank them and I can see that they put in a lot of their efforts and they are able and I am sure out of this report, we shall get out a bill that will be useful for our country.

I would like to comment on the preamble of the Committee. It was well written and it has helped us, I am sure, to come to this stage where each one of us is debating and talking our minds without fear or favour.  

That in the preamble, it is clearly stated that we should exercise a lot of tolerance and mutual respect, Madam Speaker, if we comply with these statements, the debate on this Constitutional Amendment Bill that is coming shall no way be difficult, and I hope that we shall exercise our ability to respect democracy so that if the view of the majority is taken, the minority will not rise up any arms to destroy what the majority would like to put in place.

The preamble also clearly tells us that out of the views that we shall generate, they will all be fed into the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill.  

This time I would like to thank the Committee for the methodology they used.  If you look at the methodology they used, there is no doubt that nearly every area, every part, every section of our community has been consulted.  Right from the White Paper, many people brought in their views.  

But also when you look at the methodology, the Committee itself used- it consulted extensively and it came out with ideas, which could be put together from the different groups.  

Therefore, I hope that as we debate and as we go into the future Constitutional (Amendment) Bill debates, we shall respect that. To realize that there are so many leaders in this country who have contributed to this debate and their views also should be respected including what we are going to debate as well, to use our reference points as Members of Parliament.

I would like to talk about the issues that came up in Chapter 7, about the Executive.  The committee had a recommendation that a Member of Parliament once accepts the office of Minister should vacate his or her seat.  

The people of Rukungiri District have another view.  They are convinced that if they have cast their votes to any individual who is able and whom they know will do their work well and that individual comes to Parliament and catches the eye of the President, having realized that that individual is capable, is able and can move things, we all have to accept that –(Interruptions)

MS NAMUSOKE: Madam Speaker, I have listened to my Colleague here very attentively and I am concerned.  Is she in order to imply that only his catch the eye of the President when we know that the frontbench has even female Ministers?  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, she is out of order to forget that there are very capable women on the front bench- (Laughter) 

MRS MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I do apologize and I think that should not really happen.  Sometime it is difficult to keep saying “he/she”.  I hope we can have one word in future in our Constitution and we use “she” and that will help us to be gender sensitive.  So, I will be using she to refer to all of us- (Laughter)

If a Member comes here and is appreciated to become a Minister, the people of Rukungiri District think that she should not vacate the seat as their representative.

On the issue of term limits, Madam Speaker, I consulted widely in my district. I went to every sub-county, I met nearly all the leaders of the district and we discussed this issue.  

Their feeling is this. They hope that there is no Member of Parliament who will associate herself or himself with dictatorship tendencies.  They believe that we are all responsible citizens and representatives of the people.  

They are aware that it is inevitable we are going into a multi-party system, and they hope that having seen that that is the inevitable, there is no body who is going to come here and legislate by inserting dictatorship tendencies in this Constitution, these dictatorship tendencies where you tie any party to limit their leaders in any way.  

They think we should be democratic, allow these parties to exercise their internal democracies, they should be able to choose the leaders they want as parties.  

If a leader is able, there is no need why they should be tied and it will be unfortunate if this Parliament ties this issue in the Constitution.  That is the highest level of dictatorship that you can ever find.  

When it was Movement, it was easy and it could be appreciated.  But the moment we go into the multi-party system, please, they urge all of us, Members of Parliament to refrain from sentiments of just using one person as a reference point and ditch every body else in this country. There should be no dictatorship of limiting the terms –(Interruption)

MR AACHILLA: Thank you so much my Colleague.  I would like to inform you and the Members of this House that, as for the case of Presidential elections, in relation to term limit, they are saying in order to fight dictatorship let us uphold Article 17(2), which says that all able Ugandans should be trained militarily, so that after senior Six all able Ugandans should train so that we can defend this country; in case anybody comes up to take the country, we can defend ourselves.  I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute, please.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope –(Interjection)- please, could you excuse me, I have been given just one minute. I need to tell this House what the people of Rukungiri District would like to be included in the amendment bill.  

Indeed as the people of Jie County are saying, even the people of Rukungiri say people should have the mandate.  The will of the people should be exercised; they should choose their leaders as they want.  If a leader is good, he can rule for as many years as that person is able.  

Madam Speaker, allow me to quickly comment on the issue of the Affirmative Action. The people of Rukungiri District would like to request this Parliament to uphold the Affirmative Action in this Constitution.  They feel the marginalized groups have not gained enough, they have not got to the level were they can be left alone.  

Therefore, I hope we shall exercise a lot of tolerance as we debate, and a lot of mutual respect; and I am sure if we do that we shall show the whole world that we are able leaders who are going to steer this country to greater heights.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.18
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity.  Allow me also to thank the Committee, and in particular to thank the Chairman who has not been around but now is abundantly available.  

I also want to thank you and the leadership of this Parliament, and I bring you warm greetings from the Forum for Democratic Change who are getting ready that the processes we are undergoing here should move faster so that we get out there and we contest for power.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for the greetings.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, my Colleague is reminding me that I should inform the House that I am in uniform, and indeed I am in uniform for the Forum for Democratic Change.  

My feeling is that the White Paper is an extremely very important document, the report of the Commission is an extremely very important document; it is definitely going to decide the future destiny of this country, and how we handle it will determine a lot of things in future.  

I have already been a victim of the White Paper myself, and many of you have known that because of certain things within the White Paper.  More in particular, I can tell you I was a victim of the White Paper because of the land issue in the White Paper.  

Therefore, I would appeal to Colleagues and Government that we should listen to one another, listen to the views from the constituencies and soberly discuss and agree on something, which would be all embracing for all of us.  Otherwise, I see a tendency, which will not be good for this country.  

I have categorized this White Paper into three categories: The first category is what I call outrageous demand, and this outrageous demand I think it is like the term limit, the demand on land, legislative powers and removal of cultural leaders. 

The second category, I call them reasonable demands, which definitely my people have no problem with, like opening up the political space –(Laughter)- yes, my people have no problem with that, that space should be open so that there is free and fair competition, and there are options and choices, so as democrats you can choose, it should not be limited.  

Issues like dual citizenship, my constituents have no problem with that, except the emphasis that it should be extended to people of Ugandan origin, Ugandan nationals; not just somebody who is not even a Ugandan national, but he wants to have dual citizenship. 

My people emphasize that the question of opening up political space - always when you listen to debates of people, people talk about the past, that the past has been violent.  We have read history, especially from independence up to now there are certain regions of this country that have been fundamentally extremists in political violence. 

In the part of the country where I come from, religion is not a factor.  I am a Catholic, but you will find Protestant Bishops campaigning for me if they are convinced that I can offer leadership.  

So, really in the other part of the country where we come from, it is not really a big deal.  But in other parts of the country it is extremely a big problem; and, therefore, if it is a problem for a particular region, as a country we should come together to help overcome such problems. 

The third category, which I put in mainly, is what I would call moral demands in the White Paper; they are basically morale demands –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Moral or immoral?

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Moral demands, and basically these are things like issues on traditional leaders -(Interjection)- but I have not even started my presentation; let me give my presentation then I will give you the opportunity to clarify. 

A question like the size of Parliament, my people think that Parliament should actually be reduced; this size is too big.  It is costly to the nation and at some time it may not even be effective, and yet my people have been concerned that always they hear of lack of quorum; that if the many Members cannot attend Parliament, why don’t we get a small number that will always be there.  So, my people think that we should have a smaller Parliament that is effective.  

The death penalty, my people feel that it should be abolished because the essence of imprisonment is to reform people. 

Madam Speaker, on the question of term limit, my people condemned it.  The people of Aswa, coming from the heartland of the Acholi region, do not support the term limit. They think that the reasons advanced for limiting the term limits were clear. 

In this country we have never heard people going to the bush to fight LC1 Chairmen for having won elections, to fight Members of Parliament, to fight LC5 Chairmen because they are LC5 Chairmen. But the question has always been coups; we have had wars because people want to go to State House and that is one office.    

So, if that one office is the problem and has been a problem for this country, then we must limit the term. But for the others, really I have never heard of anybody in this country going to the bush because my very good friend hon. Kakooza has won election.  So, my people have a feeling that that limitation would help this country.  

On the issue of land, my people are very clear and categorical put it that the provision in the Constitution as it is, is enough.  There is no way Government can get land for businessmen- investors are businessmen.  The provision in the Constitution is clear, Government can acquire land for public interest; that is clear.  

So, my people are saying that we have had enough retired generals.  Let us not create more generals by bringing land problem, because this country will get more Generals because there will be people fighting to defend land.  So, the provision as it is my people support it and they say it should not even be tampered with.  The Constitutional provision is enough; it should not be tampered with.

On the question of legislative powers, my people were very critical.  They gave me example of the days during Obote, when Obote was both a Member of Parliament and a President of this country; they said they saw that experience.  

They also gave me a reminder when the President of this country, President Yoweri Museveni was both the Speaker of Parliament and the President of Uganda; they have also had that experience. He was the Speaker during the NRC days of Parliament, at the same time he was the President of this country; so, he had all the powers.  They have also seen that experience. 

They have also seen where the President is not a Member of Parliament and the President and Parliament representing people are independent and they are extremely happy with this last arrangement.  That let the President stay there; let the people have their powers through their Members of Parliament and make laws and the President should not ask for more powers.  So, the question of separation of powers, they emphasize should be entrenched because it is important.

Madam Speaker, removal of cultural leaders, my people condemned it.  That Parliament should have no powers because in as far as I am concerned- I hear my Colleague was telling me that that thing is not there.  No, it was kind of management by crisis when Cabinet saw people making statements against it, they made a statement. 

But in as far as we are concerned, I took them the White Paper and that provision is still there.  They condemn it; they say Government should desist, because in the past it is politicians who brought cultural leaders into politics.  

They gave example of how Mutebi was brought in the liberated areas to get support for the Movement, to fight and they agreed on certain things.  But when power was taken, Mutebi was now left in the cold. 

They reminded me how Obote used the Kabaka and after getting power he left the Kabaka in the cold.  So, they are warning politicians, that politicians should stop involving cultural leaders into politics because they are the ones who always drag the cultural leaders into politics.  

Cultural leaders should be left where they are, to continue with their activities and that other areas where cultural leaders have not been restored, they should be restored like - and other places.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.27
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank the Committee and its chairman for the elaborate job they have done in the report before us.  

Madam Speaker, for consultation, I moved through the entire 9 sub-counties in Lamwo, addressed big rallies and shared views with all the leaders in my sub-counties who are now in 10 IDP camps.  Their conditions are not the best, they are living under very harsh camp conditions with poor services of health, inadequate food and social services and really their major concern right now is their security and lack of services that they are facing.  

So, really, the message they gave me is that when we are discussing this Constitution amendment, that this Parliament should come up with a Constitution that will not be a recipe for tribal or political conflicts in this country that will create chaos and more wars in our country.  They support the opening up of political space, but they insist that we must put in place a strong law that will protect Ugandans from political thuggery. 

We should also have strong institutions, we do not have any to ensure that any political behaviour that encourages sectarian or destructive nature of politics in this country must be curbed and there should be also adequate civic education in the camps where they live; so that different ideological views should not create conflicts like it happened during the 1960s when there were different political parties and brothers could not even eat from the same table.  So, those are the few messages.  They would wish that –(Interruption)

MRS ATIM OGWAL:  Point of clarification?

MR ONEK:  I do not take any clarification; leave me alone.

MRS OGWAL: Order.

MR ONEK:  No order –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, point of order, hon. Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, I have heard a speaker refer to the election that took place in the 1960s where people could not sit together or eat together. I do not want to misquote you.  But, you know that you cannot make an outrageous statement without substantiating it.  

Is the hon. speaker on the Floor in order to make an outrageous statement concerning events of the passed without substantiating.  Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Onek, can you substantiate what you are talking about? 

MR ONEK:  Madam Speaker, in Lamwo County there was violence between the DP and UPC in which people lost their lives.  I will not want to go into the detail; we can get you elaborate report if you need one, Madam Speaker, from the district.  

We have had definite cases of political violence because of differences.  Our people do not know how to handle ideological differences.  When there is a difference, for them now it is a difference, and you do not sit together.  So, I mean that is the practical situation; maybe it is different in Lango and other parts of Uganda, but we had violence in Lamwo County.

Madam Speaker, on representation in Parliament, our people say we should maintain the same number of people in Parliament, the same number of constituencies because then we would be having much closure interaction with the grassroots.  

They also suggest that the IGG’s powers should be strengthened so that the rampant corruption going on, the looting of public funds that goes on in the district and other Government offices should be controlled.  Enough powers should be given to the IGG. 

On land, the people say the land belongs to them.  If any investor wants to come, he has to go directly and negotiate with the owners of the land; and any negotiation must bear the commercial character so that our people also benefit from the only resource left in their hands, it is only land that they have now.  

On death penalty, they say those who kill by the sword should also die by the sword.
  
Access to justice, definitely the judicial systems, the law enforcement system is very thin on the ground in my Constituency; and, therefore, in most cases people tend to take the law in their hands. So, they would wish that we would have that Arm of Government strengthened in our district and in the constituency.

Cultural institutions, they demand that they should be treated equally.  There are some cultural leaders who are given Military escorts with big vehicles and ours ride on boda boda.  Now, what is all this?  

Our Paramount Chief in Acholi rode on a boda boda until recently when His Excellency, the President was kind enough to get him a double cabin pick-up.  We would wish that all these traditional Chiefs should be treated equally.

Elections, our people say they should not be held on the same day because during the campaigns there is a lot of eating going on. I mean the politicians dish out a few things, so we feel that the voting should be spaced so that at least there will be activities that benefit them.

On marriage, my people say marriage should be between opposite sex above the age of 18 only.  Homosexuality should be declared illegal in Uganda and punishable by law; those involved should be prosecuted and executed -(Laughter)- this applies to lesbians as well.  

Now on rape and defilement, our people consider these as criminal, particularly rape of infants; incest, our people believe these should be punishable through death sentence.  But marital rape to us does not exist because in our culture women are expected to offer resistance so as to –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member you have one minute.  

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

4.40
RTD CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I contribute as Rtd Capt. Byaruhanga for the first time.  

The framers of the 1995 Constitution had in mind to make a Constitution that will stand the test of time, and some of the Articles of this Constitution such as Article 105(2) have not been tested at all.  So, it is a challenge to us who are going to amend the Constitution.  

Two, the intention of the White Paper is to amend 60 per cent of the Constitution, and this Constitution took four to five years to make.  So, we should be careful when we are amending this Constitution so that we do not take this country into chaos.  

Madam Speaker, my approach to the White paper was different.  To my people, I looked at the White Paper and warned them of dangers of some imports of the amendments suggested in the White paper, because as we legislate or as we amend this Constitution, let history be our guide.  

Madam Speaker, we have had countries, which have had life Presidents.  Before I handle the life presidency project, talk of Habib Bhongiba, the father of Tunisia, the President who died in instalments and Tunisia remained in chaos; talk of Mobutu, who was buried standing; talk of Aidid, who left Somalia in chaos; talk of Rouffle Bwaye, who died and Ivory Coast went to chaos; and talk of Eyadema recently.  So, as we legislate, let us think of where we are taking this country.

Hon. Members, let us be ourselves, let us leave this approach, “my people have said”; you are elected representatives and you have the right to guide your people on some of the dangers of the imports.  We are tired of getting arms to remove leaders who do not want to go; we are tired of taking up arms to remove leaders, because this approach of comparing a Chairman of LC1 with the President, a Member of Parliament with the President - which of you Members of Parliament has ever been overthrown in a coup as the hon. Member has said; or which of you can command even a section of LDUs to attack a neighbouring constituency?  You do not have that power - maybe only hon. Eresu, I do not know.  So, as we are legislating, let us think of where we are putting this country.  

The dangers of removing the Presidential term limits, the life presidency project; look at all these countries, see where they have put their countries into chaos and know where you are putting Uganda as legislators.  Whether you are Eyademazing, whether you are Mobuturizing, you know where you are taking Uganda.  

The dangers of compulsory acquisition of land; Land is the only asset our poor people have.  If you legislate for the State to grab people’s land, you are heading for chaos.  To remove from a Mukiga the only asset he has, land, some of them being landless; you know you are legislating for chaos.  So, let us be careful on the imports we are going to give.  

When we are legislating to give the President more powers of dissolving Parliament and of making laws, think of how Amin was legislating whether you want us to go that way.  Let us be ourselves as we are discussing the importance of the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, as of now the seventh Parliament, we can only handle amendments relating to the transition and the laws that affect the transition.  The eighth Parliament can handle other amendments of the Constitution. Why are we in a hurry to amend 60 per cent of the Constitution we made in 1995 recently and thinking it would stand the test of time.  Who told you that we will finish all the work?  Eyadema also thought he would finish everything in Togo; he is now “the late”.  What contract do you have with God that you will finish everything that you are Alfa and Omega that you amend the Constitution of Uganda?  Think about that. 

Madam Speaker, let us stand up to be counted.  I was thinking about this open voting, and we are put on record so that we know the people who ditched this country.  You are on record in the Hansard of Uganda so that we know the people who ditched the country, we know the people who took this country back to chaos, we know the people who again forced us to take up arms to remove leaders, we know the people who led to grabbing of peoples land.  We must stand up.

Finally, on Chief Administrative Officer, Madam Speaker, as we are discussing whether to centralize the Chief Administrative Officer, let us think about other officials, because the Chief Administrative Office does not work alone.  The Chief Administrative Officer works with other staff, a situation where the Chief Administrative Officer will be working as a mercenary when other staff are chosen by the district it will be a danger.

Madam Speaker, let me end with two quotations from “The man of all Seasons.” I will not quote the Bible this time.  One was by Sir Thomas Moore, the patron of politicians. I quote, he says:”Well, I believe when statesmen forsake their own private conscious for the sake of their public duties, they lead their country by a short route to chaos.”  I hope we are not about to do that.

Another one is by Henry:  “There are those like war folk who follow me because I wear the crown and there are those like Master Cromwell who follow me because they are jackals with sharp teeth and I am the lion and there is a mass that follows me because it follows anything that moves.” And there is you.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have assured you, all of you are going to speak. Let me conclude with hon. Byabagambi.

4.47
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to add my voice to those who have thanked the Committee for the beautiful job they have done.  

I come from Ibanda South.  I will talk on the core issues in the proposal and I will leave the rest.  Because the rest I feel those were salads, the real issues were political space, third term or term limits, land and referendum. 

Madam Speaker, on political space, I have to be sincere to everybody that the people of Ibanda overwhelmingly rejected moving from Movement system to political party.  Overwhelmingly they rejected that.  

I got a hard time to explain to them why in NEC we decided that we should go to multipartism.  It was a hard task and up to date, we have not resolved that issue conclusively.  But they do not want multipartism.

Madam Speaker, when it came to the issue of land, Article 26 of our Constitution is very clear on how the Government can acquire land for investment. We should distinguish between investments from investor.  Here the Government is saying it wants land to give the investor which means giving land to an individual.  They said they do not want an individual person to have those powers to grab their land.

Madam Speaker, when it came to an issue of referendum, first they question why we are going to have the referendum at present when NEC and National Conference has already decided that we go for multipartism.  

Secondly, this Parliament approved the lifting the terms then what is the use of the referendum, they were questioning that.  Why should the Government waste ugshs30 billion on asking the obvious?  Therefore, they were against the referendum if the Parliament opens up.

On the issue of referendum being the last so when it is put to the people then all the institutions are bound to that.  My people are saying that this is Africa the referendum can be manipulated.  Therefore, they should give a chance either an individual or institutions to contest the results of the referendum to courts of law.  They against saying that the referendum should be final, that is should not be contested.    

Madam Speaker, when it came to the issue of third term or lifting the terms, I want to be sincere to everybody here that the first three meetings I got nobody knew about lifting the terms.  What they knew was third term and actually that is what was on radios everywhere. 

When I mentioned lifting the terms somebody to rule until you remove him from power. They said, “No, you seem not be with us, for us we are talking about third term.  We had a lively discussion on this and we found ourselves in a dilemma.  

My people of Ibanda are unique, very intelligent people and they can really engage anybody in a discussion.  They ended up into three positions. We are moving from one political dispensation going into multipartism and they do not want to trust anybody whom they have not tested to drive them from Movement system to multipartism other than Museveni.  I have to be sincere on this. 

But at the same time they were very cautious of saying that, we also do not want to entrust the future of this country in the hands of an individual. (Applause) That was position number one.

Position number two was that, amend Article 105 (2) to read “three” so that that experienced driver can take us across the lake, for us to go to the other bank. From that time, we can decide what to.

Position number three was that since we are moving from a Movement system into a multiparty system, and we have had Museveni a good ruler, he has done wonders, he has brought this country from abyss to this level, why can we not amend Article 105 (2) to read as I am going to state - and that was what we concluded on. 

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that at appropriate time I propose to bring an amendment to Article 105 to insert a new sub clause (3) to read, and these are the views of the people from Ibanda, “Without prejudice to sub clause (2), in a multi-party political type of government, political parties shall be free to present their own leaders for presidential elections.” And the provision of sub clause (2) will begin with, “At commencement of the multiparty type of governance…” that is what my people told me. So that from 2006 the term limits will remain in the Constitution but anybody will be free to be elected from that time; that is what my people said and that is the discussion we went through.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, one minute.

MR BYABAGAMBI: On the issue of federo, Madam Speaker, for us in Ibanda even the vocabulary “federo” is not in our heads, we do not need even to think about federo. We are comfortable with the system we have. What we are fighting for is to have a separate district, Ibanda district, so that we can also share on the national cake.

Madam Speaker, I am concluding because I cannot finish all the points, which I have on my paper. I am still consulting my people, we are still moving but when it came to the question of dissolving the Parliament, giving the President legislative powers, these are the views of my people.  That the President has got his own executive powers, we have got our own function of making laws, there is no need why we should remove part of our powers to give it to the President. If he wants to become a legislator then, put a chair here or let him go for parliamentary elections, they elect him and he comes to Parliament. Madam Speaker, those are my points.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. 

4.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING)(Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Madam speaker. Right from the outset I must thank hon. Oulanyah and his committee for a job well done. At one time there were people who passed rumours around here that they were not up to the task. I am very pleased that they were up to the task and the report they produced is above average. They did a good job and we must thank them, and now we have another document that is going to be the basis and a lot of input has been put there for us to amend this Constitution accordingly. 

But before I go on, Madam Speaker, allow me to quote a little when Justice Odoki was launching his book. He said something, which was extremely stimulating and I thought I would read it for you.  It was in the papers and I got it out just to read this one out so that we could see if it can help us. Odoki said that participation in making the Uganda Constitution is the best thing that he has ever done, “The process was phenomenon, it was unprecedented, it was a life time experience, it was a visionary”, he said.  “It was fraught with immense challenges but it was extremely rewarding.  I was conscious that we were not only making history, but we were also creating the future of Uganda”, he said. 

Now, this was a gentleman who was a precursor to our 1995 Constitution, I though I would quote this because then would come back to the rails. A lot of things have been said, there is a lot of scarecrows being planted not only by some of us, but also by our friends in the press, these are scarecrows, Eyadema, there is this one - No, talk about Uganda!  What is it that we want? Let us cure the problem we have in this country. 

People want a form of government that is fully democratic and all embracing in terms of participation and benefits.  It should be one where the leaders put the interest of their people above their own. Such a form should make leaders at every level fully accountable to the people who elect them.  

Now, once we have got this philosophy and we go back to our Constitution, especially in the preamble, it is extremely clear. Some people have already read it but they just gloss over this. It clearly says, “We the people of Uganda” it does not say, “We the Parliament of Uganda” “Recalling our history which has been characterized by political and constitutional instability- (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, to the best of my memory, I am the only one since the beginning of this debate who stood here and read the preamble to the Constitution and I meant to read the first paragraph. I said, “We the people of Uganda” and then I went ahead where it talks about recalling the history of this country. Is the honourable Member for Kampala Central in order to come here and mislead the public and this Parliament that I just glossed over it when that is exactly what is written there. Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable Member, I do not know whether he was referring to today’s debate alone. He was talking about the press, he was talking about outside, I do not know who else has mentioned this matter.

CAPT. BABU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I thank you for your wise decision. I will not waste my time on that one because I was going to another point, which says, “Exercising our sovereign and inalienable right to determine the form of governance for our country, and having fully participated in the constitution-making process.” I am really talking about the central theme of the people. The people of this country were given power by this Constitution and, therefore, I find it difficult, I am not yet persuaded that we cannot look at the power that we give the people. It is like you give them power with one hand and remove it with the other. 



Therefore, in my sincere opinion, I think if we are all sincere, Chapter 1, Article 1(4) says, “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.” Madam Speaker, it is clear and, therefore, as far as I am concerned, this sealed the fate of those who underestimate the power of the people. 

In fact, most of us here, who have been speaking, have been saying, “The people of our constituencies have said.” They are the reason why we are here, and therefore it is important that we make the people the central theme to everything that we do.  Therefore, even with the litany of the quotation of all -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we are aware that the Constitution sets how the people surrender and relate with those who govern them. Is hon. Capt. Babu in order to mislead this House that there is no system that has been established on how the people’s power can be shared, and how the people relate with those who govern them by saying that, since the Constitution says, “Power belongs to the people” all the people of Uganda should be in this Parliament to amend this Constitution? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, the Member for Kampala Central was only re-emphasizing that power as provided for in the Constitution and reminding us all not to forget that power. I think that is what he was saying.

CAPT. BABU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Ekanya for his contribution, and I would like to say I know why he did that. But, accordingly, the principle that the people are sovereign must form the bedrock to the political, economic and social life of our country. No matter what you say, these are the people. I am happy that hon. Ekanya was kind enough to use the word “share”; they share it with us and then we must use it according to their wishes.  

Madam Speaker, over time this area has been dominated by political philosophers. In fact, our chairman was kind enough to quote a litany of philosophers, who have been presented by the committee and this started from Plato up to the latest. These, if you took Plato as an example, were in a society which was divided into three at that time; they had slaves, they had foreigners, they had citizens. Sovereignty was for the citizens only. Over the years, even the slaves fought to get sovereignty, including other people. Therefore, sovereignty is something that has been fought for all the years in political sharing of powers.

So, when we talk about the people, we really talk about the people who own a nation and, therefore, it is important that when we talk about them, we should think about the present time, what the democratic process is like. Political theory must take recognizance of institutions, practices and custom prevailing.

Madam Speaker, as I finish, because I have spent some time on this and that is the reason why some people were contributing to take the time, I was going to talk about referendum. Today there are countries that are carrying out referenda, in United Kingdom, in the whole of Europe to join the European Union. 

These are very advanced countries, they have had a culture of politics for many years, some of them have had democracy for over 800 years and this referendum, including a country like Switzerland, have been used to decide on contentious issues. It is, therefore, important that we should not lose sight of the referendum. As I end, I think the most important thing that we should do –(Interruption)

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister on the Floor, as he was beginning to talk he said we should not talk about other countries, not even to give examples. But now he is again referring to other countries’ contribution. Is he really in order to contradict his own statement?  (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, actually when you begun you said we should concentrate on Uganda. So, I think you are out of order.

CAPT. BABU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  That one will not deter me from continuing; if you like, I withdraw what I said. 

Madam Speaker, we have to accommodate other groups in this country, and one of those groups is a group of the people who are fighting in the North, a prerequisite to this constitutional making. We must accommodate the group like the Baganda, who have brought their views, and we must listen to them and try and find harmony. These views are so important and, therefore, it is important that we –(Interjection)- I will not take your clarification, you can contribute when you are ready.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, one thing I have realized, there is a lot of intimidation. When somebody does not agree with you, you stand up here and start giving him or her warnings; you start threatening them. We are all Members of Parliament here; threatening us will not help.  What is going to help us is exactly what the Chairman of the Committee said; it is to look at the demerits and merits of anything that we are talking about and try to convince Parliament that this is your view. I have heard people planting their scarecrows all over the place.

5.10
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I consulted widely and wisely. As you know, the constituency I represent is full of intellectuals and is ably represented because Makerere University is there, Mulago is there and it is made up of cocktail of all people living in Uganda. 

But, the question that kept coming was, why are we making constitutions every time? Why is it becoming a fashion that whenever a government comes in power it has to make a constitution and if it is not a constitution, it is a decree?’  Madam Speaker, it is because we are not sincere to ourselves. That is why we get documents and we turn around and we say they have been inadequate. 

If I am to quote from the report of the committee on page 1, they had this to say, that is No.1 under the heading “Is the constitutional review necessary now? They say, “The setting up of the Constitutional Review Commission became necessary because experience had shown from operating the current Uganda Constitution since it came into force in 1995, that it had several defects and several areas of inadequacy, which needed to be addressed in the interest of proper administration for the country.”

This comes because we tend not to address certain issues comprehensively and we dilly-dally here and we leave them hanging, and they are so fundamental in the running of this country if we are to avoid a situation where we are going to get so many other presidents within a period, which is so short. I refer you, Madam Speaker, now to page 10. For instance, the committee recommended that the Government and the people of this country have not comprehensively handled the issue of federo –(Interruption)  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Sebuliba Mutumba for giving way. He is making such an important point that needs reinforcement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think you are wasting the colleagues’ time; you had your time to contribute.  Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba has only ten minutes;  he can make his important points himself.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The information I want to give him is in regard –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, you can speak for yourself.

MR SEBULIBA: On the issue of federo on page 10, the committee says that the Government and the people of this country have not comprehensively handled this issue. The Government itself has not decided on whether to propose a one tier or two tier regional council. Secondly, the discussions seem to be tied up with the debate on federalism and they conclude by saying, “The Committee recommends that the Government should make a wider consultation on this matter.” 

Madam Speaker, this is the sincerity I am talking about. We had the Odoki Commission, we had the Sempebwa Commission and when the National Resistance Army were fighting in the bush, they went further somewhere in Kalege - and hon. Kahinda Otafiire if he was here, he was one of the people who went deep to the peasants and asked them about what they wanted - and the people told them that they wanted federo. But we come here with this Constitution, people are shying away from it; even some are pretending not to know it, even there are those who did political science. This is about governance, sharing power and resources.  

Madam Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, if we do not amicably settle questions like this one of federalism and we gloss over it and we do not give it the due attention and hearing it deserves, this one is going to nag us. They are those who have not copied a leaf from what happened to the Soviet Union. 

Honourable members, one time when I came across the literary work of Fredrick Fossile in one of his books called, The Devil’s Alternative, I came across that country called Ukraine. By that time it was under the Soviet Block (USSR) and the writer thought, when the people wanted to fight for their rights, whether one time they would manage. But recently, they had an election and they had their rights. 

Compare the Soviet Block with America, who has gone further in terms of economic development, growth and the rest. It is the Americans and not the Soviet Block, and at the end of the day they end up being disorganized. The point I am trying to make here is, let us give it the due attention it deserves, even if it means giving it a period of ten years to study for those who want it as trailblazers such that the Government can monitor and later evaluate it as a project to see how it moves like it has done with decentralization. Decentralization took phases until every Ugandan now is looking for decentralization and after all, even under such a system like federalism there is decentralization.  

Then I refer you, Madam Speaker, on the issue of the term limit. The Ugandans in Kawempe said this one is setting a dangerous precedent. They agreed the President has done well in certain areas and they commend him for trying to bring sanity to the Ugandans, but at the end of the day, they are saying they do not want a situation where they are to push him over again to make way for another President. Much as he is good, let him be a good example for the others to follow. 

They said, let Parliament take it upon itself to retain the clause as it is. Much as they like the President, much as they respect him, they have not tested the so-called Article. Let President Museveni be our yardstick in handing over power like he promised; to be the very first President in Uganda to hand over power peacefully to Sebuliba Mutumba, if I stand as a President.  

On the issue of land, I commend them. But when it comes to the taxation of the judges, Madam Speaker, this question was very rife. We, legislators are here to legislate about even tax, but they asked me, “Recently, some of your people were the beneficiaries of Shs 5.0 million, was that money taxed? Even some who signed on behalf of others and took others’ money, did they declare that amount of money?”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, actually your time is up.

MR SEBULIBA: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

5.16
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The spirit of constitutional amendment of the people of Isingiro County North resides in this report on page 3 and I want to quote, “National interest above self and party.” In one lifetime, one can change party, affiliation and even leadership, but it is unusual and indeed unlikely that one would change nationality or citizenship. We, therefore, resolved from the onset that our supreme guiding star, and changing like the true North of the magnet, would be enduring interest of the people of Uganda. As individuals we have interest, and even as Members of political parties we are party to partisan positions. 

These interests were occasionally declared boldly before the committee, but when decision time came, we measured them alongside the national interest and more often than not, the national interest rung true and all of us without exception faced moments that we had to abandon strongly held positions when the bright light of reason and national interest was shown. Madam Speaker, this was very sweet and the people of Isingiro County North thank hon. Oulanyah and his committee.  

Madam Speaker, during my consultation process, the areas of concern were political systems, that is, change from Movement to multiparty. If you look at page 7 of the report on Government’s proposal, Government is of the view that the change of political system can better and more cheaply be achieved by amending Article 74 of the Constitution so that from the end of the current term of Parliament, public election in Uganda will be held under multiparty political system. Additionally, amend Article 69 and 71 of the Constitution to recognize the multiparty political system. 

The committee had this to recommend: Amend Article 72 in terms proposed by Government - wait a minute, is this “the people belong to the power.” Madam Speaker, the people of Isingiro County North did not want to change from Movement to multiparty system because the reasons advanced were flimsy.  

To say that very few people who believed in multiparty politics were feeling conscripted, they wondered whether conscription is a monopoly of minority; who wants to conscript the majority into a multiparty system. I want to quote a critical incident in our debate here. Majority of the people are pro-third term. Are you going to abandon the third term because those who do not want third term are conscripted? Madam Speaker, I will add on when we come to that.

The people of Isingiro County North in the spirit of pushing this against their throat in so fast a manner, they want a period of transition to do the following: One, they want to know the fate of the LC system. We are discussing multiparty politics, we are forgetting the infrastructure that is part and parcel of the Movement system. Where is the fate of the LC system? 

Number two, when you prepare for change you must get people and prepare them to get dissatisfied with the status quo, which we have not done. Number three, is that we have to identify the change agents. Who are the change agents and who is leading these change agents? The process must be administered in incremental and reasonable dosages without making mistakes. We can never argue in our history that we were under pressure of donors and we changed the system and we made mistakes. (Applause)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. The resolve that we move from the Movement political system to a multiparty system is a universal demand namely; under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to which Uganda subscribes as a nation. It is a global right and a freedom for citizens of Uganda in their respective organizations to contest government. In the present framework, today as we speak, those of us who subscribe to multipartism have no positions on Cabinet and yet we have a global freedom and right to contest government and even come to power. 

So, is it in order for the honourable Member of Parliament holding the Floor, through him, are they in order - because he is speaking for them - to imply that the change from the Movement political system to the multiparty system of government edifies the freedom of an individual to contest government. As I speak now, in my individual capacity –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I think you are contributing.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Is he in order –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, we have already agreed that every Member has got 10 minutes; we should listen to one another. Hon. Rwamirama is reporting what he was told in Isingiro, you reported what happened in Lubaga and we listened to you. Can you please, allow other people to report what came from their constituencies? Maj. Rwamirama, you are in order. Proceed.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I beg that you compensate my time. On separation of powers, the people of Isingiro County North want the status quo maintained. Any effort to reduce powers of Parliament, any effort to reduce powers of the judiciary should be resisted. 

On the size of Parliament, Madam Speaker, the people of Isingiro County North believe that Parliament is so huge and needs to be reduced. They argue that women and other interest groups have stood in constituencies and won so, they want the present constituencies maintained. 

Election of Members of Parliament and President: Madam Speaker, they are saying the presidential election should be held together with Members of Parliament and LC V Chairmen should be held with their councillors. The justification is that they do not want LC V to go and meddle with the councillors. 

Madam Speaker, the CAO to be appointed from the centre: The CAO is part of decentralization and since decentralization was by evolution, they should look in the weaknesses in the Local Government Act and improve on it so that the CAO can be brought to answer and be controlled but they want him to stay in local governments. 

Defilement and consent age: The consent age, the people of Isingiro County North want to bring it down to 15 years. And this came mainly from the women and in some cases they want even to bring it so low because they say these days at the age of 14 the girls are very mature and 15 is okay. 

Regional tier that sometimes it is mixed with federalism: Madam Speaker, the people of Isingiro County North are not interested in regional tier nor are they interested in federalism because for them they are efficient driven. They think adding on more structure is causing more administrative costs and this will reduce on the percentage of money they receive down. So, they do not subscribe to it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the term limits: The views of Isingiro County North reside in the report of the committee on page 29.  They say if we are to go to multiparty system, they would like to create a transition, provide for the leadership of the President so that he can take them through. In other words, they are giving him another term but they want the limits to stay in the Constitution.  

Madam Speaker, compulsory acquisition of land: The people of Isingiro County North want the status quo maintained.  

On dual citizenship, they would prefer that dual citizenship is given to Ugandans but foreigners they should only allow professionals and those investors who are coming here with money to create employment. 

Madam Speaker, civil servants and government officials who want to join in multiparty politics and stand for elective offices, should resign before they stand.

National language: They agree with the proposal of the White Paper and they prefer to advance Swahili, English as official languages and also to take on French so that our Ugandan people can work across the continent and abroad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.
 
MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Finally, Madam Speaker, the people of Isingiro North, having had a fever of being forced into multiparty politics against their wish, whichever way, whether it is transition or we go straight to multiparty politics, they would prefer President Museveni who has done very well, to take them through this transition. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand that today is Ash Wednesday and that the Papal Nuncio is here. I have been requested to adjourn for that reason, but I must take into account our own programmes. So, I would like to release those who want to go for service and we continue with the debate. Those who want to go for service can go.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am seeking guidance. You actually guided us that we should not disturb our colleagues when they present their constituency reports. But there are certain things that really touch our hearts and you know that your friend will not yield the Floor, for instance, 15 years and we understand that this has to do with the biological make-up of these little girls. Madam Speaker, how do we seek clarification on that matter? I wish to be guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the Bill comes all these matters are going to be in the Bill, then you will take him on, on the 15 years when the Bill comes.

5.30
MR MOSES LUBOWA (Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to report that the people of Budiope County, Kamuli District were so much excited about their involvement in the constitutional review process. This was properly indicated by the big numbers that turned up for the various meetings, quite different from what they normally do. This was so because they feel to them the Constitution is a very serious prerequisite to the type of governance that they would like to see in place, that kind of governance or leadership that will ensure them or guarantee them peace and security, dignity by way of respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, unity, harmonious co-existence among the various sections of the people of Uganda.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, during my interaction I was basically consulting and seeking opinions from the people, and where necessary I was clarifying. But it was in one particular area where I did a bit of campaigning, this is in the area of shifting from Movement to multiparty politics.  This is something that the population down there does not understand, and they are surprised why the NEC opted to go for that one and indeed, they feel that it was a way of usurping powers from them.  But for the sake of collective responsibility, definitely I had to convince these people that, please let us go multiparty because of this and that, the problems we are facing with the donors and the small elite group amongst us here. So, I convinced them that we go multiparty.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as you very well know, the Government White Paper is so broad so, we looked at a few priority areas including moving from the Movement system to multiparty system. But we also looked at presidential, parliamentary and local elections, and we said presidential and parliamentary elections should be done on the same day for the sake of saving resources, and also to avoid undue influences after certain levels of elections have taken place. And they felt that the chairperson of the district and the district councillors should also be elected on the same day, and then other levels in that manner.

Madam Speaker, when there is a deadlock between the Executive and Parliament, they feel they should emphasize separation of powers. Because if you give too much powers and interference of one Arm into another Arm’s activities it can cause undue suffering to the people. Things may be done, which are not for public good.

About decentralisation and other centres like federalism and regional tiers, these other things they do not understand. The only phenomenon they have properly understood is decentralisation, and they feel that introducing other power centres like federalism, regional tiers –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)- Madam Speaker, as I was saying, they do not quite understand the importance of these other power centres and they feel that those who are advocating for such power centres, it is just for the sake of manipulation of the people, resources will be wasted and not for the benefit of the people. So, for them they are emphasizing decentralisation and not federalism.

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, you have already ruled that Members should present their views from their constituencies without interruptions. Is hon. Lukyamuzi in order to persistently insist and interrupt Members?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I know there are things you want to talk about all the time, but let other people present their views, please hon. Lukyamuzi.

MR LUBOWA: Madam Speaker, it is because of the time constraint that I become so bad to my neighbour here; I think in future I will allow him, but not today.

Madam Speaker, about the position of Chief Administrative Officer (CAO): This was a bit sensitive to me. As you may be aware, leaving alone the question of embezzlement, the Kamuli case is that the CAO for Kamuli District is also a politician and he comes from my constituency. So, I went to consult the people, you can imagine the kind of trouble I was facing. You know that when you go to contest for parliamentary election or any kind of elections, people have strong holds and weak holds. So, the picture I got was that other than discussing objectively, there were both principles and sentiments expressed. Those who felt that their son should be CAO were saying, no, the CAO should be appointed by the district service commission. 

But when you read this it indicates the need for us to have the CAO appointed from the centre, because it will avoid a politician being involved in handling matters and you very well know that all civil servants - well, they can vote but they cannot come out publicly. But I do not know how you can stop somebody who has been a politician and now handling the affairs of the entire public effectively. I do not want to say that he has failed in this case, but it is really difficult.  That is what happened, so it was mixed with sentiments but also principles were expressed. Three sub counties said centre and two said the district service commission. I have said that, we can now reorganize from here.

Madam Speaker, about lifting the presidential term limits, people in my constituency were so lucky that in previous interactions with them, I helped them to understand the difference between third term and lifting presidential term limits. So, when I went to consult them on this one specifically, they were not an ignorant group, they knew what third term is and what lifting of presidential term limits is. For them they are saying it was unfair for the Constituent Assembly that time - and unfortunately or fortunately I was a Member of the Constituent Assembly. 

But they condemn the group that why did you decide to put limit, yet we are supposed to enjoy the services of a dedicated leader like Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. And for them they feel it is not for the sake of Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni the current President, but it is for the sake of the future, they want to see if we get a very good president in the names of, Mr Aggrey Awori or Mr Kiiza Besigye that he is given opportunity to continue until we see uselessness in him.

However, I was lucky here one day when the Speaker indicated that well certain consequential amendments could be made also maybe to allow His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, but the people of Budiope are not aware yet so, I will only go to allay their fears, because they had lost hope that His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni cannot join the race. So, this is good news to them and I think they will be very happy to learn that he can also now stand. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.40
MR MICHAEL NYEKO OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me chance. As others have been saying that they have been having processes of consultation with their constituents, for me, when I started my first leg, I only met bamboo sticks. I was caned and I had to withdraw.  But nevertheless, being a fighter always as I am, again I went back and I started consulting with the people of Kilak. 

I must report here, Madam Speaker, that my consultations in my constituency are not yet smooth. Here and there when I try to move, I still get one or two threats. Like my recent move to a place called Pabo, when I reached that place, when I was supposed to proceed to the next place called Pawel, I was informed by the Army that they could not allow me to proceed. That if I had a pick-up vehicle they could have given me escorts. 

Then, when again I said that I could hire a pick-up vehicle they said, “No, but you see, we are also under instructions from the RDC’s office that you have not got permission from them to consult.” So, as we are debating this White Paper, we should know that some parts of the country are not very accessible to this Parliament, because this Parliament can only access Kilak through me, not through any other person.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when we were discussing the Constitutional Review Commission report, which has finally resulted into the White Paper, I think we should also thank the people who originated this idea and that is, Col retired Dr Kiiza Besigye.  

During 2001 elections, there was no idea for the Constitution Review Commission initially until Col retired Dr Kiiza Besigye said that if he will be elected to be President of Uganda, then he would review the Constitution to among other things, empower political parties to operate, and that is exactly the genesis of the Constitutional Review Commission. 

And usual as it is, the incumbent hijacked the idea which we did not – for us who were supporting did not bother about it because it was good. It is not only even that idea, there are many in the manifesto of Dr Kiiza Besigye, which the incumbent is now trying to implement haphazardly, but we shall correct that when we come to power.

Madam Speaker, I was a bit perturbed yesterday when a colleague from Kitgum was trying to tie the issue of term limits to the issue of people in the North staying in the camp. I was perturbed because really the term limits and so on are political issues. When you are talking about people in the North staying in camps, it is a matter of humanitarian suffering of the people. Let us not tamper with these two issues. This Parliament is on record for having been supportive to the people who are suffering in the North not tying it to politics; it is unanimous. 

The issue of saying that, you know, the term limits should be lifted because President Museveni must first solve the issue of people staying in the camps is not correct.  In my consultations, it took me even a lot of time to make people understand that there is need to change the Constitution of Uganda, because the problem in the North, people are more concerned about the day to day survival. Madam Speaker, I thought I should mention this to go on record. Let us not talk what we feel is good for us in this House, which is not the feeling of the people. 

As far as the constitutional review is concerned, Madam Speaker, foremost to my people in Kilak and in Acholi sub region, is the issue of land. The issue of land, the compulsory acquisition of land is very touchy. When we were consulting on this matter, others were saying that we were inciting the people in the North against Government that Government wants to grab land. Instead it was the White Paper, which was inciting them, why did they put that provision in the White Paper? What we were doing was only to explain to the people what it means by compulsory. Compulsory is whether you want or not Government can get it. We were explaining who are the investors and then the people were making their own feelings, because they are always very concerned about land. 

And, Madam Speaker, when you are talking about land in Acholi land, people are all in camps, people are conscious about what is happening about their land, which is left very far away. In my constituency when I was consulting it was even worse because in Amoro sub county, already there are some strangers  who are moving with armed escorts, they are really putting land marks in those abandoned areas and, therefore, this matter of the land was very touchy.

Madam Speaker, I would like to advice Government, please, I have listened to contributions from all other parts of Uganda, nobody wants Government to get land compulsorily. Please do not bring it in the Bill, let us not argue about it; you remove it from the Bill and we argue about other things.

Secondly, on term limits, Madam Speaker, I explained to my people and they have always held the same view even before the White Paper came. For them the faster the incumbent goes the better.  They want the incumbent to move away as fast as possible; this is on record even in the trend of voting and everything. 

But when I explained what has been transpiring here in Parliament and so on, my people were saying that this current Parliament is not now competent enough to discuss the lifting of term limits, it should be referred to the next Parliament because this Parliament is already fairly compromised. So, we can amend all other aspects of the Constitution, but the term limits, please refer it to the next Parliament.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While here, I think we should actually try to abide by your guidance. You have time and again guided this House that each and every one of us is presenting those views as were given by his or her constituents.  So, each and every one here is here by his or her own right. So, is the honourable Member in order to actually say that this House, which you are capable and you have led up to now very ably, is not in position to debate and decide on this matter as far as term limit is concerned?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nyeko Ocula, when I was listening to the report of the chairperson, I did not hear the question of whether this Parliament should do this or the other. I do not see that ever as a term of reference, so that must be something you are importing. This House has stood together with the people of the North, we have supported them, we have made resolutions and recommendations.  Please, do not insult this House anymore; we have not been compromised and I think we are still doing a good job.

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, I abide by your ruling.  But I thought the trend in this House is that we are reporting what we discussed in the field, and it is exactly what we are putting really on the Floor here and this was actually part of my consultation, it is not my own. If that is the case, then fine.

Let me proceed, Madam Speaker. The issue of lifting of term limits: If you go to the current Constitution of the Republic of Uganda we are trying to amend, and if you go to the processes which were used to bring this Constitution into place - I used to attend the Constituent Assembly very religiously as if I was a Member yet I was still a student at Makerere; this aspect of a two-term limit was almost the least resisted in the Constituent Assembly. There was no controversy over it. Now, you see that there is again another agitation. I still think and feel, and I think my feeling is the same as the people of Kilak, that there is some element of manipulation, which might throw this country into chaos again and we should try to avoid that within this Parliament. We hope this Parliament is competent enough to do that. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I had a rough time when I was comparing my ideas vis-à-vis those of my constituents about death penalty. Almost half of the people in my constituency still feel that it should be retained. But I was also lucky to get the other half, who were saying that death penalty should be categorized. I was of the view that it should be abolished and I am still campaigning for it. But the people on the ground are saying that it should be first categorized. 

I am still imploring Members here, I am still continuing to consult on this issue of death penalty, let us look at the human being as a human being. I am still imploring that Members of this House should be able to help abolish the death penalty because of some reasons, which I will give when the Bill comes out.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.50
MS NUSURA TIPERU (Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in commending the committee for a job well done and in particular the Chairman, hon. Oulanyah Jacob, for steering that committee very well. I also want to thank those who brought in their views through the committee.  

Madam Speaker, as far as the White Paper is concerned, we did consult. I, in particular, consulted my people very widely and I did this in consultation with the district councillors, who were headed by the LC 5 Chairman, the district speaker, the elders, the youth, the women and the whole of Yumbe was consulted. In some areas where issues were crucial, we even had to vote.  

Madam Speaker, let me tell you briefly about the people of Yumbe. The people I represent of Yumbe are people who went to exile in 1979; they are people who have stayed in exile for long and mostly in areas of Sudan and Congo. Yumbe, which we call a district now, for long was a battlefield. Those who survived are those in exile, those who remained all died. And if you happened to go to Yumbe by around 1985, you would just see dilapidation at its maximum, houses all down. As I speak today, we have people who are just settling, coming back, a population of widows, orphans, returnees, people who have just experienced what you are aware about, the peace agreement, that now makes us begin saying that Yumbe is now peaceful. 

As I talk here, I am proud to say that I consulted widely without any problem as far as security is concerned. Without preamble, I just want to let you know that the people of Yumbe are very keen as far as the certainty of this country is concerned.  They have told me to tell you that we must do everything within our powers to ensure that nothing goes wrong because they are not about to experience what they have already experienced.

Madam Speaker, among the issues that came up is the issue of opening up. The people of Yumbe, as you know, have just started enjoying some of the proceeds that come by with the Movement system; they were not really in for parties. 

However, as their MP, I tried to educate them, tell them the NEC resolution, the donor pressure.  They finally accepted and said, “Fine, let political parties come back”.  

However, Madam Speaker, they also accepted this mostly because many people have gone to fight.  The LRA have given it as a reason that they are fighting because their people are conscripted and so forth.  So they are of the view that we open up and see who else is going to say I am going to the bush because there are no parties. Let parties come back and let us all be here and do the politicking.

Madam Speaker, the other issue that was contentious was the issue of Article 105.  Questions have been asked, they have been hearing in the media, radio stations and so forth; people saying we should not open up; we should not have an open term limit because some people are going to cling to power; we are going to have dictators; people are going to buy voters if you keep them in power for so long, and so on. 

The people have said those who are constantly talking about not amending Article 105 to give everybody a fair chance are interested in abusing the intellect of our population. If power really belongs to the people, what is wrong with opening up? What is wrong with people who want to form parties organizing themselves and having their candidates? They even said what is your worry? Why are you concentrating so much on one individual, President Museveni?  (Interruption)

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. On the same note while completely concurring with the people of Yumbe, I wish again to reiterate that the people of Kitgum on their own volition, and I told this House yesterday, even have the proceedings on video captured for any doubting Thomases who say Members of Parliament from Kitgum supposedly say the people want opening of term limit because of our own interests and benefits.  This is a lie! I am the area Member of Parliament, I, Jane Akwero Odwong, contrary to what hon. Mike Ocula said. The people of Kitgum in 17 out of the 19 sub counties want the term limits to be opened. I challenge hon. Ocula to go to the people of Kitgum, and I vehemently despise those who mislead their people and take solace and consolation – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to go back and restate the views after a full submission of hon. Jane Akwero Odwong the other day? She said it, she stated it as she has done and now we are conscious of the time limit.  Secondly, hon. Ocula is not here, the man has left.  Madam Speaker, this not being a court, is it procedurally okay, for us to try to throw ourselves into an arbitration position?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Earlier this afternoon, hon. Ocula took issue with what she said. He said she was not accurate in what she presented to this House. I think that is what she was trying to correct.

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, I hope my time will be compensated.  

Madam Speaker, before I conclude Article 105, the issue of saying that voters will be bought, the people said, “Does it mean that Parliament is full of rich people?” The people of Uganda have the intellect to vote you according to your capabilities; it is not about your money. Otherwise, we would be hearing the Mulwanas and all the rich people you have heard about in Uganda sitting in Parliament today. In other words, Article 105 should be opened up and everybody should be given a fair chance.  

Madam Speaker, on ministers being Members of Parliament, they said we should maintain the status quo.
  
On affirmative action, we are to maintain the status quo.

On the size of Parliament maintain the status quo, because for us from Yumbe we felt so marginalized until we became a district and now we have the access to be represented, they said 304 is a good number; maintain it.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of land, the people of Yumbe said land reform should be seen as a special element of development. In the event Government wants to acquire land for public good, it should do so.  However, when Government wants to acquire land for investment there should be an amicable agreement between Government and the owner of the land so that people are paid appropriately, because currently, what is happening is that most people are being cheated or the payment for their land is not commensurate with the amount of land that is taken. So, the people are in for an amicable agreement between them and Government in the case of investment.

On the issue of Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), the people of Yumbe had a very bitter debate on that one.  Out of eight sub counties the three sub counties were in for the CAO being appointed by the Central Government.  However, five sub counties insisted that the CAO be appointed by the District Service Commission. They said that if a CAO is appointed by the centre then decentralization will be undermined.

In other words, if you remove the CAO from the district that means you are saying the District Service Commission has a vote of no confidence.  How then would you allow them to continue appointing other people.  

However, if there is a problem with the CAO that means there is a problem with the whole decentralization system, which must be studied instead of only handling segments.  It should be studied, improved and strengthened to be make it better because they have benefited from it; they want it to continue Madam Speaker – (interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS TIPERU: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, for the issue of national language, they said Swahili should be maintained as a national language. The people I represent speak Swahili; the majority of them were ex-service men, daughters of soldiers.  So, they are in for Swahili because they believe as business people, they will be able to transverse the areas of Yumbe, Kenya, Tanzania and so forth.  They said English can remain as an official language.  I thank you very much.

6.02
MS ANIFA KAWOYA (Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to my colleagues in thanking the committee for a job well done. I also salute you, Madam Speaker, for steering the debates with calmness. I further thank my colleagues for being accommodating, tolerant and accepting different divergent views from all the Members in this House, because we are representing the views from constituents. I thank them, so far so good. I know some have taken it up, but according to my consultation, Madam Speaker, and these are the views of the people of Sembabule whom I represent.

Madam Speaker, I consulted extensively, I went to the district once on my own and consulted the whole district. Then I went a second time and consulted with my colleague, hon. Sam Kutesa, in his constituency, Mawogola County. I went to another constituency, Lwemiyaga, with my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo, and these are the views. 

Madam Speaker, I am going to limit myself because on the consultation of the White Paper, which we consulted on and discussed openly, there were even some minority views, but the majority views prevailed.  Much of these did not raise a lot of debate, but about four issues; first of all, term limit; secondly, opening up of the space, change from a political system; then people’s sovereignty; and on ebyaffe, Buganda, federo and we touched a little on open voting. So, I will start with term limit, Madam Speaker.  

In my constituency, Sembabule District, they were perturbed by the different views of those who are saying that the current President is an obstacle to the democratisation process in Uganda. My people are saying, this is a leader with wide wisdom, with a vision; a leader who is tested, who is very experienced, who has brought this country from far, who has led this country more times than others and he is still moving on. That is why they are saying that the much they have been hearing of term limit and people associating it with third term. Third term or no third term, the people of Sembabule are saying, why should they be denied the chance to determine the destination of this country?  

Article (1) is very clear; this is about sovereignty. Sembabule people are saying that there is no way you can talk about democracy when you are denying the people their right to advance their participation on matters of national interest.  Why is this House opposed to the participation of the people through their representatives to review Article 105(2)?  There are so many sections, which are under review, but they have not raised much dust. What is in Article 105(2)? Why is it a taboo when we come here to talk about it?  

Madam Speaker, I have heard my colleagues say that Article 105(2) is not like any other Article; it is not like the office of LC 1. Madam Speaker, you are aware that even when the President goes to an area, the LC 1 chairperson has to grant him power to address the people. So, that office is equally very important and recognized under the Constitution.  

Madam Speaker, the problem we have is, and those are the views of my people, there are some people who are very eager to take over power. My people are saying they know the history of these political organisations. Even when they look at some new organizations, they see the form of these new organizations, the substance; they are no better than even the current. So they are saying, it is better the devil you know than the enemy you have not seen. Therefore I am on the merits of opening of third term, Madam Speaker, or whatever they call it - term limit.  

Madam Speaker, a lot of views have come up that when you open up Article 105(2), the incumbency, dictatorship intolerance, life Presidency – The people of Sembabule posed a question to me: “When there was dictatorship and intolerance, was this Article there?” The Constitution was made in 1995, but we have had dictatorship before.  

They told me they are aware of other governments, which have been removed and the masses have participated in removing them, and even through a ballot. Our neighbour here, Kenya, President Arap Moi was removed and he was an incumbent; Kenneth Kaunda was removed through the ballot. What is wrong for the people to use their own ballot and remove the incumbent?

Madam Speaker, the incumbent can lose an election as long as it is free and fair. And it is only an incumbent through his popularity and through the people that he can win an election, sustain power, remain in power. So, what is the worry for when we are agitating that we should change?  

Madam Speaker, since 1995, I have heard that there was not any problem; I am happy you were part of that august House and I was there. Yes, we were making a Constitution; we looked at the politics at that time. Things have changed. I was representing Masaka District, whatever I said that time, the situation has changed; I am speaking as a representative of Sembabule now, and the people of Sembabule are saying things have been changing; the Movement itself has changed. I have heard those who are saying that the President has gone away from his original obligation. No, he is changing to accommodate the changing views and the situation and the aspirations of the people, and these are the people who are demanding for a change.

Madam Speaker, I would not go further on this, they still advance their points for support for removal of term limit.  It does not breed any chaos, Madam Speaker.

On another point, Madam Speaker, this is opening political space.  Yes, the people of Sembabule were harder; they enjoy this Movement and the benefits it has brought to the women, the affirmative action, the youth, people with disability. But then they are saying, if these people think they are being oppressed, let us open up and we see; the ballot is the deciding factor and we should give everybody his right of participation so that everybody participates.

On sovereignty, they just posed one question: “Who should derive power and authority; the state over the people or the people over the state?” Madam Speaker, for the people of Sembabule know that the state is an agent of the people, and through the social contract it is deriving the authority from them. So they have the right to decide, to participate, either directly or through their representatives. And therefore, they say that they should be given power to decide as in Article (1) of the Constitution; and I agree with Article (1) of the Constitution, which bestows power on the people to decide on very critical national issues.

Madam Speaker, finally on the ebyaffe, Sembabule is part of Buganda and a district in Buganda.  The people I represent sent me here to support the positions that were agreed on between Government and Buganda Kingdom. They have asked me that the three issues that remained we should urge Government to come up with an agreement. The position that will come out between Government and the Buganda Kingdom, I shall support them on the Floor of this House.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I support the White Paper; my people of Sembabule support the view that this government continues in harmony, and we should give them the right to choose the President they want. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.13
MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Jinja, I would like to register our appreciation of the President’s visit to Jinja in particular and Busoga in general. It was a very useful visit, but the marked absence of ministers accompanying the President was a very disappointing issue.  

Turning to the White Paper, I would like to thank the committee for the work they did.   (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe I need to make a small correction, I think I need to clear the air. The ministers were not invited, that is why they were not there.

MRS TUMA: Okay. They are now excused. I would like to comment on some articles, which were very contentious during my consultation in my constituency. These were Articles 1, Article 81, Article 74, Article 103(3), Article 181(5), and Article 105(2).

Article 1, the sovereignty of the people: My people of Jinja District support the amendment as proposed by government.  

Article 72, the change of political system: This is an issue, which raised a lot of dust. Most of our people of Jinja have had a nasty experience with parties and it took us very, very, long to get them to accept to go back to parties. They have accepted to go back to parties and they support the Movement.

On the election of the President, the Members of Parliament and the chairperson LC5, they support the elections because they feel that this will help them to consolidate the campaigns and to make sure that whatever is put in place to enhance the campaigns and of picking the right people is going to be used rightly. It would also help them not to be confused, especially for example, in most cases when a President is elected first, they said he may try to use his influence to peddle the people he would like to be elected, whereas they may not be the people they want to elect in their constituencies.  

About the LC5 chairperson, they were a bit sceptical about it because they feel that if the LC5 chairperson is elected together with the President, it may be a bit difficult because normally they always want to make sure that it is only those people who think the way they want. So they will peddle their influence to make sure that wrong people are put in place because they are their supporters.

The issue of Article 105: After considering Article 1, they thought that Article 105(2) was redundant and so it should be removed out of the Constitution because once the people have been given the power to pick whoever they think is going to take them through good governance, there is no reason why they should give them a limit. Besides, when we go to parties, each party will have the liberty to pick its leader. If the party picks its leader, why should the Constitution limit them?  Because so and so has been in power for two terms, he should not be elected because of the Article which is in the Constitution!

Lastly, the people of Jinja gave me a message to deliver to my colleagues. This is a special message, Madam Speaker, to the Members of Parliament. It is a challenge to you, to be in a position to consider views, which are being brought about by Members of Parliament from all over the constituencies in Uganda. This Constitution, which we are amending, is going to be the Bible for this country. (Interruptions) Yes we will, of course, the Constitution is something which can be amended, that is why in the Constitution we have a clause to amend the Constitution after ten years and this is exactly what we are doing. 
They have cautioned us to be tolerant, friendly, and patient, and that as leaders we must put the interest of this country before anything else. The views, which we have solicited and views, which we shall put in the Constitution, which we are trying to amend, will be the scales, which will be used to judge us. So please make sure that you are judged rightly.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.21
MR ASUPASA ISIKO (Busiki County, Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to present a real replica of the views of the people of Busiki. I consulted widely and we came up with very interesting views which now I have the opportunity to present to this august House.

Madam Speaker, it was a very difficult time for the Basiki to debate as to whether we should open up political space. The Basiki are so much in love with the Movement system and opening up political space threatens the people of Busiki. It brought us far to the history as to where Busiki has come from. 

We had a lot turmoil in Busiki; leaders were killed, all the parties performed almost badly; the UPC tortured people, the DPs murdered people. So, when we talked of opening, the late Chairman of UPC in Busiki, the late Bulolo, it is quite on record, when Tito Okello Lutwa took over Government a gang of people in real DP colours - I was there - we could leave that matter to rest.  Hon. Members, Madam Speaker, this is a story that can be picked from every angle of Busoga region.  But the Basiki are of the opinion that we should continue with the Movement system.  

On the issue of regional tiers, the people of Busiki did not support it. Already we are in a process of educating the people on the Charter of Busoga so they found it very confusing.  They propose that maybe they be left to consolidate the Busoga Charter. 

On the issue of compulsory acquisition of land by Government for investment, the Basiki requested me to present to this august House that the issue of land is a very touchy matter in Busiki. For us in Busiki the first thing we value is land, maybe second a wife, and maybe third a child. So when you touch land, you are touching the real core matter of the people; and the Basiki requested this august House to earnestly consider not to entrench the issue of compulsory acquisition of land by Government for investment in the Constitution. My people requested that if there should be any development or investors to acquire land they should go down and negotiate with the people.  Our people do not refuse investment, they could easily avail land for investment, but land, like any other commodity, should be negotiated with the people.  

On the issue of national language, the Basiki supported the idea of having an all-embracing national language. They also supported Swahili to be the national language, but with reservations.  Swahili has been introduced in all the Primary Schools in Uganda without posting a single teacher to my constituency of Busiki; and the Basiki are threatened that should they set exams for Swahili, no child will ever pass. If we are serious that Swahili should be introduced as a national language, it is the opinion of my people that Swahili should seriously be considered to be taught in schools. 

On the issue of dual citizenship, my people supported the entrenchment of dual citizenship into our Constitution.  They said Basiki people are essentially traders, who move in and out of Uganda.  But some of them would like to settle elsewhere, especially these days when Kyeyo is very paying.  They would like maybe to have access to other countries, so they supported the enactment of dual citizenship into our Constitution.

The Basiki did not support the issue of appointing of a Chief Administrative Officer from the centre.  They were reasoning that decentralisation has been brought to the people so if you appointed a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) from the centre, you will be taking back the powers that you had given to the people. You have given with one hand and you are withdrawing with the other hand. So the Basiki said that if Government has seen shortcomings with the appointment of a CAO from the District Service Commissions and wants to intervene, the law should be strengthened such that the Chief Administrative Officers are more accountable than they are right now.  

On the issue of the President, Members of Parliament and LC5 chairpersons being elected on the same day, my people of Busiki proposed that Members of Parliament and the President could be elected on the same day. But they cautioned that as we go to parties we need some transitional periods so that the Basiki and maybe other Ugandans, should really acclimatize themselves to the situation of electing in parties. The level of tolerance is still very low; the people are intolerant everywhere –(Interjection)- I love that chirping in, but if you could know what is happening in parties right now.  

Madam Speaker, as I sum up very well, the Basiki proposed that if a Member of Parliament is elected to Parliament then appointed a Minister, he should vacate the seat of Member of Parliament.  I thank you very much. 

6.30
MR ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did also very wisely and very widely consult with my people of Erute County North, who are at the moment in 10 IDP camps.  Our population used to be 88,664 people by last census, but at the moment we have over 100,000 people in Erute County North because our people have come from Otuke, even Pader and Moroto counties to seek refuge in Erute County North.  However, when we consulted it was a pleasure to identify that there were UPC supporters, DP supporters, Conservative and then NRM/O supporters.  During the consultation they gave in their views and we examined, reviewed and considered unanimously some of the views.

Madam Speaker, what was a very important issue during our consultations was the issue raised in the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, that is, the question of if the Constitution should be reviewed now. In fact they were divided in two groups, those who are in support and those who did not support it. 

Those who did not support it gave reasons for not supporting it because at the moment they say they are in the camps. This is more or less like a bus driver who is driving a bus with a flat front tyre and he continues to drive the bus in that state while the people are crying. So, their concern is that they have been neglected and left in the camps and then the idea of reviewing the Constitution comes in.  

They also expressed concern because they say the main problem in this country seems to be around the presidency, and that is why the Article 105(2) is the main discussion in this House. That is why even now in the review of the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee they were unable to decide on it. So, they are saying they do not support lifting of the term limit, because that is a fertile ground for those who will not support the view to claim that this was an opportunity to abrogate the Constitution and then wars will never stop.

While they are still in the camps, they thought that the Parliament today should discuss this very seriously to ensure that there will be no war in Uganda at all. But it seems when we tamper with this Article, then it is going to be nothing but war because a very strong reason they have given is the political history of this country. 

When we consider national language, for a long time this country has not managed to have national and even official languages. When you go to some of these high offices you find people talking either Luganda, Luo or Runyankore and you fail to understand what is meant by official language. So, if we are accepting the official language, we are accepting the national language then they say that English nd Kiswahili should be taken respectively.

On land, they say if the acquisition of the land by the government compulsorily is enacted here, then the hidden agenda of putting them in the camp will have been established and achieved. It has taken them 19 years now when they cannot send their children to school, they cannot access medical services, they cannot even dress themselves and eat properly, so when you take away this land, it means that is the end of the world to them, and it will automatically cause them to petition this government to the higher authority like the United Nations; because the reasons for keeping them in the camps up to now are obvious. So they reject that idea compulsory acquisition of land. Instead, they are saying this Parliament should have addressed the end of this war. They say it is the gun, which is the main problem in our political system. 

Those who are saying let us give His Excellency, the President a third term, they are quietly arguing that the President is a military man, his brother is also very next to him, he is a military man, his son is also a very senior military man, so the country can be safe. If it is so, why has Kony traded in this war for the last 18 years, and now we are going to the end of 19th year? So, they do not support the idea at all.

Madam Speaker, the people of Erute North actually expressed their concern about the idea of giving authority to appoint CAOs to the centre. They say if that is enacted, then that is the end of decentralisation, because the CAO will behave in such a manner that the authority at the district level will have no power over him. So, let decentralisation handle the CAOs’ appointment and the appointing other officers who are around him; that will mean decentralisation. But anything less than that means there is a problem already, because we have seen how some of the CAOs behaved in the past and Lira is exceptional. 
We are not saying we want to appoint a son of the area to become the CAO of the place. The CAO of Lira is coming from somewhere else, from Tororo. It is on merit. So, unless people have not seen this carefully, then the idea of removing the authority of the district service commission will be useless. So, they do not support the idea of giving thee centre a chance to handle the appointment of the CAOs.

We also seriously discussed poverty. The people of Erute County North are saying that instead of addressing this pertinent issue called poverty, why does not the government give opportunity to the international NGOs to go and address this system directly. The NAADS programme has not proved worthwhile to them because they cannot assess areas, which are still insecure. The international NGOs are able to reach them, without which, I think most of them would have died.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute.

MR ANGIRO: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the people of Erute wish the Movement system a safe journey out to form the National Resistance Movement Organisation as a party to compete favourably with other parties like UPC, DP, Conservative Party, and others, which have been registered. Their appeal is that everything should be done to ensure that all the parties are registered immediately so that we go to the political transition. Otherwise that is the only way forward to end wars in this country because, with this system of Movement still continuing as they want it to be put on referendum which they know will be won, that means the war will never be won. Thank you very much.

MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this opportunity to put the views from my constituencies on the Hansard. Madam Speaker, I represent 23 sub-counties, I consulted only in 12 of them and the rest I could not make it due to other constraints.

Madam Speaker, let me appreciate the work done by the committee very extensively on the White Paper and other documents availed to them. I think it was a very brilliant report and it should guide this House to come up with a nationally negotiated and agreed positions which will guide the Bill here in the House.  

Article 1 which was their concern of holding a referendum and the results of the referendum being binding. The people were very excited and very emotional about it and they were assertive, they really wanted it. But Madam Speaker, I did not agree with them. My view is that the results should not be binding. Instead the results of any referendum should act and guide policies so that we come up with laws that address the issues that were contentious.

Second issue was on compulsory acquisition of land.  The people of Kasese attach a lot of sentiments to land like it has been expressed here. They were not ready to give powers for compulsory acquisition of land for the following reasons:

One, that Article 26 of the Constitution is adequate and after putting the Planning Authority in place, and having an Investment Code to guide and also looking at Article 96 that gives the President excellent powers to deal with issues of this country as Head of State, as Head of Government, they felt that they were enough powers and enough instruments to guide any investor to acquire land in this country. Except, what they need is a comprehensive land use policy. (Interruption)

MR KULE MURANGA: I would like to inform my colleague that much of the land in Kasese is taken up by Government so that means they have a lot, more than a half of the land is Government land.  So, why should they acquire land from Kasese, already they have more than half?  Thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE: I agree with you because my figures were that 63 percent of the land in Kasese is covered by government projects, mainly, three national parks and three prison farms; and they felt that they needed a land use policy to access those redundant pieces of land. The issue was that, the ones already acquired are not effectively utilized.

Madam Speaker, I represent civil society as well.  So, through consultation with civil society, I will pick only one issue on which they were very serious and focused. The issue of Government recommending that the Equal Opportunities Commission as was directed in Article 32(2), be transferred to the Human Rights Commission has been rejected by Civil Society Organizations because Article 32(1) introduces affirmative action for marginalized groups, be it due to history, gender and other reasons. They feel and recommend very strongly that Article 32(2) be retained so that the Equal Opportunities Commission can be immediately established under a Bill brought by Government.  It should remain as a legal framework, and that two, in this amendment this time, a time frame be fixed for the effective implementation of the Equal Opportunities Commission.
  
Three, that Parliament should expedite all laws that concern or affect the lives of marginalized groups such as Article 33(6) concerning anybody marginalizing the marginalized groups being prohibited by the Constitution, also including Article 36 on minorities that there should be laws for that.  

The civil society went further to request this Parliament to put in place a provision for political parties to appreciate affirmative action so that political parties can include marginalized groups in their own structure by law and by Constitution as well. For example, they demanded that at least the composition of Parliament should change its nature and character such that the women make 40 percent of Parliament.

The fourth area I consulted my constituency in Kasese on was on Article 105.  Madam Speaker, the people of Kasese in principle support opening up the term limit because they say, since His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, came to power together with all of us, the Mid-West has only been in Luweero Triangle in name and not in practice.  Their roads have not been worked only, the railways, the airfield, tourism was interrupted by the war, the traditional institution of Obusinga has not been resolved, their development was interrupted by insecurity, they have just started enjoying peace and security, they do not want any interruption, and they think under this Government they can enjoy that. 

So, Madam Speaker, the majority of the people of Kasese would like the term limit lifted to allow specifically, His Excellency, the President, to continue, except for the youth. The youth are eager to be in power as well. So, the youths’ recommendation was that they do not want any term limit to be lifted. We are still, therefore, negotiating with the youth.  The youth have a right to express themselves on critical issues that concern their lives.  

The fifth area was on the sanctions on traditional and cultural leaders. The people of Kasese agree that cultural leaders should not meddle in politics. They have a history where meddling into politics has left a negative indelible mark on them, but they are requesting Government to make a Bill to provide for Article 246 to be implemented fully. 

In other words, they agree with the views and recommendations of the committee, especially Article 246(2), where their cultural leadership is still being contested by individuals as it was recorded here. They feel that if Parliament had made a law, they would also be enjoying their constitutional cultural rights as is indicated in Article 37 of the Constitution, where individuals are free to promote culture and cultural institutions.

On Local Government, the people feel that the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) are insecure; they have no job security. In Kasese, in a period of four years, we have had five changes of CAOs and Acting CAOs. So, they feel that Government can effectively handle and supervise the administrative functions of the CAO, and also have the Chief Accounting Officer from the centee, therefore repeal Article 188(2) of the Constitution. But they say in considering which CAO is posted where, local interests should be taken into account.  

On minerals, they support the committee that all minerals including petroleum should be treated as it were in the Article; petroleum should not be excluded, its results, its benefits should be shared in accordance with the Constitution so that the community of the region, not only Bundibugyo, should also benefit from it.  

On dual citizenship, they have no problem; it is okay as border people. 

On the size of Parliament, they want it to remain except the nature; women should have 40 percent. 

On the regional tier, they have no problem with it as long as it is optional. But given the historical circumstances of Kasese, and when they were under the regional government of the Toro Kingdom administration, they wish that the provision of the regional cooperation of districts cooperating on issues of development should remain. As long as it does not touch Kasese District, they were not bothered and they were very sentimental.

Independent candidates, they want Government to make a law.

Death sentence, they think it is well covered because it is categorized; only those who defile and then who rob - aggravated robbery and murder - it should be retained.

Finally, the people of Kasese appeal for tolerance.  From the House, they want the Executive and the House to take into account all the views, tolerate each other, but maintain security and development so that all of us can live in Uganda without anyone of us going into exile. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.50
DR DAVID BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The White Paper was quite a long piece of work and the committee did a very good job. I will only confine myself to five points, which I found very interesting during my consultations.

The first one was dual citizenship, they said they do not have any problem with that and they support it.

The second point naturally Entebbe being in Wakiso in Buganda must have touched the regional question and consensus was, firstly, that basically, they would like to have a regional tier yes, but after common acceptance, there were two slightly divergent ideas as to how this body should be formed. 

The first appeal was the support for a regional tier, which has the respect and is mindful of the cultural leaders and the culture. This was very strong indeed. In other words a kind of regional tier that preserves culture as it is understood in Buganda here or somewhere where they have no regional cultural leaders and they say, now, if this is going to be the case, then some of the traditional set ups should be preserved. 

For instance, if it is a regional tier, then it should have only one Lukiiko, one Council.  They said that is no problem with them. We must have a kind of modern and democratically elected membership. They said this should be the regional tier. 

Thirdly, the people should have the right to choose and install but also the right to fire their own cultural leaders. They should be within the framework of the Constitution, this is the kind of arrangement they have when they think about a regional kind of set up.

Naturally, as I said, this being Buganda, there was also a strong view for the federal arrangement. This, we cannot deny it, was there and if I maybe true to my understanding, I think this had a slightly stronger view. 

Now my third issue that was considered or I found interesting was the term limit for the presidency.  They said the term limit should be lifted and the reasons they gave were that one does not need to be in power for eight years or more to become a dictator.  So whether you limit or not this man can be - in fact there have been leaders who became dictators after a couple of years. Then they asked me, if that is the case, now should we start considering one very short term so that the man is not given time to become a dictator? I found that was very interesting but there it is; how short it is, they did not say. They said the only solution was only to lift.

In fact, what they said Madam Speaker was that, there are two sides to a coin. The argument that one can become a dictator when he has been there for so long and so on and so forth, they said, there are just as many possibilities for a phenomenon leader to come on a political scene and such a person should be given as much time as he or she needs to complete the programmes. Those are the two sides to the coin. This is what the Entebbe people say.

My fourth point Madam Speaker, was on the question of dissolving Parliament, the powers to be given to the President to dissolve Parliament. They said no, this should be left as it is in the 1995 Constitution. They said that is a good arrangement, it sort of separates the powers and gives the kind of confidence to the Members of Parliament that they really need if they are going to come up with some good laws independently.

My last point, which I found very interesting, was naturally on the political parties. They said, if that is what it takes to belong to the global family, then let that be, open up and we have the political parties. Thank you very much indeed.  Those are the views from Entebbe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You have even been economical with time. 

6.58
MR AEL ARK LODOU (Dodoth County, Kotido): Thank you Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the committee for a job well done. I did consult my constituents from Dodoth County in Kotido District.  They say that despite the disarmament programme, they still love the Government of Museveni. The first thing they said was that the Constitution must be amended and after amendment there must be provision to translate it into the local languages one of which must be Karimojong.  

Then there was the issue of dual citizenship. They said that they are at the border and some of their people are in Sudan (the Toposa), in Kenya (the Turkana and Didinga), so they welcomed the idea of dual citizenship. But they expressed concern that one indigenous community called Ngikutio had been forgotten under Article 10 of the Constitution. They say Parliament should make arrangements to have that indigenous community inserted.

On compulsory acquisition of land, they have bitter memories of Kidepo National Park. They said that if there is anyone to request for land from Dodoth, the people must be consulted and then they agree and give.

On Article 179 of the Constitution, the people of Dodoth said that they have been asking for a district status since 1989 and they feel so marginalized. In Dodoth we have about 10 ethnic groups, the Mening, the Nyangia, the Teuso, and the Dodoth themselves. They feel they should have a district called Kaabong district.

On the issue of the Chief Administrative Officer, they said the Chief Administrative Officer must be appointed by the centre and must be transferable instead of localizing the post.  

On term limits, the people of Dodoth said it must be Museveni’s government to continue.  They do not like the issue of lifting or whatever, but they want Museveni to lead us through for so many years.

On security, they said the Karimojong have been marginalized. There has been a lot of insecurity in Karamoja, but Government has not given due attention to the Karimojong. So, they asked that Government should make itself be felt in Karamoja; soldiers and whatever. When we talk about cattle rustling within Karamoja region, the Toposa, the Turkana, the Pokot, nobody bothers; but at least Government should come and impact itself on that.

On Local Government, they said decentralization should continue.  

On elections, they said there must be two elections; one for the President and the Members of Parliament, the other must be for the LC 5 and the rest of the councilors.  

On referendum, they have said that they already voted for referendum, they do not want to vote any more. What they have decided is that the Government must continue. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You have been extremely good; you have finished at 7.00 O’clock on the dot. Honourable members, I want to thank you for your contributions today; we will continue tomorrow. So, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.  Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7:00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

