Tuesday, 7 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: The Deputy Leader of Government Business, the Opposition Whip, Members of the Cabinet and Members of Parliament, I welcome you to today’s sitting, which marks the beginning of the Third Meeting of the First Session of the Ninth Parliament. I want to thank you for the work you did since we were sworn in May 2011. 

According to the business calendar, which was adopted by the Parliament on 7 December 2012, this third meeting commencing today will run up to 17 May 2012 with a brief Easter break. Therefore, whoever has business should present it during this period for consideration.

We have some other statutory business that we have to handle: 

    1. Laying on the Table, not later than the 1st of April, of the three-year macro-economic plan and programme for economic and social developments in compliance with section 4(1) and (2) of the Budget Act;

    2. Laying on the Table, not later than the 1st day of April, the indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of Government for the next financial year in accordance with section 4(3) of the Budget Act;

    3. The sessional committees shall consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to them and submit their report to the Budget Committee not later than 20th day of April in accordance with section 7(2) of the Budget Act.

    4. The Budget Committee shall scrutinise the estimates and the reports of the sessional committees and submit recommendations to the Speaker who shall then transmit them to the President by the 16th of May.

The business which is available to be presented by the ministers and backbenchers, that is, the Bills and motions that spilled over from the Eighth Parliament will also be considered.

As you may recall, on 25 October 2011 Parliament passed a motion to save and retain 23 Bills that were pending at the close of the Eighth Parliament. These are to be reprinted and read for the first time in the House for further consideration in compliance with our Rules of Procedure.

It is expected that reports of the committees of the Eighth Parliament will be used as working documents. Given that process, I expect that the time between the first and second readings will be substantially reduced. We are also happy to report that Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has completed its report on the Public Order Management Bill and it will be ready for presentation in this House.

I have also received the following Bills from the Government: the Accountants Bill, 2011; the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2011; the National Population Council Bill, 2011.

I also take this opportunity to inform the House that we shall have a motion to deal with the reports that were pending in the Eighth Parliament.

We also have to consider the following reports that were presented but not debated when we went for the Christmas recess:

1) 	The report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure, which was presented on the 7 December 2011.

2) 	The report of the Committee on National Economy on the state of the economy presented on the 15 December 2011.

3) 	The report of the Committee on National Economy on the request to borrow Units of Account (UA) 46 million, and another UA 10 million from the African Development Bank and the Nigeria Trust Fund for financing the improvement of the health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and in the city of Kampala. It was presented on 15 December 2011. Thereafter, we proposed that we shall go on recess from 18 May 2012 to 6 June 2012.

I am also happy to report that East African Legislative Assembly met here, in this Chamber, from 23 January 2012 to 2 February 2012. During that session, two Presidents addressed the Legislative Assembly as provided for under Article 54 of the Treaty. The President of Uganda and the President of Kenya addressed EALA on 24 January 2012 and on 25 January 2012 respectively.

They also discussed the East African Community Polythene Materials Control Bill and the Supplementary (Appropriation) Bill 2012, among others. They were also expected to have handled the East African Community Trans-boundary Ecosystem Management Bill, 2010 and the Inter-University Council for East Africa Bill, 2010.

Honourable members, I am also aware that there are a number of fora in this Parliament which we encourage. However, we have observed that during the last several months, meetings have been taking place simultaneously with the sittings of Parliament. This has affected the attendance both in the committees and the plenary. So, I would like propose that the meetings of those forums be placed during the weekend so that they do not interfere with the work of the House.

Finally, this afternoon I had the opportunity to discuss with the President of the Republic of Uganda on the issue of the signing of the oil agreements. He has agreed to come and address the House on Friday, 10 February 2012 so that the country knows what action he took and why he took it. I have used my powers under Article 101(2) of the Constitution to permit him to come and speak to this House this Friday. I will give you the actual time tomorrow.

2.36
MS BETTY ANYWAR (Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to stand up and raise an issue of national importance.

I want to wish my colleagues a happy new year and welcome them back. I want to take the opportunity to thank members for standing with me after what befell me on 4 November 2011. I know that at an appropriate time, I will come and make a full presentation or an account to the House and to my colleagues through you, Madam Speaker.

I stand here on a sad note, to let the august House know what has befallen the people of Northern Uganda particularly Kitgum District, which I represent. This is a very sad moment, but I pray that you give me a shoulder and ear to share the grief.

We have a disease in Northern Uganda codenamed “nodding disease”. Despite the fact that I have been down for all these months, the situation had become so bad that last week I had to travel to my constituency to make an assessment to see what is happening with the disease codenamed “nodding disease”. This was following what my colleagues of the Acholi Parliamentary Group had earlier done. 

You will remember that two years ago, I stood here on the Floor of this Parliament and made it clear to the country that we had a funny disease that had broken out in Kitgum District. I made this submission after the breakout of Hepatitis E and recently Hepatitis B.  The minister then, my colleague whom I am glad is here, listened but downplayed it and it has now escalated. 

The “nodding disease” has been given that code name because of the signs it exhibits in the children who are suffering from it in Northern Uganda. When you look at them, they are half normal. When they see food, the disease escalates; their heads seem to be very heavy to lift and they keep on nodding like monitor lizards. This has a painful effect on our people. The disease is not known and as we talk right now, 3,000 children have so far been infected and about 200 have died. 

As a country, we do not know what this disease is. Madam Speaker, by the fact that we do not know the disease, we have not been able to address it. It all started from Kitgum District in one sub-county, Akwang sub-county, Tumango Village. It has now escalated to all the neighbouring districts including Gulu, Pader, Amuru, Nwoya and the rest and probably it will move further. So, I found it befitting that as people’s representatives, we pronounce ourselves on this sad disease.     

The disease has heavily affected Akwang and Amira where I was born. When I went there last week and visited Okidi village, 50 children came with their parents and as I stood up to talk, three of them collapsed. One family has eight of their children already infected with this disease, which has disabled the parents’ movements from their homes. When one moves far away, you find that the sick children have fallen in the water and died or in the fire in the kitchen and got burnt. In this household, when a mother is going to fetch water, she gets a rope and tethers the children like goats on a tree so that they do not wander about and fall in water or fire. 

When you put food before them, you just see them stretching out the hand, which they cannot retract, and that is when you see them kicking like one with feats and they collapse. 

THE SPEAKER: I think you want the government to make a statement. It is not a debate, please. Conclude so that we can ask the government to make a statement. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, almost half of the children of school going age in Northern Uganda are not going to school because when they are there, nobody can guarantee their movement along the way. Even when it happens at school, all other children and the teachers take off. This has further made them stop the sick children from attending classes. Colleagues, we do not have a future if our children are not going to school. You can just imagine the socio-economic impact of this disease. Parents, imagine your child dying in your hands without any hope of having a cure. 

I have just talked to the medical superintendent as I was walking in here. He says they have even stopped going to the hospital because even the medical personnel do not know what to do with the children because the disease is mysterious to them. They guess that it could be epilepsy. They have tried some of those drugs but it goes out of hand and they almost run mad. So, it is trial and error, and the parents have given up going to the hospital where there are no drugs. When I went to Okidi, there were a few still walking. The rest were already down and could not be brought out in the open. We need to go around and find them in their homes. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we are seeing this as having taken so long because it was first reported in 1997 in Tumango Village, Kitgum District and the health officials know it. My brother, the previous Minister of Health, is here. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now debating. You have taken 15 minutes. 

MS ANYWAR: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, the tale cannot be all told here. I would want through you, Madam Speaker, to very precisely ask the government to come up with a full report so that we all know what this “nodding disease” is all about.  

We also want the government to take on emergency undertakings immediately. We want to see a budget brought and channelled there to help the sick children and their families. We would like to see mobile clinics created so that where these children are hidden, hope and some help is restored to them. We want Northern Uganda to be declared a disaster area so that we can address this issue as a real disaster and probably we get to the root of the problem. We also want the government to intensify on research to discover the scientific name of the disease. 

Should this not be done, Madam Speaker, we, the leadership of Northern Uganda – I am going to bring the 3,000 children to Kampala to the national referral hospital so that they are near the centre of power. As we talk now, it seems Northern Uganda is being forgotten on this. I implore you, colleagues, let us stand together and address this issue in totality. Today it is Northern Uganda and tomorrow it may be anywhere else. Let us address and arrest this problem. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.48
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, first of all, I must associate Government with this mysterious problem in the North. I also wish to convey Government’s condolence to the victims of this mysterious disease. I promise that the Minister of Health will give a full statement on this to the House tomorrow. We shall talk about the rest of the problems after the statement has been given.

THE SPEAKER: So, the Minister of Health will be reflected on the Order Paper to speak on this issue tomorrow.

2.49
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to wish everybody a very happy new year, given that this is our first sitting. I congratulate everybody for having survived the year 2011, which was a historical year in the formation of the Ninth Parliament. 

I stand to make an inquiry on an issue of public importance. In today’s Daily Monitor, it was written that “MPs receive Shs 103 million each for new vehicles”. Can we get a clarification from the relevant ministry as to how and when this money was paid? This will enable us, as Parliament, to make a judgement as to whether this is true or just rumours. 

Madam Speaker, there has been a lot of speculative talk as far as the facilitation of members with vehicles is concerned. As the chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, you could as well clarify on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am also a Member of Parliament but was shocked to see that headline because I have not received that money. What I can confirm is that the Commission has been engaged in negotiation with the government over a very long period to see to it that Members of Parliament are facilitated to do their work. This is not unique. The LC I chairpersons were supposed to get bicycles and we battled over those bicycles here; the Gombolola chiefs and chairpersons LC III have motorcycles; the RDCs have cars; the GISOs have motorcycles; the district chairpersons have cars. So, for me, I think Members of Parliament should also be facilitated. (Applause) 

What has been a problem is the state of the economy. We took that into account and that is why Members of Parliament have not yet been facilitated. However, I will support them to get their cars when the economy improves. (Applause) 

2.52
MR AMOS  LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During recess, I took the opportunity to visit my constituency and I observed something. Much of the road infrastructure there had got depleted, largely on account of the rains that we had recently. The same problem is obtaining in many areas of this country. I tried to find out from my local government and they told me they do not have the capacity to maintain the roads under their jurisdiction. I also raised the same issue with UNRA and they raised a similar problem.

Under the Uganda Road Fund Act (2008), Section 21, there are various sources of revenue identified for the Road Fund and these include fuel levies, international transit fees, road licence fees, axle load fines, bridge and road tolls, weight/distance charges and a couple of other sources. Section 21 (3) states that the charges that I have just referred to, when collected, shall be remitted directly to the Road Fund on a monthly basis. 

I would like to ask the relevant minister – who I believe is the Minister of Finance – the following questions: One, are the said monies collected in the manner so prescribed? If so, how much on a monthly basis have we been collecting? Two, how are these funds being utilised? Three, have we been able to collect all this money? When you calculate, it is quite a lot of money that is involved and yet we still have these shortcomings in our road maintenance. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

2.55
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for raising those issues. The road sector in this country is one of those that are required for the promotion of production. Unless we produce, we cannot reduce inflation substantially because the largest bubble in the inflation figure we have is food inflation. 

Roads are a very serious stimulus. I am happy with that point being raised because the Ministry of Finance has failed – and I do not know why – to amend the URA Act to allow URA to remit those levies directly to the Uganda Road Fund, as provided for in that Act he has mentioned. I have heard both the Minister of Works and Transport and his deputy crying over this.

We have got programmes like CAAIP under the Ministry of Local Government and others which are project-based programmes. They come and make roads and leave with the hope that these beautiful roads made by them will be maintained by financial releases to districts from the Uganda Road Fund. So when the fund is starved of those levies, which were purposely created for that function, the road infrastructure in the countryside continues worsening. Why can’t we have this amendment? Actually, as a committee, we are planning to move this amendment. So, accordingly, the ministry is notified.

2.57
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Africa, it is only Uganda and Burkina Faso that allow their road fund money to be remitted to the Consolidated Fund. On the contrary, all the other countries from whom we learnt the road fund operations - our neighbours like Kenya and Tanzania and others - the money is collected by the revenue authority bodies. We do not know why Uganda has to be at the same level with Burkina Faso. 

I will give an example of Tanzania. The money goes directly to the consolidated fund and it is then transferred to the road fund on a monthly basis. Therefore, we do not even need amendment of the Act here as we are always deceived. If there is political will, what stops you from moving the money to the road fund account after the money has moved to the Consolidated Fund? 

Section 21(3) of the Road Fund Act is very specific on what this money is meant to do. It is supposed to do the routine and periodic maintenance of public roads, road safety activities, expenses of UNRA and URF, research, among others. So, why should money go to the Consolidated Fund and then a section of it, a fraction of it, a percentage of it, is moved to the Road Fund yet we very well know that Government in the last two years took over more than 10,000 kilometres of additional roads? Those roads are under central government and they are in a dilapidated state today and the rains are about to get back. How shall we be able to move in this country? 

Madam Speaker, even without the amendment or as we wait for the amendment, Ministry of Finance should be able to move all the money to the Road Fund and do what it is provided for in the Act other than just sending a section of the money. Thank you Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have been moving in the country, to Members’ constituencies, but the situation of the roads is really bad. Please, Minister, really -

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matiya Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, since this is the first time I am speaking before this House this year, let me say happy new year and welcome back from your long recess. 

Madam Speaker, as you know, I am one of the victims. She has been to my constituency so she knows. Can I pray to this House to allow me to come back here on Thursday and I give you the legal, financial and technical difficulties that the ministry has got on this issue? I ask you, kindly, that you allow me to come back here on Thursday and I will give you a full detailed answer so that we can understand each other. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, the Minister of Finance will be reflected on the Order Paper on Thursday for that matter, to assist us in our budgeting. 

3.01
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish everybody a happy new year. 

I wish to state that I have an issue of national urgency and importance. I represent the people of Bukoto East. While the rest of the people were celebrating Christmas and New Year, the people of Bukoto East and I, specifically the people of Kasozi Village in Buwunga sub-county, had restless and sleepless nights. 

There are about 360 families threatened with eviction by one of the heirs of the land comprised of plot 21, block 540 in Buwunga sub-county. These families have been on this land for over 100 years and they have been complying to the policies of paying busuulu and relating with the late Kinataama who was the owner of this land. When Kinataama died, the heir, who is a grandson, a one Mr Semakalu, threatened to throw out these families. People are restless. I have the documents, which I wish to lay on the Table so that the relevant authorities come to the rescue of these families. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table this document and pray that the relevant authorities take it up expeditiously.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether that is Ministry of Justice or Ministry of Lands. Let her lay the documents first.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, the document I am laying on the Table is from Kasozi village, Kanywa Parish, Buwunga sub-county, Masaka District. The heading is, “Okugobwa abantu ku ttaka ku Kasozi LC1 Mailo land, block 540, plot 21.” It is dated 26 January 2012. I beg to lay. 

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Mr Sam Engola): Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  I would like to thank the honourable member who has laid that very important document on the Table. I would like to inform her that we are going to take appropriate action in the office. It has not yet come to our office and we are not yet aware, but there is a law in place and we are going to look into their problem and help her to help her people resettle. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

3.05
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also wish all of you, my colleagues, a very happy new year. This is also the jubilee year; I hope that our country will reap the blessings of a jubilee. 

I stand to raise a matter regarding the Ministry of Education. In December 2009, the social services committee was informed that a commission of inquiry into the use of UPE funds had been put in place. Subsequently, the House passed a supplementary budget because we were told that the matter was very urgent, that there was a lot of wastage of the funds for Universal Primary Education (UPE). In the following years, this House consistently voted money. 

At the inception, in December 2009, the minister told us that this commission was going to give their report by June 2010, within six months. To date we have not, as a country, received any report with regard to the use of UPE funds. What is even more distressing is that now we read from the media that the commission itself has began literally to steal. There is a report by the internal audit department of Ministry of Education where, for instance, on a single day this commission drew fuel worth Shs 2, 000,000. You would think they were using aviation fuel or something like that. If a commission of inquiry is going to milk Ugandans that bad then we are getting nowhere. 

My prayer this afternoon, Madam Speaker, is that, first of all, the Minister comes here and gives us a report from this commission because it is the one way to account for our money. Two, if there is no report you should officially wind up this commission because it is really draining our blood. It was expected to wind up in six months but it is now in its fourth year of existence without a report. So, if the honourable minister would clarify those matters, it would help this nation. Thank you very much.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to assure the House that we in the Ministry of Education and Sports share the view that hon. Alaso has raised. I want to assert that we are looking forward to the day when the commission of inquiry will finalise the report because we think that as a sector, we will be beneficiaries to the proposals that they will come up with.

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, hon. Alaso has requested me to come to this House with a statement in light of the work that the Commission has been doing and I would like to say that I will come with a statement at an appropriate time. Thank you. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, may I request that you give me a timeline.

THE SPEAKER: Tuesday next week, because I have allocated Thursday for two statements.

MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I undertake to come with a statement on Tuesday next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. For that matter, the Ministry of Education will be reflected on the Order Paper on Tuesday. Let us have the final matter from hon. Tanna, then we go back to the Order Paper.

3.09
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. I would like to wish my honourable colleagues a very happy new year and urge that this year of our golden jubilee is substantive.

I rise on the state of the economy. I have read the Order Paper and I see that the Minister of Finance is supposed to come and give us a statement. I have also seen a Motion being moved by my honourable colleague, hon. Sam Otada, on this Order Paper. However, I would like to raise a few issues that I think are matters of national importance. They have been raised before and I would urge that when the Ministry of Finance comes with its response, it comes to us with responses regarding these matters in particular.

The first issue I would like to raise is the issue of interest rates. Today, the interest rates in our country range from 23 percent to 32 percent depending on which commercial bank you go to. There are those that have been licensed as money lenders by the chief magistrate’s courts, and many of them hang around this building, and most of us know the rates at which they lend money. Some of my colleagues are finding it funny, but these interest rates in economics were referred to or are referred to as Draconian; 32 percent is Draconian. 

In my own opinion, I see a weakness. Three issues that we need to consider; do these commercial banks borrow from Bank of Uganda before lending to Ugandans? The answer is that the percentage of money lent by Bank of Uganda to the banks is really minimal or negligible. These banks source their funds from much cheaper sources other than Bank of Uganda amongst which are the deposits that we keep there. 

When Bank of Uganda came out to increase its base lending rates or Central Bank rate, which it raised gradually from 13 percent to 23 percent, the commercial banks, as we refer to them, decided to increase their rates. Why? They are selfish, they are not nationalistic and they are business people in a harsh market economy. 

It is true that they are serving their shareholders’ interests and not the interests of Ugandans. What hurts most is: Is the Bank of Uganda serving their interests or is it serving the interests of Ugandans? I would like to ask the honourable Minister of Finance to explain to us that Bank of Uganda does not only play the role of a bank of banks, but also plays the regulatory role. The regulatory role is supposed to be to protect Ugandans while protecting the interests of the banks. 

In this particular case, my opinion and humble submission is that the Bank of Uganda has gone to bed with commercial banks and left Ugandans at the mercy of these vultures. Why do I say so? Year after year, you read in the newspapers and you listen to the various media; these banks make billions in profits when Uganda is in trouble because we are not insulated from other world economies. We know Europe is in trouble, we know other countries are in trouble and Uganda is in trouble. Instead of these banks supporting us, they have decided to finish us off. 

Those who hold fixed deposits in these banks; we deposited at 14 percent and borrowed at 17 percent. Now you go to borrow, they want you to borrow at 32 percent but the deposit you kept is at 14 percent; they are not willing to increase. What does that show? They say that, “That you fixed; this you did not fix”. 

Where is the consumer protection by the Bank of Uganda? I beg honourable colleagues to take this into consideration as important; that the regulatory role be removed from the Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance sets up an independent regulatory authority like is the case in UK, Kenya and even South Africa. We need to put our feet down; otherwise, these people are going to continuously milk us. This is only the beginning. 

Madam Speaker, the second issue I would like to raise to the Ministry of Finance is that the reason that this happens is because we do not have a national player in this economy. The only national player we had was sold off. If we had a national player, at the moment, they would have put their interest rates at a lower rate and forced these other commercial vultures to come down, but because we do not have a national bank in place, that has the people of  -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the honourable member for giving way. You know that since UCB was sold off, we have a bank which is owned 100 percent by the Government of Uganda, and this is Post Bank. Unfortunately, Post Bank has been resisted by some very powerful people, which could be under the influence of the commercial banks for it to access the clearing house so that it can become a fully institutionalised bank. 

This has undermined its operations. You can see that even on the advent of the youth fund, when Government proposed to use Government money to give to the youth of Uganda - Post Bank is one of the banks that is in very many districts of this country and it can be accessed by many youths at concessionary rates. Unfortunately, you would want to find out how the decision to give the banks which had been selected were done until the youth made noise here for it to be improved. So, there has been a deliberate distortion to ensure that there is progressive undermining of the Ugandan institutions which would otherwise liberate the people of Uganda.

MR TANNA: I would like to thank -

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you very much honourable colleague for taking the information. Another robust proposal, Madam Speaker, that we can make in regard to the problem raised by my colleague, is that it is high time we passed a Consumer Protection Bill. The other day, when we were passing a loan from the World Bank, we had just passed the budget and I remember some colleagues were not supporting the loan. I stood up and I said, “Let us support this loan because it has some ingredients of consumer protection and financial literacy services.” I think one way of regulating the banks is to put in place a Consumer Protection Bill that would clearly define a neutral or an impartial umpire between bank clients and the banks themselves. Otherwise, even if Bank of Uganda was active, it may not legally do that role in addition to their monetary policy issues.

MR TANNA: I thank my honourable colleagues for that information. If we look at the rate at which many MPs and other people borrowed last year, if you had a project and you were supposed to repay within five years at an interest rate of 14 percent, 17 percent or 18 percent; an increment by eight percentage points to 32 percent, means that you will not be able to complete repaying your loan in 10 years. That means either these very banks will take over your business or those very individuals whom we have been reading about in the media with cash under their beds will take over these businesses. (Laughter)

It is extremely imperative that as Members of Parliament representing the people of Uganda, we look at this matter. I represent an urban constituency and in my constituency, even a lady selling fruits and tomatoes in the market has borrowed from somewhere either for school fees or whatever purpose. We all get those requests. At this rate, we are doomed. I would like to urge the Ministry of Finance to explain to this country – the Governor Bank of Uganda held a meeting when the traders went on strike for three days and said as the governor Bank of Uganda, his hands are tied because they need to control inflation. I would like to –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tanna, I think you are anticipating what the Ministry of Finance is going to say. You have raised your issues, let us –

MR TANNA: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, the last question I would like to raise to the Ministry of Finance is; we have seen the Governor and the ministry coming out with monetary policy to control, I would like to see the fiscal policies they are putting in place. (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I rise on a point of procedure. If I look at the Order Paper of today, those of you who have got their copies, under ministerial statements, my ministry, through our prayer to the honourable Speaker, will be standing before this Parliament this Thursday, to present a statement on the status of the economy. All these matters concerning interest rates, the question of the Consumer Protection Bill, all matters relating to fiscal and monetary policies will be elucidated on that day. Therefore, is it procedurally right that the honourable Member of Parliament, my good colleague, hon. Tanna, should continue labouring on this point when an opportunity is going to arise on Thursday to discuss this matter and inform each other? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you did not distribute your statement; so, he was speaking about the issues of Tororo Municipality. But please, wind up.

MR TANNA: I thank you for your wise ruling and I thank my senior colleague. Those are the assurances I needed because in the past, we have had ministerial statements not covering all these aspects. As he has assured us and through the media, the people of Tororo are listening that I have delivered their message and we will wait for you to come and respond to the issues we have raised. 

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we proceed, in the VIP Gallery, we have Mr Aaron Carlton, a political officer from the US Embassy. He has come to observe our proceedings. You are welcome. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PLANT VARIETY PROTECTION BILL, 2010

3.24
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill is one of those that were saved by our motion, so it has just been reprinted to enable debate. It will be committed to the committee and I expect it to return in less than 45 days. It is committed to the relevant committee. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PLANT PROTECTION AND HEALTH BILL, 2010

3.25
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010”, be read for the first time and I want to lay both Bills on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill is recommitted to the relevant committee. Again, it has been reprinted to facilitate debate and I expect that the timeframe between the first and second reading will be reduced.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Water? (Interjections) Let us go to the next.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Ssekikubo? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is the practice of this Parliament that when an item is put on the Order Paper and indeed it is being presented and read by the clerk; we should get a response. This House is well-constituted. There is the Leader of Government Business. We cannot just keep it and go to any other item yet you deliberately put it on the Order Paper. We must get a response as honourable Members of Parliament. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister - 

3.27
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the government will ensure that this Bill is read –

THE SPEAKER: I beg your pardon, Prime Minister.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Not today but tomorrow. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Just to re-echo what hon. Ssekikubo has raised. Madam Speaker, I know what your office undergoes to prepare an Order Paper for this institution of Parliament, and on the first day of Parliament, to have an item put on the Order Paper and we get such a casual response from the Leader of Government Business, is not satisfying. We want a proper explanation as to why the minister responsible is not in Parliament and has not been adequately represented by any other minister.  This kind of casual way of doing business is one of the reasons we tell the President that some ministers are not fit to be where they are even for one more minute. So, can we get a proper explanation – is the minister sick; is he held in the traffic jam? This kind of casualness cannot be used to transact national business. Madam Speaker, I beg the Prime Minister to re-gather himself and tell the House where this minister is.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, what I said, according to me is not casual. But if it appears to be casual to our colleagues, then that is their way of understanding; and we are not going to understand everything together; we all understand differently.

Secondly, whether we are here by mistake or not, it is too late –(Laughter)–  it is unfortunate because it is the same colleagues who vetted us before we came here. So, if we are now considered unfit to be where we are, then – personally I am sorry for the vetting committee to have made a mistake to accept people to come here – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, you summon the minister to come. This House was adjourned on 15th December to date. It was a definite date, it has been well known. We had a meeting of the Business Committee yesterday where we agreed on this business and there are three ministers in that ministry.

MR TINKANSIMIIRE: Madam Speaker, you remember that even before we passed the budget, we were particularly looking for this Minister of Water and Environment to come and make a statement on the irregular recruitment of the executive director of NFA. She has never appeared in this Parliament. We want the Leader of Government Business to tell us whether she is still a minister in this Government, in this country and where she is; what is wrong with her? Why doesn’t she come here? We are tired of this.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, we are not going to drag Parliament into administrative matters. Appointment – if people are dissatisfied, they must go to court –(Interruptions) 

MR SEGONA: Madam Speaker, this is an arm of Government that carries out the oversight role over the Executive. This Parliament is aware that we have courts of law in this country. But courts of law do not administer executive matters; we oversee executive matters. 

Is the Leader of Government Business, therefore, in order to tell us that when we want to know anything here in Parliament, we must go to court; and more so, he is a lawyer; a fresh lawyer. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, you have three ministers in that ministry; where are the three ministers?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I am aware there are three ministers in that ministry, but my understanding is that if somebody is appointed to a ministry and there is dissatisfaction, I do not think the Parliament can answer that –(Interjections)– yes, they should apply to court to review – (Interruption) 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. Before I raise my point of order, I wish to take this opportunity to wish my colleagues a happy new year and to welcome you back from the recess. 

The Prime Minister, in his submission, is trying to defend the fact that this Bill cannot be read in Parliament where we have three ministers in the docket. He is trying to explain their absence, which intimates to the fact that ministers are dissatisfied. 

Is it, therefore, in order for the Prime Minister to indicate to us that the ministers are dissatisfied when they have actually not excused themselves from their portfolios? The Prime Minister, who is also responsible for this minister, is telling us that the ministers are dissatisfied; is he in order? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do vividly remember that last year, we had a problem of Government bringing business to the House. By the time we adjourned, there were accusations that actually Parliament was not considering Government business. The business on the Order paper is very simple: “I beg to move that the Bill entitled, - be read for the first time”. It is as simple as that. 

There are ministers from this end up to there and none of them can do such a simple thing – a simple thing like that? Just to come and say that?

I cannot believe that we have a Cabinet –(Laughter)- and they are all looking at us. A small thing like to move a Bill for the first time – and tomorrow, Madam Speaker, you will be accused of sabotaging Government business. We have been in recess for over two months and we have come here to do serious business and they are here looking at us –(Interjections)- I think it is high time the leader of this Government looked into his team. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I saw the Rt hon. Leader of Government Business struggling to give us an answer and I just wanted to remind him that our rules are very clear with regard to sitting or presence of ministers in the House. I just want to refer him to Rule 98, “Attendance of Sittings by a Minister.” Sub-rule (1) says, “For any Ministry, the Minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend sittings of the House; and where none of them is able to attend, a Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interests in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly.’ Sub-rule (2) says, “The Leader of Government Business shall ensure that sub-rule (1) is complied with.” (Laughter) So, I just wanted to read this rule to guide the Leader of Government Business so that he knows that the rules are very clear on how he should conduct business with regards to coordinating the ministers to be in the House. I thank you very much.

MR STEPHEN KAGWERA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The statement from the Leader of Government Business is very – I am going to use the word - unbecoming. This is an honourable House and Members are here. To rise and say that if people want, they can go to court, then really people are taking this House for granted. You are taking this House for granted;, you are taking the people of Uganda for granted, because this is not the first thing; we have even been reading in the newspapers that a committee of Parliament says this and somebody goes and does another thing. 

Really, with a lot of pain, I would encourage the members of the front bench to be serious and not to shame us, especially as NRM. (Applause) Three ministers in the ministry and –(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am rising to raise a very humble point of procedure. We have a series of Bills on our Order Paper today and the Minister of Agriculture has splendidly done a good job in presenting his Bills. The ministers who are seated here are waiting to present the subsequent Bills. I know that the Ministry of Water and Environment is located in an area that is always encumbered with a lot of traffic jam –(Interjections) 

The point of procedure I would like to present to the House is whether or not we can take that item to the last amongst the Bills so that the ministers who are present now can present the Bills which are on the Order Paper as we wait for the other ministers to arrive.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have no problem doing that, but this House and specifically the Speaker has been accused of blocking Government business by members of the Cabinet. So, I gave you notice that we shall meet on the 7th. I gave you this notice on the 15th of December and you went for Christmas knowing that we shall open on the 7th of February; and so I expected you to be here. Move to the next item. (Dr Malinga rose_)  No, no; there are other Bills. Which one are you reading? The microphone is off!

3.45
THE MINISTER FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPARDENESS (Dr Stephen Mallinga): I thank you Madam Speaker. I would like to read for the first time –(Interruption)-

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, the procedure of this House is clear. The Clerk has to designate the Bill and then the Minister rises to read it for the first time, but the Clerk has not done so and the Minister has, therefore, jumped the gun to read a Bill that has not been designated officially for first reading by the Clerk. So, is it procedurally right for the Minister to jump the gun before the Clerk reads the Bill?

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please, read it again.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

3.46
THE MINISTER FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPARDENESS (Dr Stephen Malinga): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010” be read for the first time and I would like to lay it on the Table. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is another of the Bills that we saved from the last Parliament. It was reprinted and so I expect that the time between the first and second reading will be reduced and I do hope that the ministers will be available to attend the committee. It is committed to the relevant committee. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Trade) (Mr David Wakikona): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, similarly, this Bill was reprinted having been saved by this Parliament and it is committed to the committee, and I expect that the time between the first and second reading will be reduced and they report back urgently. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-HOMOSEXUALITY BILL, 2009

4.48
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa West County, Kabale): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: “The Anti-homosexuality Bill, 2009” be read for the first time. I now lay it on Table. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill has similarly been reprinted and it is committed to the relevant committee for expeditious scrutiny and report back.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, since this is a Private Member’s Bill, I would like to know whether the mover obtained a Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all the Bills that were saved and retained by our motion in December last year already had certificates of financial implications. (Applause)

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE HIV/AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on HIV/AIDS, can you report?

3.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS (Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I also join the rest of the Members to welcome you back from the recess. I also wish you a happy new year.

I am sorry I will have to apologise – we thought this Bill would be ready for presentation today, but later on, we discovered that there were some technical problems on one page. In the circumstances, we are unable to present it today. Kindly, give us another chance to present it tomorrow or the day after because it is being corrected.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. It is deferred to tomorrow. Let us get to the next item.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS AMENDMENT BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Trade -

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Trade) (Mr David Wakikona): Madam Speaker, I had already laid that one. I think it was a repetition of four and seven. Maybe I now go to number eight.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us go to number eight. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-COUNTERFEITING GOODS BILL, 2011
3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr David Wakikona): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2011” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill too was reprinted and it is hereby committed to the committee for expeditious scrutiny and report back. Let us get to the next item.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE ACCOUNTANTS BILL, 2011

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Accountants Bill, 2011” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is that one of the reprinted Bills? Is the Accountants Bill new? It is a new Bill. Minister of Finance, can I have a Certificate of Financial Implications?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, as far as I can recollect, this Bill was in the pipeline by the time we went into recess – (Interjections)- no, no it was saved from last Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Bill is committed to the relevant committee for urgent scrutiny and report back.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS AMENDMENT BILL, 2011

3.54
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2011” be read for the first time.

The Bill has a Certificate of Financial Implications attached. I wish to lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has satisfied the requirements of the Budget Act. The Bill is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL POPULATION COUNCIL BILL, 2011

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The National Population Council Bill, 2011” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it was also reprinted, the Bill is remitted to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. (Mr Okupa rose_) Yes, you have a clarification to make?

MR OKUPA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, there is this other Bill that the Ministry of Finance has always kept promising to table here; the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. May I know from the minister when this Bill will be tabled before Parliament?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank hon. Okupa for raising this matter. I would like to assure this House that this Bill is in the pipeline and we will be tabling it before this House any time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just want to remind the Government that that Bill is among the six Bills that the President told us to specifically handle. He said they are very important for the economy. So, if they are not coming, then you are the ones letting down the President.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, it is true that Bill was saved. However, with your ruling, I would like to inform the House that the committee is revisiting reports that were drafted by the old committee. What is required of the minister, as of now, is for him to bring here a reprinted copy, just like he has done to the others, to set the process in motion again.

THE SPEAKER: Can I also remind the Minister of Agriculture that you have tabled two Bills that have the same information? You have to come back and read the Plant Protection and Health Bill. This is because you read the Bill on Plant Variety twice. You need to correct that; you have tabled two copies of the same Bill.

3.56
MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Speaker, if it happened, I apologise, but there were two Bills: One was the Plant Variety Protection Bill, 2010, and the second was the Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010.

THE SPEAKER: You have brought two plant variety Bills. Both of these are plant variety. That is what you have laid. 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: I beg your pardon. I will look for the second one. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

(I) STATEMENT ON THE ECONOMY

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, as I stated earlier, the statement about our national economy - and I am reliably informed that your Office was duly informed that we will not be able to present today, but for sure, we shall present it on Thursday. So, I beg this House to bear with me. We will be coming with that statement on Thursday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Finance will be reflected on the Order Paper for the statement on Thursday.

(II) STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT
4.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, UGANDA WOMEN PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a statement on the state of domestic violence in this country. Unfortunately, I do not have copies, they are being photocopied but I have what I am going to state.

Madam Speaker, the last one month this year, two key incidents dominated the papers: There was the case of Hanifa Nakiryowa, an employee of UNICEF who had a misunderstanding with her husband, a lecturer at Makerere University. The lecturer had detained the children and called her to come and pick them. She came and called her husband to come to the gate of Makerere University to pick her. The husband told her he could not pick her from the gate but that she should walk to his apartment at Mugenyi Flats, Makerere University. 

She walked and knocked at the door for about five minutes but her husband did not open. As she continued knocking the door, an unknown person appeared and poured acid on her. As she screamed for help, the husband did not come. It is the neighbours who came out and helped take her to the hospital. When the neighbours appeared, the husband opened the door, with the children. Unfortunately, one of the children started crying and fell on the acid and got burnt. As I speak now, she is at Mulago Hospital, Ward 2C, with severe burns all over her body. 

The husband, Dr Faisal Buyinza, a lecturer of Economics at Makerere University, was briefly held at Wandegeya Police Station and was later released by Police. Police indicated that they did not have enough evidence. At the moment, he is free. 

The second incident is that of our former colleague, hon. Susan Nampijja. While returning home at night, she was attacked by her estranged lover, Mr Mukisa, who beat her with an iron bar and panga. She sustained major injuries on the head. She was admitted at Case Clinic with her housemaid and one of her relatives. As we speak now, she is still at Case Clinic. 

Madam Speaker, these are just high powered people that the press could capture because of their status. It underpins the argument that domestic violence is a national issue. It doesn’t matter what class, tribe or religion. 

According to Mulago Hospital statistics, over 80 percent of cases of acid admitted at the hospital are those related to domestic violence. And when I went to Mulago, there were about 40 cases in the last six months. Of the 40 cases, about five were not related to domestic violence. 

According to the Uganda Demographic and Household Survey, 60 percent of Ugandan women face domestic violence in form of rape and defilement, while 11 percent of men face domestic violence. Defilement constitutes 80 percent of reported cases and 60 percent of rape. 

This Parliament, realising the gravity of this national problem, on the 11 November 2009, passed the Domestic Violence Bill. It was assented to by His Excellency the President in 2010. We also passed the Genital Mutilation Act and Trafficking in Persons Act. 

Our assessment, however, indicates that implementation of these laws are wanting. The Ministry of Gender should have developed a regulation to implement the Domestic Violence Act, but as of now, we do not have this regulation at the Local Government level.

Local council courts were supposed to be constituted as the first courts to deal with domestic violence, according to the Domestic Violence Act. As of now, our local council system has not been informed, they have not been trained and they have not been constituted into a court of first instance of domestic violence. 

Therefore, the laws we have passed in this Parliament are not being implemented. The ministries, which are supposed to implement these laws, have not done enough to ensure their implementation. 

We are demanding that ministries should indicate in their various statements how they intend to implement the Domestic Violence Act, the Genital Mutilation Act, the Trafficking in Persons Act, and all the key policy and regulatory frameworks that have been put in place, and to fast-track the implementation of these laws. 

The Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is supposed to be the key actor during investigations, does not have a key policy framework or key regulatory instruments to implement these laws. We request that the Ministry of Internal Affairs sets up special units at the Police to deal with domestic violence. Because when I went to Police, there are only three key crimes related to domestic violence that are recorded: There is, rape, defilement and assault. 

So, the rest of the characteristics or the forms of domestic violence in the law are not yet recorded at the Police. 

The Ministry of Health, where victims should go and evidence is collected by doctors, still have weak systems of ensuring that victims who report to health centres are assisted in time and they are supported with appropriate medical documentation transmitted to Police for action. So, we need action from the Ministry of Health to ensure that in health centre IIIS and IVs, and in district health centres, personnel and health workers are trained on how to preserve and deal with evidence of domestic violence. 

We need the Ministry of Justice to train magistrates, judicial officers and legal personnel on how to adjudicate and ensure that when matters of domestic violence are brought to the attention of the judicial officers, justice is dispensed. 

We need the Ministry of Gender –

(a)	to immediately develop and issue the regulation for the implementation of the Domestic Violence Act; 
(b) 	to engage in setting up social services for the survivors;
(c)	to install toll-free phone numbers for Police and medical emergencies;
(d)	to establish social and rehabilitation centres; and
(e) 	to develop and popularise the training guide for domestic violence implementers like the Police, health workers, probation officers, community development officers and the local councils who are the implementers of the Act. 

Madam Speaker, we, therefore, request, through you, that the Leader of Government Business ensures that these ministers bring before this Parliament how they intend to fulfil and implement these laws that this Parliament has enacted. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from what I gather, this is not a motion for debate; it is a call for action from the relevant ministers. I don’t know whether the Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice wishes to say something about how we are implementing the laws we have enacted, because she has raised a number of gaps. 

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, first of all, to all colleagues, happy tidings in the New Year. 

You may recall, Madam Speaker, that I shepherded the passing of the Domestic Relations Bill in this House, and under very serious pressure to do so, but of course, that was a national need. 

To my knowledge, and as has been ably stated, this is an inter-ministerial matter. But we are happy to state that the Justice,  Law and Order Sector, which is a sector that cuts across these relevant ministries, has already taken some strides in some of these areas. To my knowledge, guidelines and particularly with the help and assistance of the Chief Justice who is the patron of the Justice, Law and Order Sector, there has been great effort in setting the regulations to implement this Act. But we can bring that to your attention at a later stage as far as the update is concerned. 

But, it goes without saying that we need to put in more effort to ensure that the concerns being highlighted by the honourable Member of Parliament are addressed. And since the prayer has been to the Leader of Government Business, I believe the Leader of Government Business will co-ordinate the relevant ministries to do what we are supposed to do in this area, and to bring a statement forthwith to Parliament.
 
I cannot make that undertaking because it is for the Leader of Government Business to make it, because he is the one going to co-ordinate all the relevant ministries. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, this matter involves Justice, Health, Internal Affairs and Gender. When can you come; because even the other day, a small girl’s foot was cut off when she refused to be raped? A man chopped off her foot in Mbarara.  

4.13
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, we shall call a joint meeting as soon as possible –(Interjections)– but what can I say? I said as soon as possible. (Laughter)

4.14
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request that the Leader of Government Business be specific in this case because this House has always given assignments for the Leader of Government Business and he has always taken his time. I want to give you an example. This House, when we were almost adjourning, assigned the Prime Minister to hold a meeting on the cotton issue in one week’s time and the meeting was never held in one week’s time until Members put a lot of pressure, and then it was held on the 31st.

So, in this case, it is a very serious matter and we would like the Leader of Government Business to be a little more specific and give us a date. It is not really a very big one. 

4.15
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, the matter of domestic violence has just caught attention because certain prominent people have been affected and we are aware that there are laws to that effect. But there are certain things which the laws may not be in position to address. Each one of us can be a victim of domestic violence and there are very many people in this Parliament who may not even report men and women who may be suffering a lot of slaps and domestic violence -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, that reaction shows you that people are silently screaming. 

Therefore, whereas we recognise that there are laws which can be implemented to handle the post-mortem of domestic violence, there is a lot that Parliament can do in order to sensitize the greater public about domestic violence and its effect. 

There is also a related issue of people trafficking in acid. This issue is not being talked about and very many people are trafficking in acid and maiming and disfiguring others, and apart from apprehending some of them, if people can, the trafficking continues. True, the acid is being used in many areas, especially in the batteries industries, laboratories and so on, but the question that we must ask ourselves is, where do the people who use acid for maiming and disfiguring others get it from? Who sells it to them and under what circumstances? These are the questions that we need to put across so that we get to know how acid moves in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I have got a suggestion on what we can do as Parliament on a quarterly basis. Whereas demonstrations in this country are abominable and can cause teargas, you can ask the Inspector General of Police so that we demonstrate against domestic violence on a quarterly basis.

THE SPEAKER: Deputy Prime Minister, do you have any specific date for this statement?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I want to appeal to the House not to give a date. I have given dates before and in most cases because of some unforeseen problems, the same House cannot fulfill its commitments. So, because of that, I am  fearing to give a date such that tomorrow people do not say that I have not fulfilled my commitments.

If I must set a date, then I will say in two months’ time.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe Prime Minister we shall give you one month; two months is too long.

Lt Gen.(RTD) Moses Ali: If I do not fulfill within the one month, then I should not be held responsible because my realistic time is really two months. This is because I know that it involves so many things. It necessitates meeting these people two or three times before you come to a conclusion. If we say one or two weeks and then I am not ready tomorrow, you will say that I am even in a wrong place. How can you say I am in a wrong place?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, if you are not able in one month, you let us know, but we are giving you one month.

(III) STATEMENT ON UNFULFILLED PLEDGES TO PARLIAMENT BY THE GOVERNMENT

4.21
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Now, Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that the Minister of Water has come. Arising from the meeting of the Business Committee yesterday, I am supposed to make this statement.

I want to take this opportunity to welcome you from the long recess in which we were able to interact at length with constituents. I also take this opportunity to congratulate you on successfully finishing the year 2011, and Government is looking forward to a fruitful calendar year 2012. 

At the close of last week –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: The Leader of Government Business is reading to Parliament a statement - I do not know whether it is his personal statement or a statement from Government. If it is a statement of Government, which the Leader of Government Business cannot cause to be printed, is it procedurally right for someone to come here and give a statement on pledges of Government as if he is casually addressing a campaign rally?

How shall we be able to track the pledges and the answers to them? It is as if we are listening to radio announcements. Is it procedurally right for this Parliament to receive such kind of a statement?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, my learned colleague the Prime Minister, may also want to know that I am the Chairperson of the Government Assurances Committee in this Parliament, and with assistance of the Speaker and our donors, we have a team in Parliament recording the assurances and pledges made by ministers on a daily basis.

We are launching the first book next week on this subject of unfulfilled pledges to Parliament by Government. Then you come and you want to speak off head on such a very important matter? If it were pledges, it would be a different thing, but pledges that have not been fulfilled are more important. We need a written copy of this statement where the pledges are listed one by one and he starts explaining why they have been unfulfilled. 
We pray that the Prime Minister be stayed from proceeding as the printing actually takes place because from here we do not want to make reference to the Hansard in future. We want to make direct reference to your statement, which would have been recorded in the Hansard.
 
THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, your statement is fairly lengthy; can we defer it to tomorrow so that the clerk can produce copies.

LT GEN.(RTD) MOSES ALI: I cannot go against your decision, Madam Speaker; tomorrow is not far but the statement which has been read is also like this. I do not know why the standard is different; a speech was allowed without copies and it was a serious statement on domestic violence. I can read mine tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: You are the Leader of Government Business in this country; the other Member is a Backbencher. We shall bring it and you present tomorrow. The clerk will provide the copies tomorrow.

(IV) STATEMENT ON ATTENDANCE OF PLENARY SESSIONS 
BY MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, this will also apply to the same speech. I will combine them tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: The clerk is directed to produce both statements tomorrow and distribute them in the morning for Members to read before we have the session.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to raise a clarification because what I get from the Leader of Government Business is that he seems to be constrained because he probably doesn’t have enough stationery. So, I wanted you to guide us in a situation where a government minister or the Leader of Government Business is preparing a report - because he is apparently saying that he brought a copy of his report and it is being photocopied within Parliament. We wouldn’t like to put the blame on the officers of Parliament who should be producing the copies for Parliament. Is the Leader of Government Business saying his office is constrained and he cannot raise adequate stationery and, therefore, carries a copy to Parliament to be photocopied? (Laughter)
  
I am raising this because it adds financial constraints to the budget of the Parliamentary Commission. So, is he constrained to the extent that the Office of the Leader of Government Business cannot afford to produce enough copies for Members of Parliament? I just wanted that clarification so that it is not understood that it is Parliament, which is delaying the work but it is actually his office.  Thank you very much. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I just want to simplify this matter and allow the House to continue. I am very happy and I agree with your decision to bring these papers tomorrow, which will give us time to print more copies. Otherwise, what has been raised doesn’t actually arise and I would, therefore, say that we could go ahead with business. 

THE SPEAKER: I am glad you have relieved my budget of the Commission from printing for you. Please, produce the copies tomorrow and bring them.
 
LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

(V) STATEMENT ON THE HEAT 
WAVE THAT IS AFFECTING THE COUNTRY

4.31
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Madam Speaker, protect me from the Frontbench. First, I would like to apologise that some steam went off because I was not here. I would like to assure colleagues, Members of Parliament, that it was not an omission but because I had to conclude something urgent in the office. 

But on the other hand, Madam Speaker, by midday today, I checked the Parliament website in order to access the agenda for today but unfortunately it was not there. At half past midday, my personal secretary got a call informing me that I was required to explain why we have heat waves in the country. 

Definitely, those of you who have visited my ministry know that my departments are scattered. While we reside in Luzira, the Department of Meteorology –(Interruption)
 
MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the minister should be serious. For the minister to come here and blame the Parliamentary Commission that by half past midday she checked on the Parliament website and there was no Order Paper is wrong. We received copies of the Order paper today at 11.58. So, is the minister in order to come and lie to the House that the Parliamentary Commission and staff of Parliament have failed to do their work of delivering the Order Paper in time? Is she in order?
 
THE SPEAKER: She is out of order. And in addition to that, the Business Committee, on which she is represented by the Prime Minister, sat yesterday and a decision was taken before midday that you should come and make a statement today.
 
MRS MUTAGAMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to say sorry to the honourable member who said that I have told a lie, but I have not told a lie.  By half past midday, there was nothing. I have also spoken to the secretary of the Chief Whip to find out what happened by 1.00 and too confirmed that they had not come up with one. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. The Order Paper was ready by half past ten this morning. Just say that you were not ready, but don’t try to depict the Parliament as being inefficient; we are very efficient.
 
MRS MUTAGAMBA: Madam Speaker, as I conveyed and I would like to convey the same message that since I didn’t get the message in time, I have already requested the secretariat that I present this paper on Thursday. I cannot present it tomorrow because I am going to Karamoja. So, I will present this paper on Thursday. I beg to add. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, this matter will again be reflected on the Order Paper for Thursday.
 
MR TINKASIIMIRE: Before the Minister of Water takes leave, I would request you, Madam Speaker, that she makes a commitment to this House as to when she is going to adhere to your ruling made last year directing her to make a statement on the irregular recruitment of the Executive Director of National Forestry Authority (NFA). 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I trust your deputy who was in the Chamber that day must have briefed you. This ruling was made in November last year.
 
MR SEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this is our first sitting this year. We started with the Ministry of Water with none of the ministers being around to table their own Bill. We then heard the Leader of Government Business coming to read statements that were not printed and when he was explaining, he actually said that he couldn’t give a guarantee to this Parliament and, therefore, needed two months and maybe a year.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to keep on dragging us behind by talking about issues that you have already ruled on? Is it in order? Can’t we have enough time to go forward instead of dragging us behind? These issues are already being sorted out.  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have already ruled on those issues so don’t go back to them.  (Laughter)

MR SEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If the Leader of Government Business was only patient, I was actually giving a preamble to raise a serious matter that needs his attention. 

The Minister of Water has finally appeared and she did not receive communication from the representative of Government to the Business Committee. Madam Speaker, you have seen one by one stream out of this House. Maybe we are dealing with a rebellion and maybe it is intentional that they wish to fail this Parliament. You have seen how they regard this Parliament; one by one they have left and the Leader of Government Business said he is not sure so he cannot give us a date. He said, “I am not sure whether the ministers will comply.” 

We are dealing with a very serious matter. What do we do, Madam Speaker? We represent people, some of whom are even watching this drama on TV. Maybe the government collapsed and we did not know. (Laughter) If we have the Leader of Government Business who is supposed to superintend over ministers telling you that he does not know whether they will come and give statements and asking for two months, why then did we go on recess? I thought the government took MPs and ministers to Kyankwanzi to prepare the government’s side but now they appear even more unprepared than before. What do we do, Madam Speaker? Maybe we go for another recess? (Laughter)

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I am very happy to hear from my colleague but we have already agreed and ruled on what he has raised; unfortunately, he has continued. Who is now more confused? Is it the Leader of Government Business or hon. Nganda? We usually go to Kyankwanzi on programmes and not according to the Opposition orders. 

Secondly, there is a system of changing Government and we have just finished one – (Interjections) - through elections, not wishful thinking. 

THE SPEAKER: May I have the Minister of Water. You have an outstanding statement on the NFA appointment.

4.41
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member who has reminded the House that I have to make a statement. Of course, I wish to remind Members that when that directive was made, I was indisposed and was not in office. Now that I am back and in charge, I promise to bring the statement on Thursday. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the matter of the statement on NFA should be reflected on the Order Paper for Thursday. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION 
BY KACITA ON THE 
REGULARISATION OF INTEREST RATES

4.42
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, on December 20, when actually this House had already gone on recess, KACITA, which is a member-based organisation registered under the laws of Uganda to advocate and lobby for the interests of the business community in Uganda, presented a petition to the Speaker on the issue of interest rates on loans. Their petition has one core subject matter and two prayers. 

The core issue is that interest rates have increased on both existing and running loans, ultimately affecting the new repayment schedules with higher repayment instalments yet some borrowers – if not most of them – have fixed incomes. The end result is delinquency, which definitely shall cause loan default, among other things. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the following are their prayers – Maybe before I read them, I would like to say that the petition was signed by over 70 members of KACITA. The following are their prayers: 

That Parliament prevails upon financial institutions and bars them from applying varying interest rates on running loans; and

That all commercial banks which have already charged their clients extra interest rates beyond what was agreed at the time of borrowing should be compelled to return the extra charges by way of crediting it back to the clients’ accounts.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this petition on the Table for appropriate action.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that petition came at a difficult time and I think it even led to a strike by the traders in this town. So, I task the Committee on National Economy to work overnight and report before the end of this week. 

Hon. Members, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
