
Tuesday, 2 February 2010

Parliament met at 2.30pm in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:
    1. Mr Suleiman Balyejjusa

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sulaiman Balyejjusa Kirunda, you are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. This is an institution created by the Constitution and the oaths that you have taken are intended to make you protect that Constitution.  

I also would like to inform you that this Parliament has got its own rules under which it operates; you will also operate under those rules. However, since you are new in this Parliament and I am not sure whether you already have copies of the above documents or not, I would like to hand them over to you; I hereby hand you the Constitution, which you will have to protect. Further, since you also do not have a copy of our rules that control us when transacting business, here is a copy of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

You will today be given a seat; I understand you were elected under the NRM party ticket, which is the Government side. However, I would like to inform you that this House has got two sides all of which are parts of Parliament. I would like to say that although you will be sitting on the Government side, it does not mean that you will not be working with the people on the Opposition side; you will have to work in harmony with both the Members on the Opposition and Government sides of the House. Do not treat Members of the Opposition as enemies; they are colleagues, though your philosophies are different.

You are the Member of Parliament for Budiope and I know there were candidates with whom you competed for this seat before you won the elections. However, I would like to inform you that you are now a Member of Parliament for all the people of Budiope, including those who competed with you. So, be a leader of the people of Budiope and serve Uganda. You may take your seat. (Applause)

Hon. Members, in the gallery, we have people who have accompanied our new Member of Budiope, our brothers and sisters from Budiope who are in the public gallery. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

Hon. Members, let me also use this opportunity to welcome you back from the recess and I hope you have been able to use it profitably, for you and the electorate. 

On a sad note, I have received the sad news of the death of the father of hon. Minister of State in the Prime Minister’s Office, responsible for Northern Uganda, hon. David Wakikona. He lost his father, Mzee Wakikona Wekoniya last night at 10.30 p.m. in Mbale Hospital. Burial takes place tomorrow Wednesday, 03 February 2010 at 2.00 p.m. in Bunyanga village, Nabweya sub-county, Bududa District. Please join me in observing a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank Members who were able to come and attend a special sitting of Parliament at short notice, which was held on Monday, 25 January to pay tribute to the late hon. Samuel Byanagwa, MP Rukiga County who passed away in Mulago Hospital after a long battle with cancer.

In the same vain, I thank all the honourable members who were able to attend his funeral service here in Kampala and the burial ceremony in Kabale District. May his soul rest in eternal peace and may the Almighty God give comfort and courage to his family to bear the loss! 

Hon. Members, I would like to report that we successfully hosted the Sixth Session of Parliamentary Union of the Organisation of Islamic Conference between the 24th and 31st January 2010. Participants to this conference asked me to convey to you their uttermost appreciation and warm regards. They were happy with the kind of reception that you gave them. 

I also thank the members of staff and other members in Parliament who were involved in the organisation. Thank you very much. (Applause)

The Business Committee sat this morning to chart out the programme of business of Parliament and the Clerk will in due course avail you with a detailed programme. However, suffice it to say that there is a lot of business to be handled. For instance, there are 30 Bills, five of which are related to the electoral laws and these are very important. As you know, we have been promising people that whenever we make electoral reforms, they will be done in good time so that those responsible can internalise the law for proper elections. They are very important; therefore we should try our best to deal with them as soon as possible. 

These Bills have been read for the first time and are at various stages of proceeding in the committees and subsequently plenary. Therefore, colleagues, it is important that we put in more time and effort to be able to handle these important pieces of legislation. I, therefore, ask you to co-operate in this regard. 

By way of information, I would like to inform you that the East African Legislative Assembly is scheduled to hold its plenary and committee meetings from 8th to 19th February in Kampala. This will necessitate the use of the Parliamentary Chambers and some of the committee rooms. In order to rationalise the use of resources during that period, Parliament of Uganda will be sitting in the mornings from 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. while the East African Legislative Assembly will be sitting in the afternoon starting at 2.00 p.m. Hon. Members are advised to take note of this interim arrangement and noble cause. I wish you very fruitful deliberations. Thank you very much.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not seeking clarification from your communication but I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. This is regarding the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. We have heard ministers who do not hold your portfolio make statements, like hon. Kajara, that government is withdrawing the Bill. Can we hear the position you hold on that?

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The truth of the matter is that the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, which you know is before the committee of Parliament is the property of Parliament and Government or the Executive, to be precise, does not have any direct access to this matter. 

It is true that because of the curiosity of some members of the public who were not privy to the contents of the Bill – there was a need for Cabinet to dialogue with the mover of this Bill, and the intention was that the mover assists Cabinet to understand the Bill more. But all said and done, the truth of the matter is that the Bill belongs to Parliament and we do not see any other way about it. (Applause)

2.49
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister for that assurance he has given us. The Anti-homosexuality Bill has attracted a lot of interest from within and without, but the information that the honourable minister has given us seems to contradict what His Excellency, the President, said that hon. Bahati should go slow -(Interjections)- yes, he was on the front page of the New Vision and the following day there were cartoons to that effect stating that hon. Bahati should go slow on that Bill and yet this was a Bill that was introduced in this House as a Private Member’s Bill and rightly as you said, it is the property of this House. But when we begin getting such kind of advice or concerns raised by the No. 1 of this country, it gives us a little bit of worry. Can the minister once again reiterate that this is our Bill as Parliament, and that the Executive keeps its hands off so that one of these days when it is put on the Order Paper, it is us as Parliament to look at the pros and cons and take a decision on it? 

This is causing a lot of confusion to the public. The public is all out to say homosexuality is not in their best interests as a society and it does not augur well with its social values. So, why are we having this interference from the Executive? Please, give us that assurance so that we can look at the pros and cons of this Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill, which is the subject of this debate, was read for the first time and it was committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and subsequent report to the House on a motion for second reading. 

It is a Private Member’s Bill. It is not a Government Bill. Therefore, the question of withdrawing it has its own procedure. The procedure is that even hon. Bahati, the owner of the Bill, should he want to withdraw it - but he has not indicated that to me - has to apply to the House for leave to withdraw, but the Executive and any member of the international community, is free to go to the committee and express their views. (Applause) Any member of the international community is free to sensitise us about the issues -(Laughter)- but as to what to do, that is for us. The Executive is free to interact with the committee and the mover of the Bill; that is their freedom. 

The reason why the Bill was sent to the committee was to give opportunity to people who cannot come here to debate the Bill so that they can have an input into the matter. They could be in thousands or hundreds, but we shall accord them an opportunity to do so and as far as Parliament is concerned, it is only waiting for the report of the committee so that we move ahead. (Applause)

2.53
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also take this opportunity to welcome honourable colleagues from the long recess and I wish them a very successful 2010.

I stand up on an issue of national concern. We have all been on recess and we have been using the mass media to know what is happening in this country. 

Of recent there has been an unprecedented increase in deaths in the country. Almost everyday, every newspaper and the electronic media, carry reports of brutal death through child sacrifice and human sacrifice, road carnage and brutal murders. For example, yesterday’s report on NTV and other media carried a news item of a woman who had been raped and killed and later dumped in a septic tank. Last year, in Rakai, there was a district employee who was killed and buried just behind a house. As Parliament and as peoples’ representatives, we cannot just sit and watch. 

As we start this session, we would like to request government and the relevant departments to tell us what mechanisms we should put in place during this session to ensure that the deaths reduce. Accidents on the roads are on the increase. My brother, the chairman of the bus drivers association, is here. He tells me that the bus drivers are disciplined. However, there are many accidents on our roads.  

Mr Speaker, there are very many private security firms, which I think are not well regulated and supervised in recruitment, training and even screening the type of people who man the various private security firms and installations. This too has led to the increase in robberies. So, as we open this session, and as the Chair of the Committee on Defence and Internal affairs - and I am receiving a lot of cries from colleagues as the public looks at us - how do we engage the various relevant government departments to ensure that we reduce these brutal deaths, whether through human sacrifice or road carnage? [Mr Kakoba Onyango: “Information”.] I want to conclude my presentation by saying that as Parliament, we passed, on the Floor of Parliament, the Bill for Prevention of Human Sacrifice but I think it has not been assented to by His Excellency the President, so that the relevant departments within the Ministry of Internal Affairs can be mandated, during this budgeting process, to access resources to ensure that they are able to effectively curtail the increasing deaths in our midst. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.58
MR MAWIYA LULE (NRM, Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague hon. Kasamba, the Chairperson of the Committee on Internal Affairs and Defence, for bringing up this matter. 

The matter my colleague has just raised is a very serious one and I beg that this Parliament, in this very sitting, gives time for Members to fully debate this matter so that we come to a conclusion.
 
We have raised matters concerning this issue quite a number of times, but government has always given scanty information. Therefore, I pray that we devote this time to debating this matter thoroughly so that we can also provide input, because as Parliament, we have done our work. We have enacted laws on all the aspects concerning the protection of lives of our people. As representatives of the people, let us come in handy and help government because the various arms of government, the security and everybody else, are concerned. If government cannot come out clearly, can we?  

Let me give an example. At the Lukaya road toll station, I almost wanted to put some volunteers to check these buses. My colleague there said that the bus drivers are very disciplined but if there are any indisciplined drivers, it is the bus drivers. They do not give regard to any road users; they overtake where it is not necessary; they are totally indisciplined on the road!

If it comes to these trucks that carry animals for slaughter, you have seen roadblocks that are meant to provide some security, especially concerning the drivers of those trucks, but nothing is done. That is also another cause of accidents on the roads.

Government must do its work and we must involve everybody. So, it is my prayer that we devote this time to discussing this matter to its conclusion. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I remember, it is on our record of last calendar year that this Parliament directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to set up a committee of inquiry into the rampant child sacrifice. I do not know the position - we are yet to be advised on what happened, but this thing is increasing. As you have heard honourable minister, the murders are too much and I think honourable members during the recess have got many reports to make about this issue.

3.01
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker. As you rightly put it, I believe this Parliament has debated and expressed itself very clearly on the unnecessary deaths occurring in this country. 

I would like, however, to seek clarification from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, whether the government is in position to know what goes on in this country -(Laughter)- because things are happening as if we have no government. It is the same thing, day in, day out, and no results produced.  

Secondly, if the government does not know what is happening, is the minister willing to resign his post? (Laughter) You cannot just look on as Ugandans are dying and yet it is your duty to protect my life and my property. What is happening is really sad. 

We should create airports in all towns in Uganda. Maybe it is safer in the air because the roads have become very dangerous -(Laughter)- and as we approach elections, there will be a lot of non-accidental accidents. (Laughter) I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to hear from the minister.

3.03
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Chair of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for raising this very important matter. On almost every newspaper page, everyday, there are cases of human sacrifice and killings in a manner that raises a lot of concern.

In addition to what the chairperson of the committee has said, I want to find out from the Minister of Internal Affairs - because when you drive in Kampala and throughout the country, you find very many security organisations. I think Uganda has more security firms than the population requires. But what perturbs me is the training of these security personnel in these private security organisations. Sometimes the way I see them driving on the road, in total disregard of traffic rules - they think they have a right of way.

Secondly, the kind of guns they carry - I have seen a number of security firms with automatic weapons. Is it a government policy that security firms get these automatic weapons? And what danger would such automatic weapons pose to the security of Uganda in private hands?

Also, to the Minister of Internal Affairs, we just talk about motor accidents but whenever I drive from here to Gulu, sometimes I wonder whether we have traffic officers on the way because you find these trucks loaded with charcoal, unable to even give way. You find them negotiating with the pothole in the middle of the road, with people seated on top. They come all the way from Karuma, Nakasongola and Luwero and enter Kampala through Wakiso. I do not know whether you have the fellows who wear the white uniform like you -(Laughter)- available on the other roads because it is a big concern. And I do not know whether the minister is also wearing the traffic uniform today. (Laughter)

Lastly, the issue of the uniform of the Police; now, when you get out of Parliament, you see people in white, in green, and in black. Can we be informed of the official police uniforms so that as we move we know who is a policeman? Anyone can come and dress in any uniform and say this is the new uniform of the Police and that can cause a big problem. So, which is the official Uganda Police uniform that Ugandans should know?

3.06
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Members have clearly expressed their concerns about the deaths; there is no doubt about the human sacrifice, the road carnage, poor reproductive health where our wives and girlfriends die –(Interjections)- I was talking as a man and I am sorry.

What we need is that the responsible ministers should come up with comprehensive answers to these so that we can explain to the people we represent. We cannot go on with the daily human sacrifice, the road carnage, which is on the increase. We also need to know the role of the various security organisations we are having. People need clarity.

The various police uniforms as hon. Reagan Okumu has said should be clarified especially as we go for elections. These could be areas used as excuses after the elections. So, I am appealing to the various ministers of Internal Affairs, Health and Works to come here and give clear answers to these questions so that Members can know what is happening and give explanations in our constituencies.

3.08
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): I want to thank hon. Kasamba for raising this issue of child sacrifice. The issue of wanton deaths has continued to disturb us. Just about ten days ago, we had a child who was sacrificed. She was a girl of about eight years. This is an incident that has come after eight months since we had another one in July last year. Our concern as residents is about the Police. When this case was reported to the Police, they never reacted very fast. The Police gave us seven days in which to work on the case. The residents were fed up and decided to do the search by themselves. Finally, the body was found when it was badly mutilated. My appeal to the minister is that he should prevail upon the Police when such cases are reported. If the Police action had been fast enough, this girl’s life could have been saved. The body was discovered after three days and it looked like she had been killed a day earlier.

We need a very clear statement, hon. Minister because these incidents are disturbing us especially when they involve young people. But even if it were old people, it is the duty of government to protect its citizens.

3.10
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): During our recess, the press made some statements regarding our oil -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us finish one subject then we go to another. We are now on this question of deaths that are rampant.

3.11
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): I want to thank my colleagues who have raised the issue of rampant deaths in the country; deaths which are preventable in my view. While I share the same concerns with my colleagues, I do not want us to lose sight of another major cause of death in this country. This is maternal death.

Two days ago, I was reading in the papers that last year we lost 2,600 people due road accidents. I would like to inform this House that Uganda as a country lost 6,000 women due to pregnancy and child birth. So, while we are lamenting about child sacrifice, road accidents, let us also prioritise the issue of maternal health in this country. 

I would like to know from the Minister of Health how far the ministry has gone with the roadmap to maternal health. We also need to know the fate of the US $100,000 grant promised to this House to cater for the improvement of maternal health in this country. I demand that the Ministry of Health gives this House feedback because this is about the tenth time we are raising this issue, but there has been no response as yet.

3.13
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman representative, Arua): Mr Speaker, two out of every three adults sacrificed or killed is a woman, and three out of every four children sacrificed is a girl child. It is really disturbing that in this day and era when we have prioritised security in our budgets for the last 15 years, this is still the state of affairs in our country.

The minister is here and I do not know how he would have felt if he was told that his most precious daughter had been found in a septic tank. Despite all the money we have put in all the ministries related to the safety of Ugandans, you and I wonder what we are doing as a country. Indeed as a nation and as the people of Uganda, we demand that government should act on this. Honestly, what explanation will you give a mother who went to the garden and came back and found that her three-year-old child went missing? Three days later, this lady is told, “Your child was beheaded”. What explanation would you give yet as security you have a string of unexplained classified expenditure? The Minister of Internal Affairs is here; what do you do with your chain of command in your ministry? How do you account to the taxpayer whose heart is broken and who is jiggered? What explanation do you give such a taxpayer?

You lost on the economic front and you are losing on the social front. It takes every Ugandan not less than Shs 10 million to educate a child at the university. Before you realise the dream of your child, you are told your daughter is in a septic tank and you have a minister and an entire line of Cabinet seated providing no solutions to this country.

We are told 6,000 women died in Uganda last year but I can assure you, we were called for workshops to draw up a roadmap. This roadmap was costed and as far as the costing was concerned, we were told that the money was going to be there. The President assented to this roadmap but to this day, two years down the road, there is nothing in financial terms to effect this roadmap and women die every day. Ask whether we as a nation have a focused government or a selfish one. 

As I speak, the entire country does not have gas to preserve vaccines. I was in the ministry last Friday; I am telling you that we as a nation failed to pay Shs 110 million to Shell as a company to provide gas and that was gas procured for the nation since November. As I speak, the resources for the next procurement are not in place and our children are not receiving the right vaccines stored under the correct temperatures. So, where is the Government of Uganda? What principles are we upholding as a nation?

I am standing here to say this and listen good, Front Bench - shame on you!

THE SPEAKER: I think we should end the debate on this by listening to him and then the minister will respond.

3.18
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and I am happy that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is ably represented. Hon. Reagan Okumu raised a very pertinent issue regarding police and security in this country. In the second week of January as we went for recess, the message was very clear that as we go for this recess, we must consult widely with our constituents on the electoral Bills, which are coming up.

As we held the annual Northern Uganda Peace Week, I had the opportunity to call for a consultative meeting to brief constituents about electoral processes and the electoral Bills that are coming up for debate in this House. As the tradition is, I duly served notice to the police to provide security and I indicated the venue where I would hold that meeting. That venue has always been there and that is where I had my last rally when I was on my way to this House. I gave four days’ notice to the police and the DPC received my letter. Two days to the consultative meeting -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are dealing with a different subject. We have to be structured in our debates. We are handling a subject that was introduced by hon. Kasamba and I want it to be done that way then you can raise other issues.

MR GODI: Mr Speaker, the point I am raising is, the police is supposed to come and protect the wanainchi, to give security and ensure that the event is successful. Where then does it say that in this country an RDC can come and give orders to the police that, “Today, much as we had okayed the rally, I am not going to allow this rally because I have heard that hon. Wadri and hon. Reagan Okumu have been invited”? They gave express orders to shoot and fire tear gas on anyone who came.

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry but we are dealing with a different subject.

3.21
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (FDC, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have an issue of national interest to raise regarding life. Last week I managed to visit Masaka Hospital -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please let us listen to the debates here. 

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the hon. member in order to come dressed in this House as if she is going for a disco? 

THE SPEAKER: I think I will have to examine that, but allow her to complete.

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the protection. I hope that my honourable colleague will give me the dress code next time because I believe this is a proper code, unless she is just being jealous. I am not her age mate, so I cannot dress the way she dresses. I hope you will understand my honourable colleague.

I rose up on an issue of national interest and security. Last week I managed to visit Masaka Hospital, in your home district, and what was there was incredible. Patients sleep outside on the verandas simply because it is so packed and overcrowded. The entire children’s ward in Masaka Hospital has one life support machine catering for about 50 children at a go. These children are put on life support in turns and they end up losing their lives. They put five children with different illnesses on the same bed, which in my view is very dangerous. Even in the female wards, it is the same. I hope the ministry can do something about this. I tried to visit the ministry but I was unable to get in touch with the Minister of Health.

I also managed to visit Busiro constituency’s hospital. I was called in by the only doctor in that hospital. He showed me a notice of intention to sue, which had been sent to him by Umeme for failure to pay electricity bills. This is not his responsibility. He told me the ministry only provides them with Shs 600,000 to cater for all the bills in that hospital. For the good of this nation, health has to be given priority and I hope the ministry is going to do something about it. Thank you.

3.25
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I appreciate the concerns expressed by members about the plight of our citizens who face unexpected deaths -(Interjections)

I will start with the concern of the Speaker who said that I was instructed to set up a committee to investigate child sacrifice. The committee has been set up and is headed by Justice Joseph Mulenga. They are starting work. When they are through, the House will be given details of how they proceeded and also a guide for further action.

Concerning the continued cases of road carnage, child sacrifice and private security, I would like to inform the House that government and Cabinet have already considered road accidents and we are trying to devise a solution. However, the issue is that the road users are the public and us. Our main job is to apprehend fellows who go against the law. We have devised a number of methods concerning that. You will note that during Christmas time and the New Year’s Eve, for the first time in history we did not have any deaths. It has been a normal routine for people to die as a result of accidents during that time but because of the extra measures the Police have put in place, we were able to move safely. We are already on the right track in trying to contain the situation. We are starting with Kampala and moving on according to the capacity you gave us to operate.

The question of private security is being reviewed and a proper report will be given to you. I am only asking that since these questions have come up as a reaction to what the members have heard and seen during the recess, I should be given time to come back with a comprehensive answer to all these questions so that we know where to begin in the management of our society. Managing our society is the concern of everybody - private sector and the government. The government is only supposed to ensure peace and make sure people do not violate the law. Police must be able to enforce the law to ensure that there is peace in the country. Thank you very much. 

Having answered that, allow me on behalf of government to welcome the new member, Balyejjusa Sulaiman Kirunda –(Interruption)- No, I think they can have their own time. Let me finish. I want to take this opportunity to welcome our new member, Balyejjusa Sulaiman Kirunda –(Applause)- who replaced our dear comrade, Henry Balikoowa, in Budiope County. We are happy that you have joined us in this vigorous House. You will be able to contribute with the support you have had. This is a reminder that as we debate, we should know what the countryside is thinking about. The resounding victory in your election tells us what is on the ground on the other side. We indeed welcome you here. I think you will be a vigorous member of the National Resistance Movement and you will be able to give counsel to this House. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, hon. Reagan Okumu raised a pertinent issue about the various uniforms worn by people who are described as police officers. The minister should not just gloss over that. This is because when we are talking about security, we need authorised officers to provide the security. When we go out into the field and see all those men and women adorned in different uniforms, how shall we know that these are police officers employed by the civil service of the Republic of Uganda? 

There are those whom you see in the traditional police uniforms wearing army belts. There are those who wear uniforms similar to the Army’s. There are those who have got uniforms similar to the Israeli commandos. There are those whom you see wearing khaki. There are those who wear deep blue uniforms. There are those who wear black and those who wear white. Shouldn’t a uniform of the Police be gazetted so that we know that this is the attire for a senior officer? The minister owes us an explanation so that when we go out, we know who is in the service of the Police; otherwise, anybody will masquerade as a Police officer by wearing a white suit and a flap of the Ugandan flag. So, who is a police officer in this country? What should the police officer of this country wear? Can you please help us?

3.32
MR LULE MAWIYA (NRM, Kalungu East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We requested that we debate this issue thoroughly because of the experience we have had. The same issue was debated about three or four months ago and government committed itself to bringing a report within a month. It is on record that the report has never been brought and now the minister, standing in for the Leader of Government Business, is telling us that a commission of inquiry has just been set up. People are dying! These are people’s lives and everybody is concerned. We should learn to be committal. The minister has just said, “I will bring a report.” When are you bringing this report? Actually, we must amend the Constitution, Mr Speaker, or the rules to state that Parliament must be able to direct government not to just spend taxpayers’ money like that. People are dying and we are just here. Thank you.

3.33
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I want to differ a bit by starting with congratulations to government for the festive season that passed peacefully. I want to pass on my congratulations to the Ministry of Internal Affairs because we had a peaceful Christmas and New Year season with few incidents of insecurity. While we recognise that there are problems, we should also acknowledge successes. We had a peaceful Christmas season and it must be registered. 

However, like my colleagues, I continue to be disturbed by the number of incidents in this country where people are murdered and the culprits are put in prison just for a few weeks or a few months, given bail and released. This is why we are continuing to see more women being murdered; those who are doing it are getting away with it. We need to look at the law and tighten it in certain areas such that those who murder are not left to be at large.

I want to respond to the last speaker in form of information. The last speaker said there are so many uniforms the police are wearing and I share his views. However, he described so many colours that it seemed like he was talking about the many security companies filling this town. We need clarification; are we talking about the Police? This is because I do not know whether the Police wear green. One of the colours that was described was green; do we have Police officers who wear green? We have seen the Police in white, maybe in black, but green comes as a surprise to me. So, we need clarification from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking a simple, small clarification which the minister did not consider. If we were to talk about the good things, we would not have been elected. We are supposed to fill the gaps where there are failures. So, Mr Minister, I asked you a very simple issue about the guns. Which guns do you provide to the private security guards? We have seen some with AK47s. There is a security firm, which is very notorious, and the majority of them have AK47s, while the rest do not. What criteria do you use to give some security firms automatic weapons and others ordinary guns? What danger do you think this poses to the security of the country? 

3.37
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have not stood to prevent the Minister from presenting the position, but I had preferred the position he had taken earlier. The matter before him is great in magnitude and I suspect that he might not have an appropriate answer for the queries raised now. So far, the issue of police uniforms has been raised specifically khaki, blue, maroon, black, yellow and white. Strangely, however, there are some police officers who sometimes travel with guns in plain clothing.

The other issue is about similar number plates on different vehicles - UAH, UAV, 178 and UAT on a lorry, a tractor and maybe another number on a bus.

The last issue is about the security organisations. There are several and the report could certify, although I am sure the deaths will not wait for the certification of the report - these security organisations are also handled differently. Some have the traditional private security guard guns that we expect while others have more sophisticated guns. It is those who are given preference that we need to be informed about. On that issue, I suggest that if the minister is not in a position to give us an accurate answer, it would be better for him to go and carry out a fair study, bring it to this House so that we have something from his report to take to our constituents. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Shall we report on the uniforms we have in two weeks time?  

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the comments and the points on which you want clarification.

You have raised a question of uniforms and you wanted to know when the report would be here. Hon. Reagan Okumu talked about guns and then incidents that lead to deaths, and Kyanjo says that I should not answer now but bring a comprehensive report. I would want to say that all the time, government is in charge and therefore I would ask – because we all work as team – my deputy minister to answer some of these questions, which have come before the House. The minister of state should be able to tell you about the uniforms, the incidents and the guns. 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have been off this Floor for some time. So, I wish to first of all say happy New Year to all of you and wish you a very prosperous 2010. For my colleagues in the NRM who are going to face primaries this year, I wish you all return unopposed.

I extend my condolences to those of you who have lost their dear ones including our colleagues, Members of Parliament. I was not able to participate because I was away on official duty. There are two issues that my senior minister has asked me to comment on.

Firstly, I begin with the arms to the private security organisations. I am happy to report that in the Police, we are seriously considering removing arms from the private security organisations. In other countries, they do not carry guns. Why should they carry guns in Uganda? We are debating this and we shall definitely tell this country – and I am telling those organisations that they had better start buying more – do we call them batons? [Hon. Member: “Arrow.”] No, not arrows -(Laughter)- I want to assure you that you will soon hear us on this matter of whether these security organisations should really continue carrying guns or not. We are debating and consulting the private security organisations and we shall be able to let you know. I know that all security organisations are registered. As we speak now, we have about – sorry I am not exactly sure because there are a number of them that we deregistered recently – but the last time I took a count, they were 35 and they could now be about 30 – and they are all registered. For any fire arms they hold, they must hold a license from the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

The second point is about police uniforms. I think I have stood before this House and told you that we dress our Police in accordance – you know Police has different functions. As I have said before and I will repeat for clarity, we dress our Police in accordance with the functions in which Police officers are. [Hon. Kyanjo: “Yellow”.] Hon. Kyanjo, I am not sure if we have a yellow uniform – (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I suggest that we allow him in his own words to tell us the uniforms he has. Should he leave out another one, then you can say, “How about this?” 

MR KASAIJA: What we now insist on and has now been put into force –(Interjections)- do not be so much taken up by the colour of the uniform -(Interjections)– just hold on. Every police officer including the top brass all now - and please hon. Members listen carefully - they all now have a number and their name. (Applause) So, if any police officer did anything unbecoming of a professional police officer, do not mind much about the colour of the uniform but take the number and the name and then inform the nearest police post and we shall take appropriate action. They know it very well and I thought I would give you this information so that it helps you even explain to your constituents when you –(Interruption) 

MR NYEKO: Thank you, hon. minister for giving way. I think the concern is not about the individual police men but what the police men do in different uniforms. For example, what is the duty of the police men who put on maroon? How about ones in black? How about the others? This is what we want to know. Is it the official position of government that police men should now put on different uniforms? For what purpose is this?  If you can clarify that, I will be satisfied.

MR KASAIJA: I think that is a very good question. Maroon is basically for officers who are working in very dirty conditions like the SPCs who have to work in the villages. Khaki is normally for officers who are either on the highways or on the parade. White, like in other cities is for traffic officers so that you can see them from a distance when they stop you. Blue is normally for senior officers when there is an official function so that they can distinguish between an officer and an ordinary police officer. Normally black is either ceremonial wear or when we have sad incidents –(Interjections)- I said either – please note my words, I said, “either.” Either for ceremonial purposes or it can also be put on by senior officers –(Interjections)- you want information and I am giving it to you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, since you know the uniforms you have, I suggest that on Thursday you come with a statement telling us the various uniforms you have and the functions of these uniforms to help us. For instance when you say – 

MR KASAIJA: We shall come with a statement.

THE SPEAKER: Just write them down.

MR KASAIJA: Most obliged. I entirely agree with you and we shall write out the various colours so that we all understand and if you see a police officer, you know what type of responsibility he is carrying out. 

Finally, on these various incidents, hon. Members, we are all very sorry. For example, that girl yesterday. It was really very pathetic. Where has the Arua Member of Parliament gone –(interjections)- she was here and she has gone away? She expressed sadness, just as all of us. She raised a question, “Supposing that was your daughter, Mr Minister, your most cherished daughter. What would you feel?”  I can tell you that I felt very bad yesterday. As human beings, we should not permit this to happen. 

On the other hand, do not expect the police to be at everybody’s homestead. It is not possible; you are asking for impossibility. I have said it on this floor now and again and I will repeat it. The first police officer for your security is yourself. If you conduct yourself in a manner that puts your security at jeopardy, really, we only come in at the second call. So, my appeal to this House and to the nation – and I think at an appropriate time, I will have to discuss the moral decay in our society with hon. Nsaba Buturo. For some of us, there are things that are being done today that we never saw during our youth. When we were still teenagers and young fellows looking for beautiful girls, I never dreamt that one would go to the extent of killing their girlfriend. What for? If the girlfriend did not like you, look for another one -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister stated well that he was actually sorry and felt quite bad. I find him now driving on the other side of the road with condemnation. I feel that it would be good manners to leave the deceased’s soul to rest in its ultimate place other than following it up with a condemnation as if it were a justified killing. Is the minister therefore proceeding properly? 

THE SPEAKER: Can you wind up, please?

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a human being and I am also a Ugandan. When I see things not going right, I think I am also entitled to expressing my feelings. I am expressing my feelings as a parent and as a Ugandan. Although I may be a minister and a Member of Parliament, when I see something in our society, I think I should say something about it, hon. Kyanjo. 

So, I would like to conclude and say that as police, we are doing everything within our means to make sure that these incidents are minimised. But my appeal is that each one of us should take care of our own security, first and foremost, including that on our roads, so that we live happily and live longer in this country. I thank you. 

3.52 
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I first of all welcome Members back to this august House and I wish you a happy new year. I missed you and I am happy that we are back. 

I came back from my constituency last night and I am raising a matter of national importance. In my normal duty of consultation and meeting the people, I was informed that there is a guinea worm outbreak in my district in Amida sub-county. I rose because one, as a country, we have been declared free by the World Health Organisation and therefore any suspected outbreak should be of national importance and two, I bring it to the Floor of Parliament because on three different occasions, I have stood here to give such important information to the Minister of Health concerning Hepatitis E, and concerning the children who were sleeping while eating, and the ministry took quite a long time to act and the problem escalated. I would like this issue to be taken very seriously. 

I have spoken to the technical team at the district and to the contact person on guinea worm - Mr Odoki. While coming to this House, I met the minister and I told him that I would raise this important issue. He told me that he would be back immediately to hear it. Unfortunately, he is not in. [HON. MEMBERS: “He is right there.”] I am sorry. I would really like the ministry to take this information very seriously and act on it immediately. 

I was given this information and I also saw it down on the ground. This issue has come up because with the striking heat, the water sources have almost dried up. My people in the sub county I have mentioned have literally no where to get clean water. They collect muddy water which they drink with the cows. They had two boreholes but one produces coloured water and when they drink it, it affects their throats.  As a result, they were stopped from using it. They also have the second one on which they line up for the whole day and night. So, people are forced to even drink the water from the borehole that has been prohibited. I do not know whether it is going to be a cumulative sort of slow poison if they are taking that dirty water. 

This is one of the problems we have and as a Shadow Minister for Water and Environment, I believe that due to climate change, we are going to have striking water shortages in this country because we cannot now guarantee the water sources for our people. I have heard this from Rakai and other parts of the country and I would like to – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, Shadow Minister for Water and Environment, for giving me this opportunity. The information that I would like to give you is that the ministry that you are overseeing does not have the capacity to provide water for every Ugandan. This country needs 1.8 billion litres of water everyday and I bet that we are not even supplying a third of this to our citizens. Each Ugandan would need 60 litres of water multiplied by 30 million people and that is 1.8 billion litres despite the fact that we have all these fresh water bodies. Lake Victoria is here, the Albert is here, the Nile waters are with us, the western waters are here – lakes George and Edward – but as a country, we have failed on the water logistics in this country. In Arua, there is no source. I have River Enyau that cannot even provide water for the population.

The situation in Koboko is extremely desperate. The people of the lower belt of the Nile do not have clean water. That is why we have resurgence of problems like this.

THE SPEAKER: I think since these are reports, they were meant to ask the Executive to investigate guinea worm and water. The ministers should take time next week and give us a report on their findings and their suggested solutions.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, I was giving this information because the guinea worm has its source. It has two dimensions; the water sources of this country and for those people, is not available and two that the Ministry of Health which should have quickly monitored the outbreak of such diseases is also incapacitated. Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister of Water to give us the status of water coverage as the country stands right now due to the climate change and give to this Parliament the way forward of how the ministry is preparing to combat that.

I would like to ask the Minister of Health to quickly investigate this issue before it escalates like the previous cases because I was told that the health centre IIIs are given only Shs 1 million per month -

THE SPEAKER: A report has been made, the minister should be given time, may be one week, to come back and report on the two situations; water and guinea worm.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A number of issues were raised on health and I thought I could briefly respond as follows. Hon. Rwakimari put a question for oral answer -

THE SPEAKER: Now, what are you dealing with? Hers or the other one? Are you dealing with hers?

DR NDUHUURA: All of them as raised by colleagues and very briefly.

Hon. Rwakimari has a question for oral answer. I have been with the response since November, last year but I have failed to get a slot on the Order Paper. If, Mr Speaker, you could give me a slot, then I would proceed to respond.

On the US $100 million loan to address issues to do with maternal health and rehabilitation of health infrastructure, the processing of the loan is underway and I think we are moving very well. As I speak now, my senior colleague is holding a meeting with World Bank officials at the Ministry of Health to thrash out a few issues so that we can proceed.

With the gas shortage, I was also very disappointed when I learnt of this matter. It looks like the technical officers had kept it to themselves but we are taking very stern measures on whoever was responsible and as a matter of fact the gas will start flowing and the immunisation will go on uninterrupted.

On Masaka hospital, it gets a development budget; I visited the hospital recently and one of the priorities they have is to rehabilitate all the wards and also expand the children’s ward. They also have the money to buy equipment so they should not raise excuses of shortage of funds to do the needful. We have guided them on that. 

Hon. Nakawuki pointed out that she failed to see the Minister of Health. Well there are two ministers of state at the ministry; if you fail to see the Minister of Health, we are available. I am available for you.

On guinea worm outbreak, I am hearing it for the first in the House here and I promise to follow it up. Uganda had been declared guinea worm free so if it has come up again, this is a very serious matter and we shall take it up very urgently.

The other disease which has been disturbing Kitgum is what is called Nodding Disease. This disease is still being investigated. We have gone to the extent of calling in CDC from Atlanta, the officials were here, the investigations are still going on but we have not come up with the exact cause of the disease. We are very concerned and we are not leaving any stone unturned to come up with the proper cause of the disease and how we can handle it.

For the rest of the issues which call for extensive treatment in terms of statements, we pledge to do the needful. As a matter of fact, my colleague on the other side, Dr Epetait, has already consulted your office so that you set aside a day for the Ministry of Health to address most of the concerns that are usually raised by colleagues. I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, hon. Minister for your submission. I would like to know when the Minister of Health and the Minister of Water will come to this House with a report. However, if you want to go and visit where there is this outbreak, I am very ready, even tomorrow to accompany you to the site. I want to know when.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have finished this matter. I am going to give you a date, hon. Epetait as the minister has said. The Ministers of Water and of Health are going to investigate.

MOTION SEEKING FOR LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL: THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

4.06
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all recognise the contribution of the Seventh Parliament in putting in place the Parliamentary Pension Scheme because what we are doing really stems from that.

Last year, the Parliamentary Pension’s Board released the annual report as mandated by law. We have since sent copies to all the Members of Parliament and members of staff and next week we think when the slot is given we shall be able to discuss that.

Pursuant to rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to move a motion for the introduction of a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2010” which I think has been circulated.  

“WHEREAS Article 93 of the Constitution allows Parliament to introduce a Bill or a motion that does not impose or alter taxation otherwise than by reduction or causing the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund;

WHEREAS Parliament enacted the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007, Act No.6 of 2007, to provide for the establishment of the Parliamentary Pensions Fund for the payment or granting of pensions or retirement benefits to Members of Parliament and staff of the Parliamentary Commission;

NOTING THAT since the enactment of the Act, there has been an increasing number of Members who are claiming benefits  under the Act and it has been difficult for the board of trustees and the managers to pay out benefits to these Members because the Act is not adequate and exhaustive to cover the details needed to compute the benefits accruing to these Members;

FURTHER NOTING THAT with the growth of the pension sector in Uganda and the world at large, there was need to study the Act, to identify provisions for the amendments to bring it in conformity with best practice;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this House accepts the introduction of a Bill for an Act entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2010” attached hereto. 

AND do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” 

I beg to move. 

MR ODUMAN: Seconded.

MR MUKITALE:  Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, in my justification, I will just give the principles and the gist. We need to appreciate that this is a nascent scheme and as it grows, we are very soon going to see, even those not here and the members of staff not here, that we need an amendment to that effect, that will take care of the future structure of the scheme, which will not necessarily be for members of staff and members of parliament, but for those who will have served Parliament and have since become senior citizens. 

I also want to emphasise that since its inception under the able leadership of my former chairman, Al-Hajji Kaddunabbi Lubega, whose contribution I would like to recognise, a lot has been done. The board did put in place some studies, including the actuarial studies and consultancies which have helped us to find out the ambiguities. 

One of them was to clearly state the type of scheme we intended to have as Parliament; whether it is going to have defined benefits or contributions. We are tending towards a hybrid cash balance, which ambiguity has to be cured with this amendment.

We also need to be aware that the current structure which is largely of active serving members of parliament and staff, provides for the board of trustees to be majorly from among us who are in Parliament, chaired by the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy. But in future, we are expecting Members who would have left to be more than those in Parliament. Therefore, we also intend to change the representation of the board using this amendment. 

We, for example, think that one has to aspire to be a chair with the motivation and the intention to do that. The board thinks that in future, not only the commissioners will sit on this board. And Members, when you read the amendments in detail when they come for first reading, I am sure you will be able to comprehend the issues that the board members are raising. So, the issue of composition is one of the areas that we need to look at. 

The other area which we intend to look at – in the old Act, the board was reporting to Parliament, but we are supposed to have an annual general meeting. And as we have said, in future, the structure will have more non-contributing members. We shall also have to provide for the reporting body to be the AGM and not Parliament.

We also intend to look at issues to do with dispute resolution which provides for a regulator. 

The formula was also not provided for in the Act.  In the amendment - after careful scrutiny of the consultancies and actuarial studies, the amendment in line with the actuarial study stipulates the formula we intend to use, which is clearly stated in the First Schedule, Section 12 of the amendment. 

Because of the heterogeneity between the members -

THE SPEAKER: You do not have to go into all those details because when the Bill eventually comes, you will have to explain all those details. Yours is to justify your actions. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We are basically trying to take care of our members of staff; how do we reward the long-serving staff? We are providing for the vesting period and looking at the remuneration of members. 

Hon. Members, I would like to request that you read through the amendments. Next week, depending on the Speaker’s schedule, we may also discuss the annual report. And when the Bill comes for the first reading and goes to the Committee Stage, I am sure we shall be able to make an input and improve on this pension scheme, which is currently having problems in paying members who have left us, because of the issues we have raised, like the formula which we need to put in the law, and the classification of the scheme we want to undertake. 

With that justification, I want to request that you support the Private Member’s Bill to be passed, in order to enable us make the amendments. I beg to move.

4.15
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Albert Oduman): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to second and support the motion moved by hon. Mukitale Birahwa. Like my colleague has already said, there are no fundamentally new principles that the amendments are going to introduce. We are simply seeking to provide for the smooth operationalisation of the Parliamentary Pension Act.

As you know, this Act affects the Seventh and Eighth Parliament and thereafter, but we cannot say that we have now fully operationalised the Act, and the question is, why? 

The answer is that there were some intricacies in the parent Act that needed to be harmonised by amendments. So, there are no fundamentally new principles being introduced here. 

I would like to summarise it by saying that it does three things: One is that it clears ambiguities in the parent Act regarding how much a Member would be paid on retirement, which nobody would know under the old Act; it is good, therefore, to have a formula.

Two, it also clarifies the position of the staff of the Parliamentary Commission who are also currently members of the public pension scheme; what happens to their period of service? What happens to their benefits, which they earned? And if they were already earning pension, then what happens to it? If they are not yet entitled to pension, what happens to them? It seeks to clarify all that.

Thirdly, it also clarifies on the type of scheme. Is it a cash hybrid? What type of pension scheme are we running?

So, in principle, in No.1 the Bill seeks to clear ambiguities and streamline some governance aspects – we are talking about the composition of the board and the position of the chairman. Who elects the chairman? 

We are also talking about the position of the retired Members who have left Parliament. Initially the focus was on Members who are in Parliament. But now the issue is that ten years from now the majority of the members of this scheme will be out of these precincts. Therefore, in governance, we would like to bring them on board in terms of receiving reports and being able to determine how aspects of the pension scheme are governed.

Lastly, introduction of the Bill also brings in clauses that talk about interest on members’ funds. How will interest be calculated? What will be the rate? All those are now provided for in the proposal. 

The Bill further creates the reservoir account for purposes of managing and receiving funds that are not in the mainstream, like interest on our money, penalties and so forth. 

It also talks about accounts and audit; investments of money; investment strategies; and how investment of surplus funds should be done; taxation – are the funds subject to taxation in accordance to the laws of Uganda? 

Like the chairman said, it provides mechanisms for dispute resolution. If there is a disagreement, what do we do? It also provides for how statutory instruments shall be handled in terms of changes to schedules that have to do with interests and so forth. How will, for example, statutory instruments be made and laid out? How will they be handled? How long shall it take here in Parliament? The Bill provides for 21 days within which Parliament has to pronounce itself.

So, Mr Speaker and colleagues, this Bill is not something very new in regard to the parent Act. As you have already seen this is a bi-partisan proposal. It affects all members and staff of the Parliament. I would like to suggest that we debate and dispose of it very quickly before we go to the next item.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. Hon. Members, this is a motion or business that has been brought here because according to our procedures, if a Private Member’s Bill has to be brought, one has to seek leave of Parliament to do so. The chairperson of the board has said they have found it necessary that for the smooth running of business under the law, amendments be made. That is why he is seeking leave. The purpose is to bring those amendments to you for consideration. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Leave is granted. Hon. Epetait, you have something to say?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that leave has been sought to have that Private Member’s Bill read for the first time, to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act. 

However, I would like to say that I am also very disturbed by the status of beneficiaries of the NSSF pension. A good number of them have often demanded an amendment to the Act especially in regard to the minimum age of access to their benefits. Many of those people who would ordinarily benefit from their savings with NSSF have actually died out of frustrations because the minimum age is so high. They are having a lot of problems. 

I request that Parliament takes cognisance of their plight so that we can have the NSSF Act amended, especially in that regard. Mr Speaker, this is a matter that is of great concern to all the beneficiaries today. I think the Ministry of Public Service could be better placed to provide an answer to this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I do not know under which ministry NSSF is. Is it finance or labour? Okay, Ministry of Finance.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the Ministry of Finance should not claim NSSF because they took it when they wanted money. Otherwise, the law has not been amended to have NSSF run under Ministry of Finance. So, it is wrong for Ministry of Finance to claim that NSSF belongs to it; they are holding it illegally. It is only unfortunate that the workers have not stood up.

THE SPEAKER: What we can do now is to ask the Leader of Government Business to convey, to whoever is responsible for NSSF, the message that Parliament is of the view that there is need to amend the NSSF Act.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE WHISTLEBLOWERS BILL, 2009

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I am very delighted that finally this Bill has found its way before this august House for its second reading. However, I wish to request that you allow me move this on Thursday when I will be ready.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Minister. Let us have it read on Thursday. That means the next business is what has been listed at the back of the Order Paper and that will be for tomorrow. 

So, I would like to request Members to go to their libraries and consider these reports. I understand the report on the performance of the economy for the Financial Year 2008/2009 was actually presented. What remained was the reaction of the Shadow Minister on that report, and he tells me he is ready. So tomorrow we shall deal with that particular business, and other items as listed. 

The clerk will give you the details of the discussions we have had in the Business Committee and the line up of business that we shall transact during this period so that we can prepare for the business. Unfortunately, today you got this Order Paper late because we had to sit as the Business Committee before the Order Paper could be finalised. But in future you will be getting the Order Paper in time. With this, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 4.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 February 2010, at 2.00 p.m.)

