Thursday, 7 February 2008

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you and thank you for coming on time. This is a message from hon. Dr Kasirivu. He has extended invitation to you, hon. Members and staff, to attend a thanksgiving and wedding function in Kibaale on Saturday, 09 February 2008. Prayers will begin at 10.00 a.m. and there will be a reception.  I understand transport has been organised for those who do not have their personal means, early Saturday, so that you can go and join our colleague on this achievement on Saturday. 

I am also being told that you are invited at the Peer Review, which originally - I think the venue was Hotel Africana but now they have changed it to Sheraton Hotel the same time, please you are asked to go in big numbers.

2.30
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to beg the indulgence of this House to raise a matter that needs urgent review. Last financial year, this House passed a supplementary budget and under that supplementary expenditure, Second Schedule, the Justice, Law and Order Sector was given Shs 22 billion and the proposal of the committee then was that this would meet the salaries and the arrears for the auxiliary forces.  Since then attempts were made in one way or the other to reach out to the auxiliary forces - the Arrow Boys, Amuka and frontier guards. 

We were approached as Members of Parliament from the affected region but unfortunately in August or November last year the payment turned out to be problematic.  So, while money had been given to the Ministry of Defence and that of Internal Affairs to jointly handle this exercise, a number of things went wrong to the extent that payment turned out to be incomplete.  Most of the auxiliary forces and particularly the Arrow Boys could not find their names in the registers that were supposed to be used.  Ultimately, therefore, over three quarters of them were not paid; and some of those who were paid actually just got half of what was expected.  

So, if somebody had worked for eight months, he only got about four months' payment. Some were totally left out and yet during the compilation of that register I recall the Minister of Defence enlisted the involvement of Members of Parliament, LC III chairpersons, Arrow Boys commanders and all the relevant authorities and we hoped that that register would then be authentic.  It was vetted, it was verified and we thought the payment would be completed.  Unfortunately, this payment was halted; to date, Mr Speaker, there is no payment going on; there is no report that has been made available; and we continue to come under a lot of questions from the concerned people who would like the Government of Uganda to meet its obligation.  

We are also aware that these people intervened at a time when it was very difficult for the communities. It is not, therefore, healthy to abandon them without any explanation and also not to meet their payments.  

I, therefore, would like to ask this time, Mr Speaker, not merely for an explanation by the Minister because we have done this a number of times in this House and every time they give us an explanation.  

My request this afternoon is that, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs investigates this payment.  Because my suspicion is that the money has been misused and there are so many people who have been denied their right to payment.  I would like to request you, Mr Speaker, to, if possible, let the committee investigate matters of the payment of the auxiliary forces and maybe give us a report.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, I remember this matter was discussed last time and hon. Kiyonga promised action and you have alluded to it.  So, I oblige your prayer in that I request the Committee on Defence to expeditiously handle this matter with those concerned - the minister concerned and others and report to us within two weeks. 

Honourable members, sorry, I have to adjust the order paper a little bit; hon. Akena will be making a personal statement and this was not reflected on the Order Paper but we had agreed that he should make it. So, you will be accommodated, hon. Akena, to make your personal statement. 

There is something which I forgot which I should have mentioned earlier, that the chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of our committees will be starting their retreat at Entebbe Imperial Botanical Hotel today; it is a residential retreat, so prepare your requirements so that you start the retreat this evening.

2.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (PROF. OGENGA LATIGO):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I know I came a little late but I believe that the matter that I am inquiring from you - you had not commented on this - is really in regard to what happened when we started the session where the Police made announcements -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I can explain. Sorry, I should have said something about it.  I have managed to get in touch with the Inspector General of Police and found out the details, which I did not know. He said that he never told people not to come but was only concerned with people who had said they were coming for demonstration. So, these are the only people he meant, in fact he met them and they discussed and agreed. He mentioned Church Ambrose, and another one – but they agreed and he never prevented anybody from entering Parliament; that was not what he said. It was only the people who had put announcements on radio that they were coming to demonstrate. So, he had to put security because this was the time when the German President was visiting the country. That is what he did, but nobody was stopped from gaining access to Parliament.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether that explanation by the Inspector-General is correct and honest, because the person who specifically made those announcements was a gentleman called Simeo Nsubuga. And some of the elements of his announcement were so outrageous and I think Parliament should take what has happened very seriously. 

I have the case of Betty Nambooze, who on her first entry to Parliament came with hon. Lukwago. She was stopped and she had to get out of her own car at the gate.

THE SPEAKER: Betty Nambooze is one of the people who were making announcements on radio calling people to come to demonstrate – she could be one of those. But then there is no way to verify – you see, I cannot defend the Inspector General; that is what he told me. He mentioned Church Ambrose, a person I know very well because I am always with him.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, what I see is more fundamental than just stopping Nambooze and any of these people. Every citizen of this country has a fundamental right to access Parliament. The problem we are beginning to face is a situation where individuals who own authority in this land make decisions that go beyond the authority they have. What happened was that eventually, Betty Nambooze, actually accessed the precincts of Parliament. She came to the east entrance and at one time she even met a police lady who said that there was no session. When she was being stopped, others who were coming to swear in were being allowed. Honestly, even if Betty Nambooze made a statement that they were coming to demonstrate, she had no placard; she had nothing. There is no way the Police should have stopped them.

Secondly, Parliamentary Police cannot act under the instructions of the Inspector General –(Interjections)- excuse me, let me finish - in regard to who enters Parliament, because the Police in Parliament are under the direct charge of the Sergeant-at-Arms. And it was the Sergeant-at-Arms who raised this concern to hon. Wadri as to why he was hearing announcements stopping people.

DR BUTURO: Mr Speaker, you have reported the explanation that was given to you by the Inspector General of Police who is not here. And the Member is not developing new ideas outside the very explanation that the Inspector-General gave. Sir, is the hon. Member in order to try and drag in new issues when the explanation given is very clear, namely that the previous day, radios had been going around indicating that there would be demonstrations around Parliament; that is the explanation the Inspector General gave. And he did take pre-emptive measures to account for peace and stability around this institution. 

Is he in order, Mr Speaker, that the Member should use the explanation you have given to drag in new issues which clearly has nothing to do with the subject at hand?

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, I was not a ware of this. I only undertook to get in touch with the Inspector General and I did today. And this is the explanation he gave me; that this was in respect of the people who were coming to demonstrate. People who come here to demonstrate have to be checked - even according to our Rules if people are coming to present a petition and they are in big numbers, only a few are asked to access and present it; this is the procedure.

As far as the Police here are concerned, they are also part of the Police of the Inspector General of Police though they work here. But for this particular incident that you are talking about, I cannot answer because I was not aware. Now, you are referring me to the Sergeant-At-Arms, the Sergeant-At-Arms never reported to me, he rather complained to hon. Wadri. He should have come to me or to the Clerk. Now, I have to verify with the Sergeant to give me a full account and then come back here.

So, in this debate, nobody will be able to respond positively because the Inspector General has not given other details to other people. As for me, I am only reporting what has been told to me by the Inspector General.

MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, thank you so much for giving me the opportunity. I have a concern I would like to share and make an appeal to the Leader of the Opposition. I very much respect him and even his concern; if at all anyone issued that order. Everyone should access Parliament and indeed you saw the numbers that accessed the Chamber yesterday. 

But the Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition should assure Ugandans that to have dissenting views or to oppose does not mean to incite people. I would like to hear his comment; quite often, politicians like the very ones you have mentioned, Church Ambrose and Nambooze, openly use the same radio to incite people, to issue statements, which in my opinion -[Mr Speaker: “Church Ambrose is my son”.]- do not give credibility to the Opposition.

Mr Speaker, I want to get assurance from the Leader of the Opposition that to be a dissenter does not mean to recklessly talk and incite people. There are other Ugandans who would want to enjoy the rights of co-existing with others even when they do not agree politically. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Minister for Ethics was probably not here when I first raised the matter. It has nothing to do with politics. It has to do with the potential risk that we face as Parliament. We can have a situation where tanks are actually at the gate, and it will not be ordinary people being refused to come to Parliament; it will be Members of Parliament being barred. 

Hon. Tumwebaze asked for my reassurance about people that I am not responsible for at all. And I agree with you, anybody who incites the laws of this country will be subject to the law; it does not need the reassurance of Latigo. Let the Police deal with them. But, if somebody says we are coming to demonstrate, first of all, there is no incitement because the Constitution allows you to demonstrate. (Dr Buturo rose_)  Please let me debate and you will make your contribution. 

When you say that I am going to demonstrate, you have committed no offence that precludes you from coming to Parliament. Honourable colleagues, you know it is one thing to be sentimental but it is another to be responsible to this country. Parliament is a very important institution. When you start making every Tom, Dick and Harry regardless of what they are, directing how things should happen in Parliament you run into problems. 

This was my honest concern. That regardless of what Parliament feared or the Police feared the responsibility of the Inspector General of Police should have been to come and share with the Sergeant-At-Arms, who is in charge of security in Parliament. The Sergeant-At-Arms if he thinks he cannot handle, would take the matter further, even to the Speaker. If need be –(Dr Buturo rose _) - Please, I am not taking your information, given the basis on which you tried to -(Laughter). 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Point of order, Mr Speaker.

PROF. LATIGO: Order for what?

THE SPEAKER: You know, since he has been holding the floor and he has refused to yield then he is not accepting your information. But, honestly, let us end this matter. I am going to get in touch with the Sergeant-At-Arms and get the details. You never complained to me. For me, I only gave you the information from the Inspector General.

PROF. LATIGO: Yes, Mr Speaker, the reason I rose after - (Interruption)

DR BUTURO: Mr Speaker, the hon. Member who is aspiring to be the leader of this country - (Interjection)-  ought to know the duty of the Police, which is preservation of law and order. Is it in order, sir, when you have very clearly told members the explanation that was given by the Inspector General of Police, who had prior information that this demonstration would lead to some situation that would be unpleasant for all of us? Is it in order for the Member to continue harping on this issue when the Inspector General could certainly not report in any way to Sergeant- At-Arms concerning information he may have had that may be privy to him as Inspector General of Police? Is he in order, sir?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue has been raised. He has told me the source- I have no idea what this means- but this is what he said- of the Sergeant and I am going to call the Sergeant to give me the details. If necessary we shall establish some inquiry and then a report will be made. Let us end it there.

2.50
MR JOSEPH MATTE (NRM, Bughendera County, Bundibigyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. “Ebola, Ebola, Ebola. You are a very bad visitor; Ebola Ebola, you visited Gulu; you left so many people dead. You have now visited Bundibugyo; Your bad…” -(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Let me explain. The hon. Member had asked me on the day we opened that he would report – because he comes from the area, which was affected. Unfortunately, when we started he was not present and is actually just giving you a report of the situation. You can continue. (Laughter)

MR MATTE: “You have now visited Bundibugyo; Ebola you are a bad visitor; you have left me with orphans, widows, and widowers; never visit Uganda again!” (Laughter) Honourable members – (Hon.Members rose) - let me finish please.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us just be courteous because it was an important matter. Ebola was a serious matter- (Interjections)- Honourable members, the member approached me. He said he wanted to give us a report on what is happening in his district and let us be courteous. What he was doing was making a prayer condemning Ebola not to come back- (Laughter)- just listen to him.

MR MATTE: In Bundibugyo, we were attacked by Ebola; according to statistics, we lost 37 people and about 150 cases were reported and successfully treated. I take this opportunity to express my thanks to the Government and in particular the Ministry of Health, which took immediate action to ensure that Ebola is contained in Bundibugyo -(Applause)- As I talk now, Ebola is absolutely under control.

I am now requesting Government and fellow MPs to consider giving financial assistance to the orphans and widows of Ebola victims. Bundibugyo is one of the poorest districts in this country and the area most affected was the mountainous area, which had been attacked by ADF sometime back. People were still trying to resettle and all of a sudden they got Ebola. My constituency was the epicentre of this Ebola. 

So, I am requesting the Government and fellow MPs to give financial assistance to the orphans and widows of Ebola. More critical is the school fees. So many people are not able to go to school because of Ebola that took some people and deprived others of their bread earners. This is a very bad disease. It kills in a very short time and very quickly too. You cannot even visit. I could not even visit the victims once it was declared that it was Ebola, but now we are able to go around.

And to Government and Ministry of Health, I would like them to pay quickly what is due to the workers who are in Ministry of Health.

Two, in Bundibugyo we grow 60 per cent to 70 per cent of organic cocoa,which is exported outside this country. Now, Government intends to spray DDT in Bundibugyo. The buyers of cocoa have threatened not to buy the cocoa anymore because they fear that DDT is not palatable with cocoa. This is the one of the main income generating activities in Bundibugyo. 

So, I would like to appeal to Government to reconsider spraying cocoa in Bundibugyo with DDT. With the income that we generate from cocoa, we are able to educate our children and attend to some domestic requirements. Therefore, it is our prayer that instead of spraying, give us mosquito treated nets so that we can continue earning this very vital income from cocoa. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a procedural matter where I need your guidance. We are aware that on Thursday you alloted time for questions to be answered by ministers according to Rule 31. Three weeks ago, I put a question, which I feel is of public importance regarding what happened after the Kenya crisis; the issue of fuel scarcity. 
I raised a question regarding the national fuel reserves and wanted the Minister of Energy, hon. Migereko, to come to this House and I have been waiting for this day. I thought that today I would have the opportunity of hearing the Minister answering that question and giving an explanation to the people of Uganda as to what happened to the national fuel reserves and what plans the Government has. 

I am wondering whether we still have to wait because I feel that since we still have a problem in our neighbourhood, the Minister should have come here, explained and assured Ugandans that there are mechanisms in place to avoid such situations arising again in case the problems escalate. I needed some guidance from you or an assurance that the Minister will be directed to come here to answer this question.

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of Government Business should direct Mr Migereko, when he comes back to Uganda, to come and answer that question. Can we go to the business because the procedure, hon. Members, is that if you want to make comments after communication from the chair, you have to inform the Speaker that you intend to do so? Hon. Alaso, hon. Matte and hon. Akena, who is going to make a personal statement, did that. Let us follow that procedure.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.59
THE MINISTER IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I am holding the portfolio for the Minister of Foreign Affairs and it is in that capacity that I present this statement.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to brief the august House on the current situation in Kenya and the efforts that the Government of Uganda has been making to bring about a peaceful settlement as well as mitigate its consequences as soon as possible. 

As you are all aware, the current situation in Kenya emerged following the announcement, by the Kenya Electoral Commission, of the results of the presidential, parliamentary and civic elections held on 27 December 2007. 

As a result of the declaration of H.E President Mwai Kibaki as the winner and his being sworn in on the 30 December 2007, his opponent hon. Raila Odinga contested and rejected the results. There have since been protests and violent demonstrations in various parts of Kenya resulting in loss of life and property. The developments since then have had adverse effects not only on Kenya but also on the region as a whole. 

H.E President Yoweri Museveni, as a neighbour, current Chairman of the EAC and Chair-in-Office of the Commonwealth, has, on several occasions since the current situation developed, been talking to President Mwai Kibaki and hon. Raila Odinga to try to bring the two parties together in order to find a quick and lasting solution. H.E. The President has also been in constant consultation with other leaders in the region on the situation.

Last month, President Museveni travelled to Nairobi. While there, he held separate meetings with President Mwai Kibaki and hon. Raila Odinga together with their respective delegations. He subsequently sent the hon. Eriya Kategaya, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Community Affairs to Nairobi to follow up on his mediation visit and to work with the mediation team set up by the African Union under H.E. Kofi Annan. 

Various other initiatives have been undertaken in an effort to address the situation. Among these initiatives, have been those by: H.E John Kufuor, President of Ghana and then Chairman of the African Union; H.E.Kofi Annan, former Secretary General of the UN; former African Heads of State, including, H.E Joachim Chissano, H.E Benjamin Mkapa, H.E Kenneth Kaunda and H.E Ketumile Masire of Botswana.  

Other efforts have included those by Dr Jendi Frazer, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Mr Louis Michel, the European Union Commissioner for Development Cooperation, the South African Nobel Peace Price Laureat Archbishop Desmond Tutu and Mrs Graca Machel, spouse of former South African President Nelson Mandela, among others.

Furthermore, an extraordinary summit of the East African Community is scheduled to take place on the 8th to 9th February this year with a view to assisting the people of Kenya in finding a lasting and peaceful solution to their problems. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the violence that has ensued has disrupted life in Kenya and other countries of the region, including Uganda. Nearly 1,000 people have lost their lives, around 300,000 people have been displaced inside Kenya and Uganda has received about 5000 Kenyan refugees. 

Railway and road transport have also been disrupted. Our imports and exports through the port of Mombasa and other transit cargo have also been affected. Government is experiencing reduction in tax revenue collections and many businesses have been adversely affected, to mention but a few of the problems arising from the unfortunate situation in Kenya. 

In order to address these problems and mitigate their impact, Government has been holding consultative meetings at the level of Cabinet, sub committees and corresponding technical levels with various stakeholders dealing with a number of areas including political,diplomatic and economic issues arising out of the current situation in Kenya. 

I wish to assure this House and fellow Ugandans that Government is doing all that is possible to deal with the problems resulting from the current situation I have described above. 

Currently, the Kenyan Army and Police are providing security along the major highways. With these measures in place, incidents of violence along the transit routes are being curtailed and the backlog of goods at Mombasa Port is gradually being cleared. 

The Uganda High Commission in Nairobi has continued to reach out to Ugandans in Kenya, to offer the consular services. Necessary arrangements have been put in place to deal with emergency cases should need arise. Already, working with Kenyan authorities, we have been able to ensure the safe repatriation of Ugandan students from St. Andrews School, Turi, and other schools in the Rift Valley Province. 

At the beginning of this week, hon. John Nasasira, Minister of Works and Transport, led an Inter-Ministerial delegation to Tanzania to work on details for the movement of Uganda’s imports and exports through the Southern route.  

Mr Speaker, allow me also to comment on allegations made by certain politicians and media houses both in Uganda and Kenya to the effect that Uganda deployed her troops in Kenya. I wish to categorically state that Uganda has never made any such deployments and she has no intentions of doing so. 

All such speculations are absolute falsehood. I wish to take this opportunity to appeal to the press and political leaders to desist from making inflammatory and reckless statements that are likely to worsen the situation in Kenya, negatively affect our relations and put our nationals in harms-way. 

Our bilateral relations with Kenya have always been excellent and the two countries cooperate closely at bilateral and regional levels at the East African Community, in the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development, the Common Markets for Eastern and Southern Africa and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We shall, therefore, stand by the people of Kenya in this hour of need.  

In conclusion, I wish to reassure this House that the Government of Uganda remains committed to working with and supporting our brothers and sisters in Kenya in their efforts to find a peaceful and lasting solution to their problems; while doing its best to deal with the negative impact on Uganda resulting from that situation. We shall continue to work with the region and the African Union to this end. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.   

3.07
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms Bako Abia): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Reagan left the capital this morning for a very important assignment and I am here on his behalf. As the Opposition, we are concerned about the unfortunate situation in Kenya. It is a broad day rape and defilement and consequently murder of democracy in that country and this is as a result of the lust and greed for power. 

As the Opposition –(Interjections)- we are concerned and at this point we wish to send our condolences to the bereaved families of the slain MPs and the entire Opposition fraternity in Kenya and the Kenyans at large and we still demand that there should be an independent investigation into the death of the slain MPs. 

Mr Speaker, what is happening in Kenya is totally unacceptable and we are concerned that our own President who is the current Chairman of the East African Community and Chairman of the Commonwealth congratulated President Kibaki, yet the Commonwealth team of observers in Kenya revealed that the elections were not free and fair. 

The East African Community team of observers said the elections were not free and fair, therefore, we as the Opposition wonder where he derived this mandate to congratulate President Kibaki- (Interjections)- It will not be long in this country before those who are shouting now will be measured and their conscience judged in the time to come. It may be prudent for them to talk now but – (Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, we have our Rules of Procedure and one of them, which I am not ready to quote now but which I am sure exists, is that we should use parliamentary language. Now, is it in order for the hon. member holding the Floor to say that Members are shouting? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, be courteous to your colleagues.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, I will not be intimidated, trust me and I will say what I want to say irrespective of who you think you will intimidate. Mr Speaker, there is a rumour that there is a proposal to have a peace keeping mission –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, it is in the Rules of this House that strangers sit in the gallery and not with us in the Plenary. (Laughter) As far as I know, the Third Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Kivejinja - [Hon. Members: “He is not here”] He has just been sitting there and it is, therefore, ridiculous for Members to say he is not here; you will be deceiving yourselves. He has just been sitting right next to you, Mr Speaker, and he has just gone out. The Third Deputy Prime Minister has not taken any oath that allows him to be a Member of this House after another election was conducted in Bugweri that brought in another MP. Is it, therefore, in order for him to come to this House without being sworn in? I am very concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, arrangements are being made to swear in hon. Kivejinja. He is not here; when you say, “Is he in order?” and the person is not here, then who should I rule against? As I have told you, arrangements are being made. Actually, he came to consult -(Laughter)- listen; and I am the one who advised that until the oath is taken, he cannot take his seat. 
MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you, and to note that he had actually disrespected you because you had told him to wait until he is sworn in, and he insisted on coming to this House. That is undermining the Parliament of Uganda. I want to thank you for clarifying that. 

THE SPEAKER: I did; I am the one who told him. 

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker -(Interruptions)- can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: You are very much protected, Maama.

MS BAKO: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, our position is that much as our President congratulated President Kibaki, we demand a formal withdrawal of that congratulatory message. We think it is not worthy and we as a nation have been ashamed and the congratulatory message must be withdrawn formally. 

On the issue of troop deployment in Kenya, the proposal that Ugandan troops will be peace-keeping in Kenya to us is not befitting, because as of now, Ugandans are being targeted in Kenya and their property vandalised. So, we cannot guarantee the safety of Ugandan troops in Kenya at this point in time when we are almost an island in the entire region, because of political pronouncements brought about by none other than our head of state. 

The Uganda High Commission in Kenya must come up clearly with a statistical provision of which and who as a Ugandan is living in Kenya, because as we talk now, Ugandans are stranded and being hunted in Nairobi, Eldoret, Kisumu and Mombasa. So, we need to know who of our own is in Kenya and doing what, and we need their safety to be guaranteed. We cannot take this lightly anymore because one life lost is not easily replaceable. 

Mr Speaker, as the Opposition, we feel that Uganda is not even credible enough to be mediating. I have seen the ministerial statement; it is absolutely wanting and that is why it is in font 16. If there was much to do, this would be a more detailed report because Kenya is our neighbour. We have strategic interests there, for example, our oil and the fuel that we have. We are now going to suffer an economic crisis just because we were reckless while talking to our neighbours. This is totally unacceptable. (Interruption) We will always propose. We know that even when we say that we have very good bilateral relations, at the moment this is not what is on the ground. 

MR ACHIA: Thank you, for giving way. Through you, Mr Speaker, I want to pass information to the honourable from Arua. I think it is important to know that the crisis that has befallen our neighbours is not the creation of Uganda. And while we are being sensitive to what is happening to our neighbours, it is also important from our analysis to know that it is a problem that is grounded in the socio-economics and per economic parities in that country. So, to impute that Uganda is in a way responsible for the on-going conflict and that the antenna of Uganda is in Kenya, is to miss the point. We need to direct our efforts towards securing border relations, protecting our interests in Kenya, and trying to work towards - we cannot ignore this, we must participate as a country - to help our neighbours to recognise the challenges they are facing and to address the income inequalities and the problems of democracy in that country. Thank you, very much. 

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for that information, but at times it would be assuming too much. You cannot resist the fact that there is an urgency in this country, motivated by nothing but politics, to politically federate with Kenya. So, what prevails in Kenya actually affects us tremendously. We think and we know that what is going on will definitely impact on us and our children to come, and we are saying that Uganda is not credible enough to intercede in this case. We are calling on the African Union, at least whose Chairman now is a credible regional leader, that is President Kikwete, to stand and clear this kind of crowd of shame that we have as a nation and not Uganda anymore. 

What happened when we went for a peace-keeping mission in the DRC? We ended up fighting. We have had bad relations with Rwanda and now we are in Kenya. We are becoming an isolated island in a landlocked country. The repercussions of what is going on in Kenya is actually going to impact more on Uganda than even Kenya itself. To us, the position should be that the intervention should come from the African Union and Uganda should play a neutral role at this point in time. It is not politicking around because I am not a grandmother yet -(Laughter)- by the time I am a grandmother, I want a stable region. 

Therefore, we wish to say that at this point in time, we should take the Kenyan situation very seriously. It should not be an issue of saying “No, let us politically survive.” We must understand that the need to live as humanity is the most important thing. The need for everybody to have a plate of food should be the reason we are leaders in this country. We must, as Parliament, come up clearly and pronounce ourselves on this matter and denounce it that it is unacceptable, that electoral reforms are required, and that if Kenya is to be peaceful, there must be a re-election under a credible electoral commission. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when making your contributions, make contributions that are going to help the situation. It is not our duty here to say that there is no President in Kenya. So, let us make contributions that are helpful; not those that will continue to support the rift. 

3.23
Mr KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking hon. Adolf Mwesige for the statement that he has presented to this Parliament. This statement should not have been presented today. Mr Speaker, you will agree with me that I did at one point, write to you to request your good offices to reconvene Parliament earlier than 5 February 2008 because of the events unfolding in Kenya which have got a lot of bearing on us as a sister country. 

I am further happy that the Minister, in his statement, has been able to clear the doubt about the position of Uganda. You will agree with me that it reached a point where the whole world was made to believe that Uganda had a hand in the unfortunate things happening in Kenya. I can ably cite to you the BBC programme, Focus on Africa as well as another programme on NTV and another one on CNN when rioters kept pointing at the Police and referring to them as Ugandans. That portrayed Uganda negatively in the international media. I feel that as a country, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should have acted very fast to correct and cleanse the image of this country in both national and international media. 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the genocide that happened in Rwanda in 1994 started with a small magnitude just like this problem started in Kenya. It started like a small fire and it eventually engulfed the whole country. And I think as a neighbouring country, we cannot afford to see our brothers and sisters kill each other, and as a regional block not come up to assist these people. These unfortunate events unfolding in Kenya have had a direct impact on us as has been stated in the minister’s report. 

But at this point, I would like to challenge Government. I remember in the 1970s when some of us were still students- young as we were. This was during the regime of the late Idi Amin, which has been undermined by a number of countries and a number of leaders in this country and the world over. In his ignorance, as they always claim, he was foresighted enough to see that Uganda, being a land-locked country, needed to have oil reserves. We had a very big tank constructed in Jinja, another one in Nakasongola and others in Eastern Uganda, which if fully utilised could have helped this country for a minimum of six months. 

Mr Speaker, I would like us to really be serious in these issues that we are considering because they directly impact on us. These problems in Kenya are not two months old and yet within less than a week, we started feeling the impact because fuel was not readily available. Government should come up to reconsider the decision that it took to give out these tanks to independent and individual hands. If Government still had full control and usage of these tanks, the fuel crisis that we are experiencing now would not be the case. So, my question is, can Government come up with a clear explanation as to what has happened to these tanks? -(Interjection)- Well, I will get informed since my brother is the Minister for Energy. Please.

MR D’UJANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the reserve tanks in Jinja have not been given away. They are still in the hands of my ministry.

MR WADRI:  My brother hon. Eng. D’Ujanga, Minister of State for Energy, has actually put the loop around his own neck as a minister. If you have not sold these tanks, why don’t you put them to use? It is like somebody coming up when the children are starving in a house and he/she says “We still have got the cooking pot.” If the cooking pot is there, why don’t you cook? If the tanks are there, why are they not filled with fuel so that we can access them? That is what I am challenging Government to come up with in terms of programming so that in future, should such a problem befall a neighbouring state, or us directly, we are not subjected to such suffering.

Mr Speaker, I will not wish to dwell –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter before the House is the situation in Kenya and now we are here involved in the internal situation within the country, namely, our petroleum reserves. This is a serious matter that the minister needs to comprehensively address. So, would it not be prudent for the Minister to come with a statement and tell us where our petroleum reserves went; who sold them and where did the money go, so that we really take a concrete decision on this matter because there is a looming crisis in this sector? Mr Speaker, when do we expect a statement from the Minister?

THE SPEAKER: The subject at hand today is the situation in Kenya. We should not be so subjective that we stress more about what is happening in our country. I think let us exhaust the subject on the Kenya situation and help the Kenya situation to improve.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker -(Interruption)
 
MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I thank you. I was going to stand up and ask for audience since part of my statement to this House was going to deal with the fuel reserves. Why? Because the things, which are happening in Kenya are affecting us directly and that is why we will keep on referring to it. But the whole matter would have been settled if we were told in no uncertain terms that the matter has been heard and that the Minister will come here make a statement and clarify the matter. If we do not, it will keep on coming back, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is being subjective; subjective in the sense that we are talking about our internal problems here rather than talking about the source of the problem which is in Kenya. How do we solve the problem in Kenya? I think that is what we should stress. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to say that the question of fuel in the country is a very serious matter, as we all know, and there are many allegations that have been flying around. There is need for the ministry to come up with a comprehensive statement on the fuel status in Uganda and in so doing comment about this question of reserves and that will be done by due –

THE SPEAKER: But that is a separate subject.

MR MBABAZI: Yes, on Tuesday. I was just giving –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is a separate subject.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as I was saying, I do not need to dwell on the direct impact of this suffering in Kenya as meted out on our people who are trapped there. I think my predecessor has ably articulated that. But the other bit that I wish to draw our attention to is the plight of the business community. Many consignments have been trapped and locked up in Mombasa and of course every other day these goods continue to stay in the bond, demurrages are being accumulated. Is there a specific plan on the part of Government to come to the aid of our traders? 

The goods are not there of their own making. Not only that but even the insurance cover does not provide for that sort of thing. Is it possible for the government to come and consider what it can do to ameliorate the suffering of our business community? I can see hon. Eng. Gagawala up in arms; I hope he is going to give information, which will assist us in reaching a good decision in the interest of our people.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr Gagawala Wambuzi): I thank you. I would like to inform you that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is actually hands-on on the subject and we shall come here and inform you in due course –(Laughter)- because I think the Minister of Works and the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry have been dispatched to Tanzania. They will pass through Kenya and they will come here and in that time they will compile a report. We would like to give you a full report so I beg the House to allow us to report appropriately in due course. 

MS ALASO: Thank you. Having heard the Minister of Trade, I am actually disappointed and I would like to be helped. First of all, the ministry should really tell us what they have. This crisis has gone on since last year and when you are telling us that your teams have been moving, are you subsequently telling us that you have done nothing and you dare to stand on the Floor to tell this country that you have done nothing to salvage the traders from the plight that they are going through right now? 

Secondly, when the minister talks about “in due course”, what is “in due course”? By now a prepared ministry would have all the information we need again owing to the time that this crisis has been on. I would like to hear from the minister that he is actually ready and has some documentation on what they have done, which can be submitted by say Tuesday. But when you leave it at “in due course”, it sounds vague and also a little bit irresponsible. Mr Speaker, I need that clarification.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, “due course” simply means, when the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry, hon. Janat Mukwaya, completes the circuit and comes back and reports to the ministry and we digest everything. We are receiving some reports but already, as you know, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs takes care of what is outside Uganda by and large. Therefore, I cannot jump that until I have interfaced with the rest of the Cabinet on the matter. I cannot half report and I cannot commit this House on a date until we receive the delegation, which has gone to get details on the ground and actually negotiate some other issues. I thank you, and beg the House to listen and comply.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I have the following to say: hon. Eng. Gagawala, Minister of State for Trade, rose up on a point of clarification, which turned out to be information. I am very grateful, but be on notice that today is the 7th and we are going to make sure that we keep the Hansard on which you have been recorded this so that we will use it to compel you to come with that statement because the issue of the suffering of businessmen affects all of us. 

Mr Speaker, when doctors carry out post mortems or - in the African anthropological set up - after the death of a person, when people assemble to come up with an explanation as to why the person died, it is not for nothing. It is so that we can be able, collectively as a community, to prevent the reoccurrence of such an unfortunate situation. 

Today we are here, in this August House, sharing views on the unfortunate happenings in Kenya; it is not for nothing but to learn lessons from it. What lessons do we learn from the happenings in Kenya? We are in no way going to be judgmental as per your wise ruling in apportioning blame, but we are also going to take a leaf out of all that is coming out, with which we as a country should be able to safeguard ourselves. 

The issue of a smooth electioneering process in Africa, I think, is the most important thing that we need as a community to co-exist. The idea of saying that the winner takes it all and therefore begins to use the position to suppress others is what most likely leads to such situations. The issue of economic imbalances - I was very happy when hon. Achia Remigio stood up, I thought he was on my side and indeed in his ideas he was actually with us. (Laughter) We should not just look at these things literally. 

The issue of imbalances in Kenya as cited as one of the reasons for the disturbances in the country date back to the colonial times and it is only now that people are saying, “Yes, for this long we have lived as an independent state, can we sit down, reflect and reconsider the imbalances in the country?” And I think that as a country, we also need to take this into account. 

This morning, I had the privilege of reading a magazine entitled the Independent, and I saw two articles, one written by Prof. Jean Barya from the Faculty of Law of Makerere University and another one written by Mr Andrew Mwenda, talking about imbalances in this country, and tribalism. I think that now, over 40 years since independence, Ugandans should be able to rise above sentimentalism based on tribalism. The issue of saying that hon. Amama Mbabazi - the one commonly known as being in the queue and the super minister - is a Mukiga and I am Lugbara, should in no way wedge a rift between him and I. 

When I look at a person like hon. Nathan Byanyima with whom I have been in association for long, right from our student life, I should not see tribe in him; I should look at him as a Ugandan. That is very important for us as a country. I hope that what I am preaching to you does not fall on a hard rock but on loam soil, which will cause the seed to germinate because once that is done, some of  these unfortunate happenings in Kenya will not re-occur in that country, let alone this country.  
 
Let me say something about economic imbalances. I saw in the article I was talking about that the positions in the UPDF; the top civil service positions; the positions in parastatals –(Interjections)- this is public knowledge; it is a public document. So, the moment we do not come out of that and look at ourselves as a country, we shall be in trouble because my sisters and brothers, this country belongs to all of us. We will be judged harshly if we brushed it aside because of our selfish interests in what is happening in our neighbouring country. I urge all of us, regardless of our tribe, religion, colour, and political party affiliation, to first look at Uganda as a country and that way, I think we will not fall in the pitfall.

3.48
MRS LOY KIRYAPAWO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to congratulate the NRM Government in general and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in particular for coming up –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Kiryapawo, he is saying that he had not concluded. Please, conclude.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have some important information that I want to give to my colleagues. Honorable members, we should not look at the just concluded elections in Kenya as a major cause of violence in that country. What happened in Kenya are the consequences of the old problems. People in Kenya had suffered for so many years. It is like if you have a wound and it is hurting and someone puts salt on it hoping it will get healed. This is what happened in Kenya. People had suffered because the national cake was not shared equally.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much my colleague for the information. Mr Speaker, as I wind up -(Interjections)- order on whom? Order on me? Fine!

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to find out whether the Opposition is in order to react to a Government presentation in the way it is doing? I want to still find out whether actually our statement should be responded to verbally instead of them giving us a copy as we did! I am asking this because we are discussing a very important matter, which is implicating Uganda in the situation in Kenya. So, I would like their response to be in writing so that we can get it word for word. 

This is important because if in future there is some need, we can refer to it. So, is the Opposition in order to keep making statements accusing Uganda here and there; making accusations on whatever is going on in Kenya as if actually they have a proper record of the causes of what took place in Kenya? I am saying this because Uganda at one time might have a situation of answering what has been said in this House. Are they in order to make this House assume that we actually know the cause of what is taking place in Kenya?

THE SPEAKER: I believe that in their honest judgment they think they are playing their role. But honorable members, you should know that according to our rules such a statement is only discussed for a very limited time but now it seems as if we have a free day. Therefore, you conclude so that I give opportunity to others to make contributions.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as I conclude -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. I am very concerned that the Eighth Parliament tonight is deliberating on a very important issue, which affects Africa; which affects our region; which affects our brothers and which affects our lifeline as Uganda in terms of imports and exports. After the minister gave a statement I am surprised in the manner in which we seem to be polarized. I think this is not a partisan matter. 

Given the situation in Kenya, I would expect us to proceed as Ugandans because it is a question of national economy and a question of national security. In other countries foreign policies are largely guided by their national economies and security interests. I therefore, seek your guidance –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: My guidance is contained in the communication I gave you. When we came back here I mentioned the issue of Kenya and I appealed to you that whatever you say or write should be aimed at helping the situation rather than prolong it. That is the guidance. So, whoever makes a contribution should aim at helping the situation rather than doing anything that will worsen it.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interruption.)

THE SPEAKER: I think you have finished. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I have one lesson to learn from that situation, and one recommendation for us to consider. 

The one lesson for us as a country, and more so a young democracy, is that we should not take peoples’ votes for granted. People, regardless of their social status, have the same strength and weight of votes as those who are well placed. Whether you are a poor man; whether you are a professor; whether you are a minister; whether you are a Member of Parliament; whether you are the Speaker of the National Assembly; whether you are the President; your one vote is of equal value and weight like that of any other person. That, therefore, means that for us as a country, let us be conscious. Once people have expressed their decision and they have talked through the vote, please, please, listen to them. 

Why do I say this? I say this because whereas the two leaders of ODM and PNU are comfortable in Nairobi, the peasants, the 300,000 people displaced, the 1,000 who are displaced internally in refugee camps, those who have been killed are the ones who have talked. So, let us not cause trouble for the weak in society; let us respect their views. 

What recommendation do I therefore make in all this suffering that the Kenyans have gone through? I think for us as a country that is blessed at this particular time to be seen to be playing an important role in the regional block of the East African community, it is high time we engaged one another to have our physical presence, if any, felt in Kenya because we cannot continue like that. Every other time one mediator comes, one after the other, but the violence continues to grow.  

I think it is high time through the East African Community that the neighbouring countries came up with a position and really be on the scene to give protection to the ordinary Kenyan who is suffering. Where two elephants fight, it is the grass that suffers. And my concern most important of all is about the “grass”, the ordinary Kenyan that is suffering. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Loy Kiryapawo): I thank you Rt hon. Speaker for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this statement. I should first congratulate the NRM Government in general and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in particular -(Laughter)- for having come up with this statement. I am saying this because it is clearing a lot of allegations and rumours, which have been going around.  

People are almost blaming our President, asking why he congratulated the President who had just won elections in Kenya. It is stated in this statement, informing the whole country and the world that President Museveni sent the congratulations after the Electoral Commission of Kenya had announced the winner and after the winner had been sworn in by not any other person but the Chief Justice of that country. 

It is common that once you win elections, you have people who congratulate you but when they are congratulating you, there is no whistle blower who says, “Now those who want to congratulate, I blow the whistle and you start; get on your marks, get set, go. No!” (Laughter) There must always be a first person to do that and in this case the first person was the President of Uganda. 

As the chairperson of the East African affairs – (Interjection)- -(Mr Fungaroo rose­_) can you let me finish? So, he did it in that capacity as the President of a sovereign state, which is Uganda; secondly as the chairperson of the East African Community; and thirdly as the Chairman of the Commonwealth. Because he is there, others are saying he was chairman only during that CHOGM period but I want to inform these people that actually he will be the chairman for two years, until there is another Commonwealth meeting. That is when he will cease to be the Chairman of the Commonwealth. 

The other issue, which this document clears, is the situation –(Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: Is the Member of Parliament, hon. Kiryapawo in order to call the President a whistleblower of congratulatory messages?  (Laughter)
 
THE SPEAKER: No, I think what she meant was that you do not have to wait for people to blow the whistle in order to start sending a message that you want to send. That is what she was saying.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: I thank you Rt hon. Speaker for your wise guidance. The other issue, which this statement clears, is that of allegations, which have been going around saying that our Army is in Kenya. Here it is clear that the army, which is trying to help to provide security on the highways, is the Kenyan Army and Kenyan Police. So, I would like to beg our colleagues even if you are in the Opposition; have your country at heart. It is wrong to come up with unfounded allegations, which are not good for your country. 

The one, which I want to ask our Government and all well wishers of Uganda –(Interruption) 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has insinuated that the Opposition does not have the country at heart and in fact that the Opposition has been saying that the Ugandan Government has deployed in Kenya. What we know is that these allegations are coming from Kenya; they are contained in reports from the civil society in Kenya and Members of Parliament from Kenya. We are also reading it from newspapers like the Nation from Kenya. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that the Opposition in Uganda is the one making allegations that Uganda has deployed; or can she substantiate?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiryapawo, you are informed that the Opposition does not believe in those allegations. (Laughter)

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Mr Speaker, I want to say this: what I would request the government and all well wishers of Uganda to do is work together with Government and see how we can assist those people who are now refugees in Uganda. One center right now, which is in Tororo District, I am sure is not enough to hold all the people who are there.

Two, provide them with the necessities that they need, like clothes, food and all that. 

And I would like to thank those who have already contributed and assisted, but I am sure we need more assistance for those people.

As I conclude I want also to ask that the business community whose goods are stranded - Government should also try to work quickly to assist them. We are informed that they are trying to look for alternatives, but I think they should speed up with those alternatives. With those few remarks, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.59
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But please, let us be brief because very many people want to contribute to this debate. We should not exceed an hour but now it appears we have gone beyond.

MR DOMBO: First and foremost, I want to thank Government for coming out with this statement, because it helps to clarify on a few issues, which would have been very difficult for us to comment on without having an official position of Government.

Secondly, want is happening in Kenya right now is very unfortunate. When you look at the electronic media footage, you can see that the people suffering most are the children. In this Parliament, we have a forum for children and for us it is not proper and fair for the child to pay the price for the sins they did not commit. This is very unfortunate!

However, we also want to recognise the fact that there have been international efforts, on top of regional efforts to ensure that the problems of Kenya are solved. At a recent international meeting which I attended, this issue came up for consideration and there was consensus that all efforts should be put towards resolving the current problem as it exists now. 

I would like us as Members of Parliament to support the international effort, especially the Committee of Eminent Persons, the regional effort and also to welcome the recent development that the Chairman of the African Union now comes from the East African region. We should give such efforts the support that they deserve; even if it means Members of Parliament coming up with a resolution; because that is how we conduct our business in Parliament. 

The most unfortunate thing is that what happens in Kenya, apart from the economic sense of it, also socially and directly affects what is happening in Uganda. We have tribes in Kenya, which spill over to Uganda. We have Luos in Ugandan and in Kenya. We have the Luhyas, the Banyole, the Iteso – if we are not careful about the statements that we make as a country, we could indirectly inflame the emotions of our people and create a problem within the region that could have been mitigated by our sensibility as a Parliament coming up to strongly support the international effort. 

Mr Speaker, I recently had an opportunity to read a report sent to us by mail by one of the election observation teams. What was very unfortunate, to me, was that in that report I sensed that the people who went to do election observation acted a little bit outrageously by overstepping their mandate as election observers. They went to the extent of making law reforms within Kenya, which I do not think was the specific duty of those who went to observe the way the elections were being conducted.

Finally, before I sit, in the same international meeting which I attended, a member of the Tanzanian Parliament and the other members of the delegating, said to me: “By the way you people in Uganda are suffering, but ten years ago the government of Uganda signed a memorandum and you were allowed by the government of Tanzania to develop one of the ports in Tanzania.” So, the current economic crisis would not have occurred if that had been done. But I did not have any information about that. So as the minister winds up, may I seek clarification from him on whether such a memorandum was signed and how far it has gone so that the consequences of such problems may be mitigated in future? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.04
MRS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would also like to add my voice to those of my colleagues to thank the minister for at least having come up with an explanation that had kept people wondering what their Government thinks about the situation in Kenya. 

However, in a situation like this, where the chaos in Kenya has affected Uganda and the Great Lakes Region, I would first of all what to urge Members – I have been calling people in Kenya and they are saying that some sentiments, which are coming from Ugandan leaders are escalating the problem in Kenya. My own brother lives in Kenya; he is still in Kenya, he has a business there and he has not faced any problem yet he has already deposited his wife and children here because she is a Kikuyu and they cannot live with him. But he being Ugandan, he is still there working. But he says, “Ugandan leaders have got some sentiments, which come up in our newspapers that instigate violence in Kenya.” Some of those are sentiments like, “This thing will happen in Uganda any time”. We really do not have to speculate!

And blaming President Museveni for having congratulated Kibaki; President Museveni is not the head of the Electoral Commission of Kenya. It was just courteous of him to say so –(Mr Fungaroo rose)- Let me first give you an example before I take his information. Hon. Fungaroo, if I found you in the hospital, sick and in pain, would I ask, “How is the pain?” I would just say, “Good morning”, but is the morning good? It is just courteous to say good things; he did not announce him a leader. 

And blaming the Ugandan President is beside the point. Whether or not President Museveni congratulated Kibaki, there was going to be chaos in Kenya. Remember, about two days before elections were held, even before a single vote was cast, the people of Raila Odinga were celebrating that he had won. That meant that they were ready for anything if something contrary to that happened.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way and for accepting the information. You made a very important point that we should perhaps capture - especially so the honourable Chief Whip of the Opposition. I respect him as our former commissioner for youths. The point of the statements leaders make - he was very courageous - and I also admired the charisma of my sister the honourable shadow minister, condemning our leaders. We should actually condemn leaders who utter reckless statements. We should do so without fear or favour. 

In particular I want to draw the attention of the House to the statements made by the President of FDC that, “Kenyans are fighting for their rights and how I wish Ugandans could do the same!” I do not think Kenyans are fighting for their rights. Be it the Kikuyus, be it the Luos, they are all losing. And Kenya is losing. These are the kind of reckless, unpalatable statements our leaders are uttering. 

I wish to challenge the Leader of the Opposition and following the guidance of the Speaker, that as we discuss these matters, we should rise above party sentiments. We should know the implications of the statements we make. 

Finally, the message that we should capture from that is that violence serves no one. Violence targets all including those who spearhead it, who execute it, who author it. Some years back the Hutu extremists were good at it, but they also suffered it. So, be it those who author it, be it those who fan it, be it those who plan for it, at the end of it, all suffer for no one guarantees the first victim. I thank you.

MRS MUGISA: Thank you very much hon. Tumwebaze for that information -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But that was a contribution. (Laughter)

MRS MUGISA: Mr Speaker and members of this august House, I want to add, besides what we have said about congratulatory messages and the rest that we need to know at the back of our minds that Kenya is a sovereign state. We cannot prescribe what should take place in Kenya or how they should sort themselves out. We can only advise but we cannot dictate upon them and tell that, “This is what we Ugandans want” -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the honourable member holding the Floor is: you have been talking about the congratulatory messages but we know that we have our High Commissioner in Kenya, much as we have ambassadors in various countries all over the world; and these keep on sending diplomatic notes. I would have thought that even our High Commissioner in Kenya, like other ambassadors did, should have sent a diplomatic note to the Minister of Foreign Affairs to alert the President about the situation. Shouldn’t we use those diplomatic notes and we base our judgement on that to send congratulatory messages?

MRS MUGISA: You have actually gone exactly beside my point. The President of the Republic of Uganda never wrote. It was a telephone call and in that telephone call he did say that, “Even if I have congratulated you and I have heard what has happened, I hear there is chaos. How are you going to sort it out?” And after that he has been in Kenya for some days, you know it very well. And he has gone there to clear, to calm down the situation and no one has rioted in Kenya.

Lastly, I said we cannot prescribe how Kenya should sort itself out. Ultimately, the decision is upon them. The decision lies with the Kenyans, no amount of – I mean even if the UN – we know the UN is already in Kenya, the former Secretary-General of the UN is in Kenya but he may not do much. 

Let me tell you, this situation in Kenya has made me appreciate Uganda. If you know Kenya’s judicial system very well, you know how hard it is to get an election petition ruled on in court. Raila Odinga has rejected going to court because he knows by the time you get the ruling on your case, somebody has already served his term. You do appreciate that here we have really won cases; we have lost cases in a very short time, which cannot happen in Kenya. (Applause). You should appreciate that in Uganda we really have kept ourselves at bay, in spite of some mayhem, of course caused by disgruntled people which you cannot completely rule out. You cannot say people should behave the same. 

Because I do not believe that it is the imbalances, the economic imbalances in Kenya that have caused this situation. I really do not think so because Moi was unpopular, he stayed. Let me tell you, I always argue that it is capitalism that is exploding all over the world. It is a global trend. Look at America, the super power of this world, the world hegemony. Only 23 families manage the economy of Americans and manage everybody, including Bush. But have you heard of them rioting and causing such chaos as there is in Kenya? That is because the political system has created a social security system that covers people who are less advantaged. This means we should really say in our politics, let us put – I mean, we will never be the same. Even here in Buganda there is a king. For us we have a young boy of 15 and he is very powerful -(Laughter)- you get it. You cannot say everybody must be at his level even economically. 

That is social but economically, I have told you even in Europe there are multi-nationals who govern the whole of Europe. Very few people control this world. Not everybody shall be at the helm. But what we need to do is create a situation where everybody is well catered for and that is what we should call upon even in this country.

THE SPEAKER: This time you wind up, please.

MRS MUGISA: Mr Speaker, finally I want to tell Ugandans here today to please learn to appreciate this peace that we have in this country. Do not take peace for granted -(Applause)- it can go any time and do not add salt unto a wound. I thank you.

4.15
MS JESSICA ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the government for making these vast clarifications over the Kenyan catastrophe, through the minister’s statement. I have two comments. 

One, we have been depending on Mombasa Port as the only entry and exit route in terms of goods and services. I would like to implore Government to have as a matter of policy an alternative route, both for exit and entry because we are a landlocked country.

Mr Speaker, if we had it on paper that we have an alternative route that the hon. Nasasira went to negotiate with Tanzania as indicated in the minister’s report on page 6, we would not have lost all the time that the traders are now crying over. We would not have had that crisis of fuel. So I want to emphasise that Government should have it as a matter of policy to have an alternative route because we are a landlocked country.

The other one is that everybody wants to have the Kenyan crisis resolved overnight. It has come to my knowledge tonight that all Members of this assembly want to have the crisis sorted out. In the minister’s statement on page 4, he talks about a summit that is going to take place on the 8th to the 9th. It is my desire to learn from the minister if he can accommodate a cross section of Members of Parliament in that summit. This is because it will give us the opportunity to express our views further as we always have limited time here. Thank you.

4.17
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is happening in Kenya is a classical tragedy; one that does not just involve one country. In this case it involves a whole region and we know that the whole world is looking towards Kenya. The people who have been killed in the violence, those who have been displaced and the sex violence taking place is something that makes all of us think that the world is almost coming to an end. 

Some Members of this august House questioned the credibility of our President in mediating the conflict in Kenya. Mr Speaker, President Museveni’s credentials over dialogue are unquestionable because he has got a track record that includes UNLF I, UNLF II, PRA and now the Kony rebellion; Burundi and Somalia. Everything is on record. I am about to finish a book on how President Museveni, through dialogue, has managed to bring peace not only to Uganda but to the surrounding areas. 

When there was a proposal that there should be courses on nationalism, some people sneered but at this point we should realise that we need those courses because for some of our people, and I am very sorry to say that some of them are educated, the word “patriotism” does not exist. This is because there are allegations that some of the violence that is taking place in Kenya against our own people is instigated from here. 

Last night I watched Al Jazeera television and there was a young man who opened an SMS and it said, “The Kikuyu are being trained in Uganda to come and eliminate other tribes.” The young man said, “I got this SMS from a Ugandan”. It may not be true that this was a Ugandan but it is true that some of it has been instigated here. Where is the patriotism that we are talking about? Ethnic violence knows no boundaries and there are neither vanquished nor victors. We are all losers if it happens. 

I will end by what the President suggested in Kenya. He made a proposal and said that a commission should be set up to establish the truth of what happened and both parties agreed to it. I think this is a matter that should be pursued and which we should encourage. I also implore everybody, including the Opposition, that language and words like, “Emulate what Kenya has done” has caused wars. How can you emulate the cutting up of people, and sex violence? As we speak, let us build bridges rather than something that will take hold of us. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are debating a statement made by the minister but some Members here have sent me messages that they want to have something tangible in the form of a motion. This is by hon. Kakoba Onyango and hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal. This is so that we don’t just debate generally but rather on a motion that is directly related to the statement.

4.23
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to add something for the information of the House and especially in light of some of the contributions made so far and expand on the ministerial statement so that when we debate the motion, we do so with a background of information. 

First of all, an effort has been made by Government, contrary to what some people were saying, to make statements about this situation on Kenya. Today Government has made a statement in Parliament because this was the first opportunity for us to make it as we were on recess until a few days ago. 

Furthermore, the Minister of Foreign Affairs addressed the press and in Kenya, our High Commission also made a statement. In fact they bought space in all newspapers in Kenya giving the position of Uganda on the situation in Kenya. Therefore, it is not true that we have been quiet. We have been talking and today we are talking in Parliament. 

This idea of recognition by the government of Uganda or President Museveni of President Kibaki is not true. The Government policy is not to recognise governments. We recognise states and it is up to states to have governments of their choice. What the President did was to congratulate President Kibaki upon his swearing in as President of Kenya. This was after the Electoral Commission of Kenya had made its pronouncement and President Kibaki had been sworn in. In fact, it was two days after the swearing in and what prompted President Museveni to call President Kibaki was because the difficult situation was beginning to manifest itself in Nairobi and other areas with demonstrations, disrupting the flow of traffic to Uganda. So he called him to talk to him as his counterpart, the one in charge of the government and responsible for the situation in Kenya. If you were President, what would you do? (Interjections)

I think America has its ways; I am talking about our policies. I do not know about America. (Laughter) This is not only President Museveni. There are many other people. As we know, President Kufour was going to Kenya as the African Union Chairman, and they contacted President Kibaki and in fact when President Kibaki said that it was an internal matter and did not need external mediation, President Kufour did not go. He only went after President Kibaki had invited him. 

In Kenya itself, as all of us know, Parliament is convened by order of the President and we all know that the Parliament of Kenya has sat and the Opposition led by my brother, hon. Raila Odinga, and the ODM attended. They were summoned by President Kibaki and they responded to him as President because that is how the Parliament of Kenya is convened. So, why should we in Uganda have this debate on whether we should recognise them or not?

MR OCULA: Thank you, Mr Minister for giving way. The President in Uganda is the fountain of honour and in that way he acts on behalf of all Ugandans who own that fountain of honour. Therefore, in a situation whereby everybody could see that what was going on in Kenya, including the swearing in, was not moving on correctly, it was not correct for the President to go ahead and congratulate him. Even my own son who is in P.6, when he saw how Kibaki was being sworn in, he asked, “Daddy, what is happening?” The man looked like a thief in the whole –(Interjections)– and this is not the first time it is happening in Uganda. 

I remember when there was a contest in the USA, when John Kerry was seemingly about to defeat Bush, again there were statements from the President of Uganda, as if he was trying to disown the Bush Government immediately. But later on that did not happen. 

The information I want to give is, when the President acts, he acts on behalf of all of us. For that matter he should act correctly. Thank you so much.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You know, our six year-old sons normally say what they see us do and say. (Laughter) Children are absolutely innocent and usually they say what they have heard. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: We have other business of hon. Lukwago, and another of hon. Akena.

MR MBABAZI: I am sorry, hon. Odit, you know I always give way but I am informed that we do not have much time. There was –(Laughter)- I have known hon. Odit for a very long time and this is the first time I have seen him act in a very ungentlemanly way. (Laughter) 

The next point is about Ugandan troops in Kenya. We have made this statement many times before and I would like to repeat it here that we have no troops in Kenya. We have not had them in the past and we do not intend to send troops in Kenya. What is true is that there were rumours in Kenya that we had troops there and the President –(Interjection)– the rules here give me the right to accept or not to accept. Since the Speaker has advised that I have very little time, I intend to give you, in this little time, the information I have. 

What is true is that the shooting in Kisumu of some people who were demonstrating was done by people who were moving in a vehicle that had Ugandan registration numbers. One could understand the spontaneous interpretation of the ordinary person about who these people were. But I should inform you that the President did not only talk to President Kibaki. At that same time he spoke to hon. Raila Odinga and the leaders of the Opposition. They have been in constant contact with each other on phone. 

When this issue arose, the ODM itself sought clarification with our High Commissioner who met the Secretary-General of the ODM, Prof. Anyang Nyong. President Museveni spoke to Raila Odinga and it is him who informed President Museveni that they knew the people that had shot the demonstrators. Although they were in a vehicle with Ugandan registration numbers, they were Kenyan and they gave the President the names of the involved officers. So ODM knows that these are not Ugandans. It is not true and the ODM knows, and does not believe these rumours that fly around – the leadership at least knows.

On Ugandans stranded in Kenya, it is not true to say that Ugandans have – I am just only adding to what hon. Margaret Mugisa said - Ugandans have not been targeted as such. It is true they have been affected. In fact now about 17 Ugandans are in a camp in the Mathare suburb. These 17 were not targeted as Ugandans; they were affected like the rest of the inhabitants of this area and not as Ugandans. So, it is not true to say that they were attacked as Ugandans. 

The High Commission has been very helpful, as the minister said in his statement. We took all measures even as a Government to ensure that we assist in the process of evacuating our children from St. Andrews School in Tuli to get out of Molo, which was very volatile, to Nairobi and back home.

Demurrage charges: I just want to say that as we wait for the report from the minister as hon. Gagawala said, the government has made contact with authorities in Kenya and it has been agreed that the demurrage charges arising out of this situation where our traders could not even access their goods, will be waived. They are going to be waived and they will not be paid.

In my concluding remarks, Mr Speaker, I would like to urge our colleagues, especially in the Opposition that let us unite on this -(Interjection)- Oh, I am happy to hear that we are united; that is great news. Let us be united in this matter because our Kenyan friends, our Kenyan brothers and sisters are suffering. We should really not attempt to make politics out of this. For a leader to say that this situation in Kenya is a good sign for Uganda – that Ugandans should emulate that good example –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. I believe that when the substantive motion, which is proposed on this matter comes, I will say something. But taking it from what you had said before, you made the allegation on the issue that our leaders said that we should learn from Kenya and we should take an example from Kenya. That is a matter, which I think makes reference to what Dr. Kiiza Besigye was quoted to have said in the first instance. I would like to let you know that he made a clarification, which was published in the media that what was said is not what he did say. 

I agree with you and when I make my contribution I will probably bring this point out that the Kenya situation is not about politics; because if Kenya goes the way it potentially can go, we do not know what the repercussions will be and I will make that point. So, let us let that matter rest. Dr. Besigye went to the media and made a very thorough clarification on what he said – (Mr Mbabazi rose_) (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: What is it? 

MR LUKWAGO: To raise a point of order –(Interjection)- yes, to the honourable minister. The honourable minister knows for sure that the violence we are witnessing in Kenya today is as a result of rigging elections and people are fighting because they were dissatisfied with the outcome of the election; and we know that it has ever happened here in Uganda. People were dissatisfied with the result of elections of 1980 and they decided to go to the bush. Is the minister, therefore, in order, by insinuation, to condemn those people who went to the bush because they were dissatisfied with the elections? (Laughter) Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, one will tell you that this has been overtaken by events. (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I really must say that I do welcome the words of the Leader of the Opposition. I did not have that information that these words had been withdrawn fully and these thoughts –(Interjections)- okay, corrected; and this puts my heart at peace because really if there is any time we must be united, this is it. That is why, therefore, my sister hon. Christine Bako’s vigorous statement here - you know I had not seen her speak before and you could see she is quite vibrant. She said -(Interjection)- how can I talk about her being a grandmother when I do not know whether she has conceived or not? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No; I think let us shorten the contribution.

MR MBABAZI: She made a statement that if Kenya is to be peaceful, there must be a re-election. My simple point here, honourable colleagues of Parliament, is that let us not be judgmental. Really as we stand, we do not know whether there was rigging or there was no rigging. Let the process in Kenya, let the mediation effort sort out this matter, let the facts come out, then maybe we can talk on the basis of facts but let us not be judgmental to make a statement that, “Certainly there was rigging”, or “This one is responsible for that”, because we do not know. Therefore, I hope that what my sister hon. Bako said was really in the heat of the moment and the words of the Opposition leader, which are quite calming will influence our contributions. That is because what we say here even as leaders of the Opposition incidentally is picked up and magnified many times in Kenya and can cause problems, and I am sure none of us would like to be held responsible for further trouble in Kenya. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, anybody picking the Hansard of today’s contribution on this particular statement may not know the position of Parliament because everybody has said what he wants to say. But as I have informed you, two Members have sent me a proposed motion which would perhaps tie up what you have said here so that somebody will say, “Oh, Parliament pronounced itself on this by this motion.” Those I had identified on this side may contribute if I allow the motion to be moved then we end the exercise. I think that is my view and therefore I should allow honourable mover and hon. Cecilia Ogwal to move their motion. 

4.44
MR KAKOBA ONYANGO (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I beg the indulgence of the House to move a motion of public interest under Rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament concerning the post-election violence in Kenya and I proceed to read:

WHEREAS Parliament notes that presidential, Parliamentary and civic elections were held on 27 December 2007 in Kenya;

AND WHEREAS there have been situations and incidents of violence, killing, unrest and turmoil following the announcement of the said elections; 

RECOGNISING that Kenya is a neighbouring state and that the treaty establishing the East African Community seeks to promote peace and stability within the region, and good neighbourliness among the partner states;

AWARE that the instability in Kenya is already having negative repercussions on the political, economic and social wellbeing of Uganda in particular, and the Great Lakes Region as a whole; 

NOW, therefore, this motion is moved that Parliament resolves as follows:

1.	That it collectively condemns the post-election violence, killing of innocent people, civil unrest, and tribal conflict taking place in Kenya.
2.	That it calls upon all parties involved in the conflict to embrace the peace initiatives by various national and international groups and persons, aimed at resolving the crisis.
3.	That it commends the mediation efforts initiated by, among others, the former UN Secretary General, Kofi Annan, the African Union, and the East African Community.
4.	That it further commends the mediation efforts of His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, as the Chairman of the East African Community and as a sign of good neighbourliness.
5.	That it urges, the Government of Uganda and the international community to consolidate efforts aimed at finding a lasting solution and peaceful resolution to the crisis.
6.	That it urges Ugandan leaders and the public at large to desist from making statements that may ignite tribal and/or interstate conflict and jeopardise the mediation efforts.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded? Ok. The hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Do you want to speak on the motion? 

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: Mr Speaker, I want to give a brief justification of this motion.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as you may realise, what is happening in Kenya concerns the issue of democracy and good governance. And as Parliament and as guardians of democracy and good governance, it is incumbent upon us to pronounce ourselves on this issue. This is because today it may be Kenya, the next day it could be another country altogether. 

In that respect, I want to thank the honourable minister who presented the statement on behalf of the Minister of Foreign Affairs for bringing this statement to the House, and indeed the government. But as Parliament, we felt that we should augment this statement by pronouncing ourselves on this issue. 

As vice chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee, I have been keenly following the events taking place in the East African region, and in fact the world at large and I note that our Parliament will be the first Parliament within the region to pronounce itself on this issue and it is very pertinent. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we need to support the mediation efforts because of a number of reasons but I will be brief on them. These issues are at national, regional and international levels. 

First, at national level: As a country, it has already been pointed out that we have been affected. We all know what has been happening, that is, the fuel shortage and all that. We also have the problem of the refugees in our country and this problem is affecting our income. The taxes have been drastically affected by this crisis.

At a regional level, the problem is affecting the integration process within the East African Community and if we resolve it, then the issues that we are talking about that we intend to integrate may not be realised. As I said, I will be brief in order to give Members chance to contribute. 

Finally, at the continental level, as Africans, I think it is high time that we sorted out our problems. That is why it is important for Parliament to support this motion in order to give a boost to the mediation efforts that are taking place in Kenya. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you very much for giving this motion the support. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

4.51
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While I thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs for presenting this report to the House, I would like to express my disappointment at the scantiness of the report. I was expecting a very well condensed report, giving us balanced views and probably giving us more insight into what has happened and what is in place to deal with the matter. However, the report is very hollow; it is not what I was expecting. I am sorry –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: I think you should speak about your motion -(Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: That is part of my contribution, Mr Speaker, and it is a very important observation. 

As a preamble, I would like to plead with some Members, including the chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee, not to make comments on matters which we are sometimes not an authority on. I think the President could have made a statement based on the briefing from our High Commission and we are all aware that the diplomatic community took a joint position and we should have stood by that because nobody has told us that Uganda was not a party to that joint position and that is what should have been carried. It is a very unfortunate incident, which we should try to correct but we should not carry it too far. 

I think as Ugandans we should thank God that Uganda has not plunged into this kind of crisis. We do not want to talk much about the past; I think we should focus more on the future. It is bad that it has happened in Kenya. But we should also thank God that it has not happened in Uganda. We know that this Parliament has a record of a huge document talking about electoral violence, which document has never been discussed by this august House. It is something, which stains the image of our Parliament because we cannot express concern about what is happening in the neighbourhood when we ourselves are not in the right shape. 

The Bible tells us, “Do not talk about the log in somebody’s eye when you have a huge log in your own eye.” So, I think as a country, we have to clear our own image. If we go into the details of what happened in Kenya, we would be scratching a wound which is healing. We do not want to go into details but we should be concerned about the practical actions to be taken so that our interests are also protected. 

I know that if we are to call for a re-run of the election, there will be worse violence; maybe more people will die. I do not know. But these are some of the issues we should be discussing because there are some international agencies pushing for that. But as neighbours and as people who know what is happening in Kenya, should there be a re-run -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, the position honourable members is that, the court list of cases on the election in Kenya has been issued and there is one petition in respect of the presidential election by voters. So, now this is a matter which is before court. This is the latest position in Kenya on those elections. So, I think the courts will be able to find out what really happened. There is one case.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just thought I should mention it in passing and also to re-emphasise that of the five East African Community members, I think Uganda is the most affected being a landlocked country. I am really shocked that a minister would stand in this House and say that in the last two months, we do not have statistics in terms of trade, in terms of the economy on how much Uganda has been affected. It really saddens me. It makes me feel as if we are having a bus without a driver. That is what concerns me as a Ugandan.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think now we have a motion. We are no longer making general statements. The text of the motion is there, let us direct ourselves on the motion that we have accepted.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister said it that is why I am just mentioning it in passing. I just want him to be prepared ahead of time. 

Mr Speaker, reading from the media, I am aware that the European Union has already passed a motion asking for sanctions to be imposed on Kenya. My concern is, as a major partner in the East African community, how is Uganda going to be affected by that action if at all it happens? That is my concern.
  
I would also like to find out how Uganda can use this opportunity, horrendous and bad as it is, to put something in place that may help us as partners in the region. We need to explore mechanisms of dealing with post electoral violence. It has happened in Uganda before though it was not as bad as it is in Kenya. It has happened in Kenya and claimed many lives; it may happen in another country, maybe worse than it has happened in Kenya. 

But I am pleading with this House that we should use this event to prepare for the future. I am appealing to the international community to help strengthen our democracy. I think it is important that all these things, which are happening, are also due to the infancy of our democratic development. (Interjection) Are you asking for clarification? 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and thank you so much hon. senior citizen, Mrs Cecilia Atim Ogwal, for giving way. I am rather disturbed when you say we should prepare for post-election violence. I thought in support of this motion, you are going to suggest ways and means to immunise and insulate this country from election violence.  Therefore, a proactive and a preventive way that we do not have to wait for a problem after elections but to prevent it prior to elections. I thank you so much.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I plead with Members to listen carefully. I said we should put in place a mechanism for dealing with that kind of situation should it arise at all in the future. Please, understand me so that when you are asking for clarification -(Interjection)- are you asking for further clarification? Can I finish then you can request the Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have a two-paged motion. The issues that we are supposed to consider in dealing with this motion are one to six, so our contributions should be directed on this without talking about Uganda because this is about Kenya; to justify why we should pass this, one, two, three and four in respect of Kenya, which we are trying to assist.  

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that clarification. All this information I have given is about Kenya, it is only that it concerns Ugandans and Uganda as a country that is why I am saying this. But let me conclude by saying that I do support this motion because at least it will show that our Parliament is standing in solidarity with our brothers and sisters in Kenya. I believe that if we take the points, which have been raised in this motion seriously, it will move us forward. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, too. I had already identified the order. Let us start with hon. Fungaroo.

5.02
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the mover of this motion and the seconder. I would like to support the motion but with suggestions for amendment in the direction of addition of points, which ought to be included in our pronouncement. 

First, is the background for the amendment. The analysis of this problem would require us to tackle the problem in five perspectives. Some of them have been covered here, but there are others that have not been covered. The first perspective is that one on international relations and diplomacy between Uganda and Kenya, Kenya being a neighbour and a sister state of the East African Community. I notice that the motion has covered this.

The second perspective relates to humanitarian disaster. We have heard of people who have died and those who have been displaced. I have sufficiently not seen a reflection of what we say about the Kenyan refugees in Uganda. So, this should be included. 

There is also the perspective of the effects of the problem in Africa. We have been talking about African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM) and President Museveni is one of the chief champions of this but instead of allowing Africans or Africa countries to be criticized by the west, why shouldn’t we criticize ourselves? We should evaluate and appraise ourselves as sister states. Therefore, what happens in Kenya whether it is reflected negatively in Uganda is what happens here too. When you see an ugly face in their mirror, it is your face. So, do not blame the mirror. (Interjection) You can use Uganda as a mirror with Kenya looking at itself. You are seeing Kenya in Uganda, but that is not Kenya. So, do not fear if you are the mirror. 

The other issue, which has not been covered, is the one of pronouncing ourselves on the need for thorough investigations on the allegations of vote rigging and unfairness in the electoral process. I therefore, suggest, honourable members, with due respect, that we call for a thorough investigation into the allegations of the unfairness in the electoral process. 

The other issue, which we need -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you read newspapers from Kenya like I do everyday. We are supporting the mediation efforts and the mediation efforts have already dealt with this. So, when we support it, we do not go into all details that are going on in the mediations. That is really covered by the mediations by Kofi Anan.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. But when something happens, there are lessons that are learnt. In this case, the lessons learnt are of two nature: One is for the sake of a disease that has killed people. We will look at it in the aspect of post-mortem. The post-mortem does not help the dead; it helps the living. For that matter, if Kenya is the dead and Uganda is the living, what we talk about in respect of Kenya is not only intended to help Kenya alone, but also Uganda and all the other countries that have been affected. So, the living should be happy about the results of the post-mortem. 

For that matter, Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest this. This is an example. We have elections that have had questions. Kenya has had elections before this, but those were living elections and not dead ones. So, I consider these ones that have raised a lot of problems as dead elections. That is why we need a post-mortem on such dead elections to help the living elections of Uganda if they are not to die in a similar manner.

I would, therefore, like to conclude my submission as follows: If you do not want to suffer from a disease that can be immunised, it is better for you take the pain of the prick of the needle in a process of immunisation instead of waiting for the prick of the same needle in the process of cure. We cannot close our eyes as Ugandans and claim that he who says that the same disease is likely to affect Uganda is against Uganda. 

When you say that a child is likely to be affected by measles and that such a child should be taken to the hospital for immunisation, you are not wishing that child to be affected by measles. Doctor, the honourable Minister of Health, isn’t that true? I mean this is the situation we are in. Do not close your eyes. We should look at the underlying conditions of Kenya instead of the signs and symptoms of the problem -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we have another business from hon. Lukwago. So, please give way.

MR FUNGAROO: I, therefore, thank you very much for giving way to present my submission. Otherwise, Uganda should be vaccinated because the disease is there and we are at risk of the same. Thank you.

5.09
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to make my comments on this very important subject. I stand to support the motion and I take the opportunity to thank the Minister of Foreign Affairs and government, for presenting a statement today, its shortcomings notwithstanding. 

Mr Speaker, although I support the motion on the Floor, I will make a few observations particularly on points number 3, 4, 5 and 6. I agree that we should commend any mediation efforts intended to support the process of peace building in Kenya wherever they come from, including our own efforts in Uganda by our President. But, I have a problem with mediation efforts in general, which always come at the end of the problem when the problem is at its worst. 

What happens is that the international community, regional bodies, neighbours, everybody just watches as the problem develops, as the problem progresses, as a problem escalates and as a problem erupts.   Then everybody stands up and expresses shock and concern and then calls for mitigation when these things could be prevented. Why do we always talk about solving problems but not preventing problems? I have a big problem with that. 

What is happening in Kenya is extremely painful! But we know that it is not only the results of an election dispute; it is something that has been waiting to happen. It has been waiting to happen in Kenya; it is waiting to happen in Uganda; it is waiting to happen in other places. There is a common saying that you can hide your head in the sand if you wish but I insist that nobody has a right to hide their head in the sand any more. 

MR ACHIA REMIGIO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The motion on the Floor is to try to advance the agenda for peace, the agenda for mediation and the agenda for stability not only in Kenya but in the region. Mr Speaker, we have just been discussing and you have urged and guided Members to try to advance and make positive efforts, to be sensitive to what is happening in Kenya, to try to use a language and contributions that advance for peace and stability in the region. 

Then, Mr Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to impute that the unfortunate situation in Kenya is waiting to happen in Uganda? Can the hon. Member give us information to the fact that there is a plan that election violence or for that matter conflict in Uganda and the killing of people is waiting in this country? Can we be given information and if not, is she in order to impute, to prospect and insinuate that Uganda is about to become unstable and violent? 

THE SPEAKER: I think she is emotionally touched by what is happening in Kenya but at the same time she might be out of order if she has an early warning mechanism which she does not reveal to us. (Applause) If you have an early warning system, please reveal to us so that we can use it. But please curtail your contribution. 

MS KAMYA: I will curtail my contribution, Mr Speaker, but this House is aware that we have had two election disputes in this country. During those election disputes, the courts ruled on presidential elections that were not free and fair.  But the courts went ahead and said, “Even so, let the present government form government,” but there is no provision for that in the Constitution of Uganda. There is only one way, through a free and fair election. And the last time –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  What did the courts say?

MS KAMYA: The courts ruled that the elections should not be repeated. But Mr Speaker, I am saying that according to the Constitution of Uganda, there is only one way through which you can form government: a free and fair election. I do not see any other provision.

I have heard very beautiful thoughts on this Floor this afternoon urging Ugandans to be together in this; to hold back our sensitive emotions. Mr Speaker, I started by saying that let us just not talk about a solution without talking about a problem or how to put out the fire. We may not have a solution; we may not do much as Uganda to reverse the situation in Kenya but we should take a big lesson from it so that it does not happen to Uganda. We cannot run away from the fact. The lesson we must take is that the fruits of injustice, no matter how long it takes, will come home to roost. And that is what we must work against.

Mr Speaker, the minister’s statement here reminded me of a Biblical story where - those who read the Bible will remember - ladies were crying when Jesus was hanging on the cross and someone found them and said, “Ladies why are you crying, what are you doing?” And they said, “We are crying because Jesus is dead.” And he said, “Cry for yourselves and your children.” While we are crying for Kenya, I think we should be crying for Uganda. I do not want us to cry for Uganda but let us be serious and look at ways to stop what is happening in Kenya from happening here. No one wants that to happen here.

Finally, I am quoting the Bible. What is happening in Uganda and what we should prevent from happening - we know that people are tortured   and harassed on trumped up charges. These are not my words; they are contained in four reports of the constitutional Uganda Human Rights Commission report. Read the Uganda Human Rights Commission report. The summary of all the Uganda Human Rights Commission report, Mr Speaker, is that torture and abuse of human rights are perpetrated by security agencies of government. That is the Uganda Human Rights Commission report, which you can all refer to. 

Mr Speaker, I really want to be very serious on this matter. I have been summoned personally to Police on Monday -(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, with due respect there is a motion by hon. Kakoba Onyango and on this motion you can either support or oppose. But actually I have been listening attentively right from the beginning and I am actually at a loss. Initially, you supported the motion but the justification you are bringing, even the examples you are quoting put me at a loss because when you bring issues of the court, you know very well the time you have been in this House that it becomes – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, my guidance is that, let us be relevant to the motion otherwise we are going to spend a lot of time here. I believe you have concluded.

MS KAMYA:  I am concluding, Mr Speaker. In conclusion, my sister Margaret Muhanga said we should not take this peace in Uganda for granted. But this peace is not going to be supported by guns the way it is today; this peace is going to be supported by a just system. I support the motion, but I did qualify it that I was debating on points 3,4,5 and 6. 

And finally, Mr Speaker, point 6 says that it urges Ugandan leaders and the public at large to desist from making statements that may ignite tribal or inter-state conflicts. While I agree, these people are sounding wakeup calls, and no one has a right to hide their head in the sand at the situation that is happening in Kenya. 

I support the mediation efforts in Kenya and I support this motion but we should look out for Uganda not to take that direction.

5.21
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion on the Floor, but I have some reservations, beginning with No. 6. This is where we are urging Ugandan leaders and the public at large to desist from making statements that might ignite tribal and or inter-state conflicts.

This statement does not seem to bear the facts as to what the underlying problems in the Kenya crisis are. It is true that the crisis has manifested itself in a tribal form, but those are not the factors. Earlier, somebody was contributing and brought about the issue of the Luo and the Kikuyu. I am not aware if the honourable member knows that Kikuyu and Luo land do not have a boarder. 

The majority of the killings that are going on in the rift valley are between the Kalenjin and the Kikuyu who have settled in the Kalenjin area and in the southern rift, it is between the Masai and the Kikuyu; and the central issue in the rift valley is land.

Historically, the land, which was taken over by the colonialists – there was a noble goal of returning the land to the Africans in the process. But the process of returning the land saw people close to the president of the time, the late Jomo Kenyatta and his cronies and people from his tribe, coming to settle in the area of the rift valley. Those are the factors which are driving the conflict. I do not think it is statements because when you go on the ground - I recently had an opportunity to be on a fact-finding mission for AMANI forum which took me into the north rift. The issue there is land! 

In Uganda, we are touching on the land question, but we must be aware; we can have serious repercussions. How we handle it and who seems to benefit from that process is going to have a telling future. We can blame it on statements of leaders, but if the feelings of the people are not taken into account, there is going to be a serious problem.

The election triggered the conflict, but the factors are different in the various areas. In the far western   Kenya, the majority of the victims have been shot. In the rift valley they are being hacked and killed by spears. In Nairobi, shooting is also the predominant means. That means that the factors or the forces are not the same across the board. 

So, I am very uncomfortable with classifying it as a tribal conflict because in essence, it is not. It is a conflict over resources and aborted expectations. 

Hon. Muhanga I think mentioned the issue of the process of the election. But there is one point which you missed out on that. There were opinion polls throughout the process. The highest that the ODM leader got in the opinion polls was 51 percent. The lowest was 46 percent. The highest that President Kibaki got in the opinion polls was 44 percent and the lowest was, I think 38 percent. This was through the opinion polls by the various organisations, media houses, and all those who generally engage in it. The people were expecting an ODM victory. So, it is not unexpected for ODM to start celebrating; the process looked like it was going in that direction. And in fact, the opinion polls were done throughout the country except in one region, and that is the region where the opposition is bringing out the issue of serious rigging taking place. You must bear that in mind as we try to do this.

And the number of the Members of Parliament returned by various parties bears witness to this clear manifestation. Of the 207 seats declared, ODM had 104. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akena, don’t you see that when you start siding and making the assessment yourself, you are not helping the situation. According to you, you think ODM won. Maybe it did, maybe it did not!

MR AKENA: Mr Speaker, I believe ODM won. I am not going to deny that. I went to Kenya and I opted not to be an observer because I felt I had an interest, but there are certain facts which we cannot deny. The chairman of the electoral commission stated on record that he did not know who won the election. At the process of the tallying, he mentioned that he could not locate his returning officers and requested the police to assist.

THE SPEAKER: I think our intention here is to appeal to our brothers and sisters to forget what happened and reconcile. But when we start saying that, we alienate one side to the other and we cannot bring them together. That is the problem.

MR AKENA: Can I conclude then, Mr Speaker? The third point, commending the mediation efforts especially of the former UN Secretary General, I would like to support that effort because that addresses the concerns. 

He came up with four points: the first being calling upon leaders to work towards ending the violence as quickly as possible. Then calling on both sides to support the humanitarian efforts; the third point is to address the issue of tallying and the fourth is to deal with the historical issues that have manifested in this crisis. So, I think that will cover my sentiments and my briefs. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.29
MR JEROME KADDUMUKASA (Independent, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. But I will mainly dwell on point No.3. I think when hon. Kakoba talked of the East African Community, he meant the chairman, who is our President and hon. Eriya Kategaya, the minister in charge. 

If this disaster befell one of the countries in West Africa, we would have had the ECOWAS Parliament pronouncing itself immediately, or in Southern Africa we would have had SADAC Parliament pronouncing itself immediately on that matter. But here I can see a list of individuals some in their individual capacities or some because of the offices they head. But I have been disturbed to learn that the East African Parliament is only planning to convene tomorrow to handle this issue which has been there for more than a month. 

I beg to amend this motion and include point 7 which should not condemn but remind our Members in the East African Parliament their role if such disaster befell our region or if such a disaster in future befell one of the member states. In fact, I think they gave room –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, when you read on the front page, then “Recognizing that Kenya is a neighbouring state and that the treaty establishing the Eastern African Community seeks to promote peace and stability within the region…” – don’t you think this is recognising that it is our function as East African Community to do this? Does it need another resolution?

MR KADDUMUKASA: Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable member for giving way.  As part of the efforts to find a mediated solution to the conflict in Kenya, there were several delegations including the AMANI forum, but the East African Legislative Assembly also sent a delegation. This morning, I was reading through my mail and I found a report from the EALA actually sent to you, which copy I believe if it was not to me only it must have been sent to all Members of Parliament. So, it would be unfair to condemn our colleagues. They were actually working on it. I can testify that Gen. Muntu who is from FDC was part of that delegation and this message which was sent this morning was from hon. Nusura Tiperu. So, let us not condemn them; they have been working.

MR KATUNTU: I would like to give further information. Apparently, there are several committees of the EALA and two committees charged with the issues relating to elections have been meeting in Arusha and they have also met here. So really some organs of the EALA have been meeting and discussing the issue. Maybe the plenary has not sat but I think the EALA has done its role.

MR KADDUMUKASA: Thank you, for that information. Maybe, they are moving too slow because it has given room to some individuals to make statements like the one of Gen. Kagame who gave a wonderful advice to the army in Kenya to takeover. But, Mr Speaker, if the Parliament had pronounced itself all that would not have come.  Thank you.

5.34
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would have supported this motion considering the issues raised and the concerns we have but I have reservations.  One, it is a question of precedent. I can see item number one here that Parliament resolves as follows: “That it collectively condemns the post-election violence, killing of innocent people, civil unrest and tribal conflicts taking place in Kenya.”  For purposes of consistence and for generations that will go through our records, I recall hon. Otto and I presented a motion to this House to condemn violence in Zimbabwe. It was the hit and move - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Who moved? 

MR LUKWAGO: It was hon. Otto who moved it and I seconded it. It was in the midst of violence being committed against Morgan Shangarai and his people who were being clobbered and so on and so forth. The motion was thrown out on one simple ground that Zimbabwe is a sovereign state and this Parliament has got no mandate whatsoever to condemn anything happening in an independent and sovereign state. That precedent –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. It is not comparable assuming that was the position. The two situations are not comparable. This one is not selective, blaming this side. It is only general condemnation that people are killing each other.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I recall in supporting that motion, we did not say we were condemning Mugabe or Mugabe’s government. We did say in the motion that we were condemning violence in Zimbabwe regardless of whoever was behind it, causing it and regardless of the victims of violence. We were condemning the act of violence in Zimbabwe. That was the spirit of the motion. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The two things are not comparable, with due respect.

MR LUKWAGO: What I wanted to say here, in my training as a lawyer, is that I have come to learn that one thing is, if you set a precedent and you know it, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I know it very well.

MR LUKWAGO: To depart from that precedent you have to give reasons.

THE SPEAKER: But there is what they call distinguishing. I am able to distinguish a case from another and I am saying it is not applicable.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Lukwago.  Mr Speaker, I had also read that, but in the spirit of not apportioning blame or inciting things, I was going to come with an amendment to say, “We express our deep regrets that those things -” In that case, we would accommodate all sentiments because we want to see a process of dialogue amongst them.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR LUKWAGO: That is far better –(Laughter)- but condemning a sovereign state, we have a precedent in this House and we have not set it aside and we have no reasons to depart from it.

Finally, I would like to express my views about item number 6. This omnibus recommendation that, “We urge Ugandan leaders and the public at large to desist from making statements that may ignite tribal and/or inter-state conflicts. “ This statement or recommendation is ambiguous and it is subject to misinterpretation and it could cause again more confusion. You know for sure the way I can interpret it myself –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Number what?

MR LUKWAGO: Number 6. In my opinion, if I was to be selfish, I would interpret it to include the statement by President Museveni congratulating Kibaki. Depending on the way you look at it, my interpretation would state that by congratulating Kibaki, he exacerbated the situation and incited violence so we are directing him to desist.

THE SPEAKER: Prima facie. Is hon. Kibaki the President of Kenya and under prima facie did he win the election?

MR LUKWAGO: That question is difficult for me to answer given the fact that even Mr Kivuta, the Chairman of the Kenyan Electoral Commission was not so sure whether  (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I am talking about prima facie, in the Kenyan Gazette. What does it say? The fact that the Chief Justice swore in President Kibaki and signed the book and the fact that the latter convened the Parliament of Kenya –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: My contribution was on the interpretation of this statement. However, in relation to prima facie, you can say that Kibaki is the President of Kenya. However, it is also true that there are certain sections of Kenyan society as well as some Ugandans who are not comfortable with President Museveni’s statement.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, in any given country there are agencies that have a role to play. The agency that decides in the elections in Kenya is the Electoral Commission and the results are evidenced by the Gazette. However, what was done can be undone. That is why I am emphasising prima facie.

MR LUKWAGO: Let me wind up my submission.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that the hon. Member insinuated on a very good point by bringing in the issue of congratulations sent by the President of Uganda. To be specific, I want to seek clarification from him or the mover of the motion concerning the intention of number 6. This is because he has brought the congratulation issue although the statement is saying that it urges Ugandan leaders - We expect that this statement is going to be circulated internationally to leaders, the UN and ambassadors to show the solidarity of the Parliament of Uganda. Can’t somebody later construe this statement to include statements made by Members of Parliament and other leaders? I just wanted to seek clarification.

THE SPEAKER: My interpretation is that, we should not exploit tribal differences and stress them, for example, by saying, “The Kikuyu went and took land belonging to the Kalenjin,” because when you do that then they start thinking that it is a serious matter and pursue it. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, when you look at this, it is not only restricted to igniting tribal conflicts but also inter-state conflicts. Therefore, if you talk of inter-state conflicts, this statement by President Museveni fits in well because he puts Uganda at loggerheads with Kenya by congratulating Kibaki whose victory is being disputed. We can make it better; I am helping you. Otherwise, I will go out and interpret it that way if that is what you want.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, improve on it.

MS MUGISA: Hon. Lukwago, the information that I want to give is that, the President did not only congratulate President Mwai Kibaki, he also called Raila Odinga and you are aware of this. He spoke to Raila Odinga at length, has met him and they are friends. That is what I want to tell you. He has pronounced himself on this and said he met both parties. He asked Odinga to go to court and Odinga said he could not because of the long process in Kenya’s judicial system. He also advised Mwai Kibaki to set up a commission of inquiry, which can help maybe propose a re-run. Therefore, he has really been neutral. Let us be objective on this issue. I thank you.

MS LAGADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Member. I would like to inform you that statements by leaders like those saying that, “3000 UPDF soldiers were shipped to Kenya” - I don’t know whether by submarines belonging to Kenya or Uganda; those kind of statements can cause inter-state wars. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you think that you can improve on it, please do so.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, if there is resistance we can leave it at that. I can see that we are broadening the interpretation so let us all fit in our own interpretations.

THE SPEAKER: But you can improve on it.

MR LUKWAGO: If that is what they want - I am serious on this matter, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Improve on it.

MR LUKWAGO: I am of the view that this paragraph serves no purpose. We can scrap it completely as we have paragraph five, which captures the same intention. It states that, “It urges the Government of Uganda and the international community to consolidate efforts aimed at finding a lasting and peaceful solution to the crisis”. That captures everything so that even these tribal sentiments -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall take recommendations one by one and then if there is any improvement, we shall take it up when we come to the end.

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to support hon. Lukwago because this statement is a –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He has agreed to a solution.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your indulgence that whereas the Parliament of Uganda is pronouncing itself on the situation in Kenya, over 1,000 human beings have lost their lives. When I look at the resolution that we are making, I am wondering and seeking your indulgence that at what stage can we urge the multilateral intervention? As negotiations and mediations are taking place, lives are being lost, couldn’t it be wiser for Parliament to also urge for a multilateral and not unilateral intervention to keep peace. I think we are at a stage where peace should also be kept. Couldn’t we add number seven as an amendment?

The second guidance I am seeking is, listening to our presentations –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is an ingenious way of making a contribution.

MR MUKITALE: Yes, we are discussing what is happening in Kenya.

THE SPEAKER: No, but we discuss in a manner that is allowed by our rules. I said I am covering these people and I will come to you. When your opportunity comes, that is when you do it. 

Honourable members, do you think now we should not deal with the other items on the order paper? We had hon. Akena’s statement and then hon. Lukwago. If you agree, we spend up to 7.00 p.m. listening to you. 

5.49
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to bring one issue which has been left out both in the minister’s statement and in the motion which is crucial. The Leader of Opposition has indicated to you that a number of observation teams went to Kenya; there was the Pan-African Parliament that had parliamentarians who conducted the observation mission, the EALA, AMANI, EU, USA led by the US Ambassador to Kenya and we had domestic observers in Kenya. All these reports are available and they were all designated and they were accredited by the Electoral Commission of Kenya.

It should be noted that it is on the basis of the verdict of the observers, international and national, that the US Ambassador immediately advised the US Government to withdraw their congratulatory message which they had originally sent to Kenya. It was also on the basis of the joint observation verdict, domestic and international, that made the US Secretary of State to study the initial process of the negotiation and later all these other mediation and negotiation efforts are being based on the findings and recommendations by the observation mission and also by the reports from the Electoral Commission of Kenya. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think you are dealing with what happened in the election and the reports. We are now trying to solve a crisis that has arisen. It might have been that voting was this and that – we are no longer concerned with that. We are trying to see how you bring these people together. 

MS AMONGI: That is why I am saying I am coming to the amendment because on the preamble it is stated, “Whereas Parliament notes that the presidential, parliamentary and civic elections were held on 27th December and whereas there have been situations of incidence of violence…” I brought that aspect because I want the mover of the motion to recognise in the preamble that whereas we are also aware that the international and national observers made a verdict which indicated that the elections did not meet international standards of free and fair elections, the basis of which led to the violence. Because the pre –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That does not solve the problem. 

MR GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, the issue of America withdrawing its original support, we should take it a bit carefully because there is a US presidential candidate who is also half a Kenyan and, therefore, it was only prudent for USA to take a stance which would not hurt its own elections. We should be careful that it was in the interest of the American people rather than the interest of the African people to take the stance it took. I beg to advise.

MS AMONGI: Honourable minister, I do not want to go deep into the issue, but that is the fact of the matter because I was there and I have documents but we cannot go into that now. 

Mr Speaker, the second basis of this motion which brings number five as a resolution also does not have a basis of the preamble. Number five is attempting to address the question of consolidating efforts to finding a lasting solution while the preamble does not address the root cause of this problem.

Hon. Jimmy Akena indicated some of the issues and, Mr Speaker, you were insisting on indicating that probably that should not be an issue of concern. But if I am to quote a writer from Kenya of Africa’s New Governance Model: debating form and substance - in this book, which I can lay on Table, there is a chapter on Kenya that deals with the question of debating form and substance of the governance model in Kenya and it brings out systematically how the land question is at the centre of this and the historical perspective –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: That is a book edited by Oloka Onyango. Don’t you think that those people mediating have that copy? For us, we are just appealing that let us support the mediation efforts. What you are talking about is ethnicity which is quoted in the book. We do not have to go into all those details at this juncture.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, my concern is for the motion under five about finding a lasting solution to have a preamble which recognises the fact that the pre-colonial historical factor has contributed to the current event. If you run away from the fundamental cause of a problem, you are not addressing what you want to address under five. That is what I am trying to imply, that the mover of the motion brings a statement in recognising the historical factor even if you do not go into details of saying it is land or ethnicity. Otherwise –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, Kenya is a sovereign state with its own history and Uganda too is a sovereign state. I do not know why we should imagine that the colonial history in Kenya is a factor which has brought about the unrest that has been sparked by the recent election. These are unnecessary details for us; we do not need to go into these unnecessary details. It is terrible because if we assume that we know and yet we are very far away from Nairobi, it will be a disaster for us. I think we should really steer clear from controversies. I thank you. 

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, let me make it clear that I am not assuming; that I have read. Yes, I know the historical factor and fundamental root cause and it is up to this House to reject the inclusion of the fact that we put a provision recognising the fundamental root cause. It is up to the House to reject it but it is my belief that if you want to address the lasting – under No. 5 you are saying, “To consolidate efforts aimed at finding a lasting and peaceful solution.” You cannot do that without addressing the root cause. But it is the wisdom of this House, which I respect. Thank you. 

5.59
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is going to be very brief but I want to differ a bit from the movers of the motion because the motion seems to be glossing over the situation. If you did not read about Kenya, it could be found in any report from any part of the world handling conflict resolution, it is very vague. It commends the mediation by UN. 

Somebody may not understand that something is happening around Kenya because we are glossing over the recommendations and not specifically targeting what is really happening in Kenya because like my colleague, hon. Betty has said, underlying causes should have clearly been highlighted so that the different captions on the resolution have an impact on the unique volatile situation in Kenya. 

I want to suggest and also differ from my honourable colleague, hon. Odit, that we needed especially on caption five, to urge also the government of Kibaki or of Kenya to embrace the suggestions initiated by the different players in the mediation process. This is because if we do not urge the Kenyan government to be part and receptive of the process –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have already made a contribution to this debate and I did indicate that I was unhappy because the material that was given to the House was not adequate and I also recognise the fact that we would have made this document too bulky if all the information we wanted was included. It would have probably taken us a couple of days to go through. I want to assure the colleagues on this side of the House that I took trouble to make sure that we incorporated all issues we felt were necessary to bring to this House. This is a serious institution concerned about what is happening in Kenya. There is no way we could have made it water tight. So, I am reacting because of the way you said that we are glossing over the matter. I do not think so. We did not gloss over anything and you can trust me on this, I will not be party to glossing over such an important matter, but there is still a lot that we can incorporate in this. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you so much, but the Speaker has guided me that I need to finish off. The seconder of the motion has also agreed that there are gaps and they needed some beef on the skeleton. So, that is why I am urging that when we are urging the Government of Uganda and the international community to consolidate efforts, we should also urge the government of Kibaki or in Kenya to also find a lasting and peaceful solution to the crisis. Thank you so much. 

MR KATUNTU: May I have a suggestion to balance? 

6.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to qualify myself in standing to debate this motion. I did my Masters at the University of Nairobi from 1980 and I did my PhD in Nairobi. I came back to Uganda in 1988. So, I know many other things about Kenya that many of you that have debated probably do not know. But I can tell this House that the day the announcement of the election results came, I actually literally cried because I knew that the worst could easily come to Kenya and therefore, that is why I think we must all support a motion that pushes Kenya without sides, to a resolution of this conflict. 

Sitting here watching even us who are in Uganda, we already have sides. It is true that my party, FDC, did not go to Kenya but I can assure you that if Odinga had won, we would have been at the swearing in. That is a fact. And it is also true that since the events of Kenya took place, we have sat, as a party, on a number of occasions and we have resolved even to send a delegation to Kenya to help in the process. This is because much as politically we were with Odinga before the elections, the events that are now unfolding in Kenya are not about Odinga or Kibaki. It is about Kenya and the reality that they failed to see or to consider much earlier. 

I would like to draw the attention of those who may insinuate ethnic basis for this conflict to two Kenyan ladies, one of whom writes in The East African every week. For those who read The East African, there is a lady called L. Muthoni Wanyeki who writes for The East African. She is definitely a Kikuyu. I know her because I lived in Kenya for eight years. She is the Executive Director of the Kenya Human Rights Commission. I wish Ugandans who want to help Kenya would take trouble to read the things that Kenyans themselves write.  

In yesterday’s The Monitor newspaper, there was an article which read, “Post-election situation in Kenya: Kenya can learn from flying geese”. This article is written by Betty Maina who is the Executive Director of the Kenya Association of Manufacturers. As you know, industrialists are extremely concerned about what is in Kenya. The other author is Arthur Muliro. He is now based in Rome. I would like to bring this to the attention of the House because it is very important, as you pronounce yourself on the motion, that we have a clear understanding of the problem in Kenya. 

This article which is here says that in 2000, a multi-ethnic team of 60 Kenyans from different professions met several times to consider various outcomes for Kenya in the future. In other words, they did what they call visioning for Kenya and they published a scenario which shows the future for Kenya, taking into consideration four scenarios. I would like to read it because it is so important. If we do not help Kenyans, Kenya is in real trouble. I will talk first for Kenya. Let me quote. According to the team, “The future of Kenya will be determined by the interaction of two major uncertainties”-(Interruptions). Please, allow me to help the House.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you Prof. Latigo, for giving way.  We are discussing a very sensitive diplomatic issue and when we came here you guided us that we should go by the motion. I would like to appeal to you, Mr Speaker, that the Head of the Government here - I have three people that I could refer to. I could refer to hon. Rugunda, hon. Mbabazi, or hon. Adolf Mwesige. They are all my colleagues or my former colleagues in foreign affairs, and this is not the way we discuss a matter like this one. Let us handle this matter diplomatically and let us not refer to newspaper articles. 

In diplomacy, we do not refer to newspaper articles because we cannot substantiate them; somebody can deny them. Mr Speaker, I beg you to protect our country and to protect our President so that we discuss this matter professionally and in a manner that can help our country and the region at large. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is a former diplomat -(Laughter)

PROF. LATIGO: Please, my honourable colleague, just allow me to help the House. This one is on a website - the Kenyan scenario. I can give you the website. You have not even heard the context. Why don’t you listen? This is what they said. According to the team, the future of Kenya would be determined by the, “Interaction of two major uncertainties: when and how economic recovery would come about and when and how we would determine how we wanted to be governed and the basis of political legitimacy.” 

Now, they created four scenarios. They called the first scenario, which is the worst case scenario, the El Niño. These are Kenyans who did this and this is what they said, “Would confusion and inertia thwart efforts to transform both the economic and political models? If so, tension would be heightened and Kenya would fracture into regional and ethnic enclaves with new systems of government within them.” This is a scenario of decline and disintegration that was labeled El Niño. 

“Would the transformation concentrate on reviving only the economy and postpone agreements or needed changes in the political structures and environment? This would result in short-term economic gains that would be used to buy off demands for political reform. Nonetheless, the political tensions would eventually re-emerge and if not addressed, throw the country back onto the El Nino path.” This scenario of initial rapid gains but full of inequalities and instability was labeled Maendeleo. 

“Would the transformation be long drawn out, focusing on institutional re-organization and the creation of democratic and locally accountable institutions?” Okay, I will now leave the quotation. Let me just go to the point I am making. The point I am making is that we should support this motion. Secondly, that the motion that we support should reflect our genuine concern and restraints and should avoid issues that can be misunderstood. In both the statement by the minister and this statement, for instance, we as a country have not expressed regrets at the fact that so many Kenyans have died in this conflict. 

More so, for Parliament, two honourable members of the Kenyan Parliament were killed. A motion about the crisis in Kenya that does not make mention of the MPs of Kenya who were killed by our Parliament would really be insensitive and inadequate. 

Lastly, I would like to reaffirm the issue that hon. Lukwago raised that paragraph 6 should be deleted. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, we have heard Members and even listened to lectures from different colleagues on this matter and I think we are in position to pronounce ourselves on this matter. I, therefore, wish to move under Rule 68 that the question be now put. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand what he is saying. The debate ends here and then we process the motion as it is. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, what we are going to do there are six or seven sorts of resolutions. I think we go one by one so that if there is a need to improve on one, then we can do it. Do you not think so instead of doing it omnibus?

Honourable members, No.1, that it collectively condemns the post-election violence, killing of innocent people, civil unrest, tribal conflicts taking place in Kenya. We are not condemning a sovereign state. We are condemning what is taking place in Kenya. We are condemning the act of killing each other.

PROF. LATIGO: Given that we had discussed this matter and I had said that we would move an amendment, I would like to propose that item one be amended to read that, “Parliament collectively expresses its regrets at the post-election violence, killing of innocent people, civil unrest and tribal conflicts taking place.”

THE SPEAKER: Is that okay?

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I rise to support that amendment because it makes the same point without infringing the diplomatic nicety we require to talk to our friends. So, we support it.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KATUNTU: I seek your indulgence. I think I could assist in redrafting this particular resolution such that it clearly captures what Prof. –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The professor said “regrets”, we have removed, “condemns” and we have said “regrets”, what else –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Can I go ahead, Mr Speaker? That “Parliament collectively regrets the circumstances that led to civil unrest and condemns the” – (Interjection) - Yes, I am adding some value to this. I have been a legal draftsman and I know what I am talking about. Because there is a reason; you are regretting the circumstances and you want now to capture the diplomatic etiquette. You regret the circumstances then what you are actually condemning is: one, the post-election violence, killing of innocent people and tribal conflicts. That one you can condemn and it has no diplomatic problem. What you can regret are the circumstances leading to this criminality. I thought we would –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have heard. He is proposing another amendment. Can I put the question? 

(Question put and negatived.)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also did point out one inadequacy in us not extending our condolences about the deaths. The right place for it to come really is as a new No.2.

THE SPEAKER: For the Members of Parliament who died? 

PROF. LATIGO: I had just drafted that, “Parliament extends its heartfelt condolences to the families of all the people who have lost their loved ones as a result of the crisis and in particular to the families of hon. Were and hon. Too of the Parliament of Kenya.” I do not have the full names.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, this is an added paragraph. 

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I think I support the amendment but I would like to amend the amendment, it is an addition really, by not making reference to the names of the people that have been killed because they are so many. We actually do not have the names, we just happen to have known about the MPs but you never know how important the other ones are.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, this is an expression of a condolence message. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now the third, which is the second, it calls upon all parties involved in the conflict to embrace the peace initiatives by various national and international groups and persons aiming at resolving the crisis. 

MR DOMBO: Insert “eminent” before persons so that it reads: “…international groups and eminent persons, aimed at resolving the crisis.”

THE SPEAKER: Does it do any harm? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We go to the third one, which is now the fourth that commends the mediation efforts initiated by among others, the former UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan; the African Union and the East African Community. I now put the question in respect of that too -(Interruption)

MR ACHIA REMIGIO: Mr Speaker, Kofi Annan was sent by the African Union. In that respect, the person of Kofi Annan may be –

THE SPEAKER: No, but we are just pointing out these prominent people. The fifth, which is now the fourth, is that we further commend the mediation efforts of His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni as the EAC chairman and as a sign of good neighbourliness. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, if we can listen to each other it will be good. When you look for example at 4, it is covered in 3 because these are mediation efforts initiated by the East African Community. President Yoweri Museveni is the Chairman of the East African Community. So, how are you divorcing the two? Can we do this thing professionally? I really request you, for example, when you are not even listening - can I make my point, hon. Amama Mbabazi?

THE SPEAKER: But does it do any harm; because we have pronounced ourselves on this? It is a question of recognition of the president of a country.

No. 5, which is 6 now, urges the Government of Uganda and the international community to consolidate efforts aimed at finding a lasting and peaceful solution to the crisis. I put the question –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: That whereas we are urging the international community to consolidate efforts aimed at finding lasting and peaceful solutions; I was seeking your indulgence the other time when I raised guidance, because the people are dying while these ones are taking tea in Nairobi. Why don’t we be bold enough –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, should we include the phrase, “helping the displaced?” Is that what you want to put?

MR MUKITALE: No, to include a peace keeping element.

THE SPEAKER: No, that will come out of the mediation. Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We now move to 6, which should be 7, and which urges Ugandan leaders and the public to desist from making statements that may ignite tribal and/or interstate conflicts. Yes, clarification.

MR KAKOBA ONYANGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The intention of bringing in this resolution was to make sure that we do not ignite tribal sentiments by trying to divide people because this has been one of the big causes of the problems there. So we thought that if such statements went on to be made, they could cause problems between Uganda and the neighbours, keeping in mind that actually some of the tribes we have in Uganda do live across the borders of both countries. That was the intention of this resolution. But it is up to Parliament to take a decision.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appeal to the movers of the motion – you see this statement other than actually helping us, it can even inflame the debate and there is absolutely no point why we should allow that to happen. The rest of the motion is very good; the point we want to deliver has been made and the support that Kenya needs from our Parliament has been delivered. So, let us just delete it.

THE SPEAKER: Do what?

PROF. LATIGO: I propose that let it be deleted because as much as we say that we desist, actually even the word “desist” tells you that you cannot stop it. So, if you can’t stop it, why do you have a motion to do what you cannot do?

THE SPEAKER: Well, the motion is that we delete. You see, when you have a motion for deleting, that motion goes the furthest. Therefore, we start with that one because if you delete, then the question of amending does not arise. So we should start with pronouncing ourselves on a motion to delete this particular paragraph. I now put the question –

MR MBABAZI: I had stood but gave way of course to hear the Speaker in silence. Otherwise, I had clearly indicated that I wanted to respond to the motion – 

THE SPEAKER: No, he moved a motion but he said that he wanted to make a contribution to his motion before we vote on it.

MR MBABAZI: So, Mr Speaker, I oppose that motion; I oppose it completely. You know one of the greatest problems we have in this country are some of the statements we make. I said that I really was very happy - by the way I heard people saying, “Should the President be included?” - of course, yes! This Parliament of Uganda urges every leader from the President to the LC I chairman, to NGO leaders. Please, avoid making public statements that may exacerbate the situation in Kenya; that may ignite tribal conflicts.

Like what hon. Lukwago said in respect of recognizing His Excellency Kibaki is not the case; absolutely not. How does that ignite tribal sentiments? No, it doesn’t. So it is important that this Parliament takes a clear position on this question of leaders who make statements that incite tribal sentiments in Kenya, and I hope in future, even in Uganda. Therefore, I oppose the deletion of this.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the mover of the motion, I was of the view that this No. 6, which is now 7 - I am just pleading with the Leader of the Opposition - I think it is important that we leave it there because if someone comes up with a statement and says that President Mwai Kibaki is a thief or he is a president fraudulently, it may incite some negative sentiments, which will be directed to Uganda as a country. And also it depends on the level of leadership; if it is done by an RDC, a Member of Parliament or a minister, it can be misconstrued as being the sentiment of the whole of Uganda. We are already aware that some Ugandan vehicles are being targeted. I feel that as a country we should try to restrain our people. I know how we feel but we should try to restrain ourselves and avoid anything that will make things worse. I just wanted to make that comment. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I don’t want to be misunderstood at all. Because if I was sentimental and did my things in the way that this particular item is supposed to address, I would have stood here to talk about the fact that in the media in this country they have written that they have seen Acholi helping their brothers in Kenya. That is why I am saying that if I was sentimental I would have talked about it. But I know that I cannot –(Interjection)- please, I know that the point I am making is very simple: this particular motion - in my view - will not stop those who are so reckless and they are very many on all sides in this country doing this. This is redundant. You will not stop them but if it pleases the House, I withdraw my -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: So now I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Any other formulation that you want to add? This would be No.8.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence to bring forward this amendment bearing in mind the hospitality that the people of Uganda and indeed the government have accorded to the refugees now in Uganda. My proposal is to put across a commendation to the people of Uganda bordering the Republic of Kenya, the Government of Uganda and the international community for ably hosting the over 12,000 refugees now in Uganda. I had thought that this commendation would be part and parcel but this was hurriedly passed. But I think that it can come as a substantive commendation. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, our brothers and sisters from Kenya did not come for holidays. They came because they have been forced to. When we help them and we start chest thumping how we have helped them - I am even surprised because the honourable minister is a border man and has relatives across the country. For him to stand here and thank himself for hosting his brothers and sisters from across! The fact of the matter is that Kenya hosted us for very many years and their Parliament never passed a resolution thanking themselves for hosting Ugandans. Let us help them in humility and leave it at that.

MR PIRO SANTOS: Mr Speaker, the Kenyans are our neighbours and our brothers and sisters. As Parliament I want to ask my colleagues to pronounce ourselves that we shall continue to mobilise resources and accord them the protection that they deserve as we resolve this conflict.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I support the retention of Item No. 6. You see we are a responsible House. When this goes out, they will say, “When you say ‘desist’, it means some leaders have been doing it.” Why couldn’t they substantiate? I would have been happier if this read: “It urges Ugandan leaders and the public at large not to make statements that may ignite tribal and/or interstate conflicts.”

THE SPEAKER: It is a fact that some statements have been made. This motion is saying, “Please, stop”. 

MR MUKITALE: They already passed No. 7. Whereas we have put this in the motion, I am seeking your indulgence if we make reckless statements. What can we do as the Eighth Parliament to immunise ourselves as Parliament, as an example, from this problem in terms of the question of national integration and unity in diversity? I am about to request whether it is possible to arrange a ten days’ retreat to tell us the diplomatic language, if possible, at Kyankwanzi.

THE SPEAKER: That is a different matter.

MR MUKITALE: I said so but I am saying we need to immunise ourselves.

THE SPEAKER: Let us conclude with this motion since there is no further amendment. Therefore, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much for the input and for sitting here all these hours. As you appreciate the Order Paper, add two important items to include the one of hon. Akena who had wanted to make a personal statement and that of hon. Lukwago on the motion on statutory instruments. Can we handle it or we put them as the first items on Tuesday? So they will be the first items on Tuesday.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have seen various resolutions from various bodies that have been made. And in the conclusion of those resolutions, they say that the presiding officer is urged to forward this resolution to a, b, c and d. So I just wanted to find out, after we have made this resolution, does it just end there as a resolution of the House, or shall we forward it to the appropriate organs in order to support the efforts that they are undertaking?

THE SPEAKER: You can do it but the Clerk normally does that duty of transmitting them. But do you have specific people you want to name so that we can consider them?

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, given that the Parliament of Uganda has committed a whole day deliberating on the issues that are taking place in Kenya, and given the concerns and sentiments we have raised, it would have been good for us to forward this resolution to:

1.	The African Union
2.	The East African Community
3.	The East African Legislative Assembly
4.	The United Nations
5.	The Committee of Eminent Persons who are deliberating; and 
6.	Other Parliaments within the region. 

THE SPEAKER: To the Kenyan Government and to the political parties in Kenya? 

MR DOMBO: Yes; and to all political parties in Kenya.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; is there any objection on this? No. So honourable members, we have come to the end of today’s business but next week we will be dealing with the other two items: hon. Akena’s statement and hon. Lukwago’s statement. Then we shall deal with the Public Service Bill, the Trial and Indictment Bill, the resolution on the authorisation of Government to capitalize National Water, the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, Law Revision, Fines and other amounts of Criminal Matter’s Bill, statement on fuel reserves, and the Tourism Bill; that is at the Committee Stage.

So, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday, 2.00 p.m. I wish you a good weekend.
 
(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)



