Thursday, 9 February 2012

(Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. It seems the message of the Prime Minister did not sink in yesterday. I see a lot of spaces, but I hope that Members are going to come. Nevertheless, you are welcome. 

I just want to say three things: One, that yesterday, I informed you that the President had appointed a Clerk to Parliament and I want to introduce Ms Jane Lubowa Kibirige, who is here. (Applause) She took the oath of office this morning and we have decided that she should learn fast; so this is her first activity as the new Clerk to Parliament.

I also want to amend the Order Paper to include an item to enable the Leader of Government Business to fulfill the requirements of Rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure, which requires the Leader of Government Business to inform the country and the House on the nature of business coming next week. So, I will make that amendment to accommodate the Leader of Government Business.

I also want to remind the Members that His Excellency, the President, will be coming here tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to address the House on the issue of the oil agreements. Otherwise, I wish you a good day and I welcome the Vice-President. I also saw the Member for Busiro North, Prof. Bukenya, you are welcome!

Hon. Anite and hon. Amodoi had matters to raise. Let us start with hon. Amodoi.

2.52
MR CYRUS AMODOI (INDEPENDENT, Taroma County, Katakwi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a petition from my constituents about their land that is about 100,000 acres, which is in Angisa sub-county, and is being grabbed by Uganda Wildlife Authority. This land was vacated by the people in 1957 when the Karimojong cattle rustlers came in and chased away the people there.

In 1964, that was the last time people left that land up to around 2002, and the following years, we saw the rebel activities in this constituency and also more activities of the Karimojong cattle raiders.

When Government was trying to resettle people around 2000 after the camping activities, people were going back to their land but UWA chased them away and only gave them a very small piece of land which is in a camp curving off around eight parishes leaving people with only two villages i.e Angaro and Apopongi in Angisa.

This land, by 1964, when the last occupants left this place, had a population of 318,503 people. There is evidence of this land being inhabited: there are a number of graveyards, a number of administrative units, and a number of other documents that have been found on this land. 

Madam Speaker, the prayer of the people of Toroma in Katakwi is that this land should be given back to them, because currently, they do not have where to stay. They have been forced to live in a camp and on a very small piece of land which is swampy.

They also pray that UWA stops frustrating people on this land; and leaves them with their land so that they can use it fully. They also pray that Government should try to provide them, as it did earlier, with some resettlement packages.

They further pray that Government continues with a programme of disarmament because this land is on the borderline between Karamoja and Katakwi.

Let me lay this document on Table for further action.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister for Tourism is here, it seems this year you are getting challenges.

2.58
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): In accordance with Rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to inform –

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I thought you were going to say something about the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the people of Toroma. I will call you for that later.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I will ask the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and antiquities to look into these problems and others such that they are handled together.

2.58
MS EVELYNE ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern Uganda): Thank you very much Madam  Speaker, I want to thank the Ministry of Finance for finally complying to our demands, we the young people, by ensuring that Shs 25 billion meant for the young people under the youth fund is taken to the banks so that it can be accessed.

This was after you gave us an opportunity as the youth MPs, to come and debate here in the House, and we have finally achieved this target.

Last week, I was in the West Nile sub-region, which is one of the sub-regions that I represent. I was on a radio talk show trying to sensitise the young people on the Shs 25 billion that is to be accessed from the bank account. I gave them the guidelines about how much money an individual could access.

Young people told me how it was very hard for them to access this money because of the requirements that have been requested for in order to access the money.

It is very sad to note that even when we as Parliament resolved that the requirement of training in entrepreneurship from an institution approved by Ministry of Finance, in this case, Enterprise Uganda, should be removed, it has not happened.

I thought that the young people were merely making a lot of noise, but this morning I decided to take the trouble to move in the three banks that are supposed to give this money to the young people. 

I went to DFCU, Centenary and Stanbic banks; they have the requirements, and requirement five says that one should have certificates of attendance of training in entrepreneurship from an institution approved by the Ministry of Finance.

The Bank manager of DFCU, Mr Wilberforce, told me that ever since this money was given to them, not a single youth in the country has ever accessed this money because they do not have the qualifications.

Another point is that they require one to at least have an O’level certificate. The young people are up in arms about this. We had a meeting today and we think young people should benefit from this money. They are saying that when it comes to asking for votes, you do not ask for any certificates; how come you attach academic qualification to the money.

It is very sad and I believe we should bring this back to the ministry, and we maintain what we resolved, because there are young people in this country who do not have an O’level certificate, yet they are doing business and their businesses are doing very well.

I asked the branch manager of DFCU what exactly the problem could be; or whether it was the banks that had set the regulations. He said that they even give loans to illiterate people. They are saying that any young person who is in business can actually access this money.

My concern about this Shs 45 billion is; if we go by this route, this money will only target the young people who are already rich, whose parents are rich and can get them certificates from Enterprise Uganda.

Enterprise Uganda as far as I am concerned has only trained in Kampala, and recently went to eastern Uganda. In 28 districts of Northern Uganda -(Interruption)- someone is saying that they even went to Mbarara; but I am talking for the youth of Northern Uganda who voted for me; none of them has been targeted to get this money.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry gives at least a slot for each and every district. There are only 112 districts. 

If the ministry decided and gave say Shs 15 million to Kamuli, the young people would get the money, but if they put this money in the common pool the way it is now, the young people in urban centres will rush to the bank because perhaps they will have the qualifications, or they can easily run around and get them, then access the money.

The people in Arua, the young person in Agago, the young person in Yumbe cannot access this money; by the time they go to th ebank, the money will be finished.

Hon. Minister of Finance, this time around, we are not going to threaten to say that we will walk naked, because that is one of the reasons why you complied. All we can tell you is that the young people are so hurt and they are already warning you ahead of 2016, that if you do not comply, you stand to lose.

3.05
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Whereas I do appreciate the feelings of my colleague on behalf of the youth, I think we should take this matter a little bit more seriously than an issue of youths being used for purposes of votes.

Whereas the youths can be used to vote and they can vote, they also have a right to exist in this country and the youth that are working must be rewarded by giving encouragement and incentives to work, whether they vote or do not vote.

This problem is coming because this country requires a paradigm shift. Our education system recognises certificates. When you have a driving permit but you do not know how to drive, you will be given a job. Many people have degrees but they are not graduates.

Basically, this is the emphasis of the education system. If money is for people who are working (entrepreneurs), you do not need to go to school to become an entrepreneur; there are many jua kalis on the street who are doing work. So, can the Ministry of Finance help this country? We shall be failing the youth of this country and the people who are working because they do not have a certificate from somewhere.

This could be connivance between the person holding the consultancy to train with the banks so that they ensure that he is factored in. Can the Ministry of Finance help us? This House will be doing a disservice if we just sit here and watch the youth being tortured. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last year I permitted the youths to make a statement on the Floor of this House on this very matter. We had a very lengthy debate and I thought that Ministry of Finance had heard and understood the cries of the people of Uganda.

It seems that what we said here was left here. What you are doing, Minister of Finance, is to discriminate against certain people in this country - the uneducated. What you are doing is to discriminate against the women. I am saying this because in the last census, only two and a half percent of the women had post-secondary education. So, you are locking out the women and the youth. Really, why are you doing this to the young people of this country? Yes, we want answers. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I share the concerns of the youth. I also have youth in my constituency. We are beginning this scheme and it is not possible that we will cover each and everybody. We cannot because we do not have sufficient resources to go around for everybody. This is the beginning. We are using this stage as an experiment and we want to make sure this experiment does not –(Interjections)- Can you protect me, Madam Speaker, so that I finish my statement? No? We are, as I said, experimenting and we want to make sure -(Interruption)

MR NGANDA: Madam Speaker, the first time I heard of these funds, the President told Parliament that this money was supposed to address unemployment among the youth, and he actually listed it as one of the interventions. Is the Minister of Finance in order to tell Parliament that to them, it is an experiment - not only experimenting on human beings, but experimenting on public funds? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the matter of this 44 billion has been publicised in every corner of this country. I do not think you can convince anyone that you are going to pilot with educated people only and leave out the uneducated who are the majority in this country. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, thank you for correcting me. I think I used the wrong word. I should not have used the word “experiment”. I think the word is “piloting” -(Interjections)– yes, it is piloting. We are piloting to ensure that this project does not fail and, therefore -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker -

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue which has been raised is a very serious issue because all of us here represent youths. At the same time, I can see it is a very substantive issue which needs a very substantive response from the minister himself. But the procedural matter I am bringing up is in the way we ministers stand up and before you even complete the first sentence, you are completely derailed with hon. Kassiano saying, “Order,” and this one putting up what. Why can’t you first wait, listen then you respond? This is an honourable august House where we need to listen to each other and then we respond appropriately. 

So, I do not know whether it is procedurally right, Madam Speaker, because as ministers, we are human beings. Sitting here does not mean that we have now been lifted from one level to another level of being a human being. We are still the same. And you really lose a point when you are developing it and you are suddenly cut off; you get problems.

Therefore, I am asking you to guide me on whether it is procedurally right to continue with this interruption?

MR AMOOTI OTADA: Madam Speaker, I think colleagues rising up and interfering or maybe disrupting the submission of a Member is based on the Constitution itself. The issue of discrimination, which the chair raised, is what I would like to remind my good friend about. Article 21, to be very specific (3), is very clear. And I think that any attempt by a Member of this House to go against this Constitution, he should be found to be out of order. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the hon. John Byabagambi, Minister of State for Works, in order to believe that a Member who is speaking in a spirit which is not in consonance with the Constitution should not be interfered with as not being in order with what is required of him or her? Is he in order to ignore this very fundamental Article 21(3) of the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wanted to remind the honourable Minister for Works that I hope he will stand up the next time he is talking -(Laughter)– that the problem we have is that we sat here and spent nearly two hours in this House on that matter. The Minister of Finance said she was going to review the conditions, but five months later, the same conditions are still there. That is why these Members are agitated. We thought we had made a good case for the young people of this country.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Once again I thank you honourable minister for accepting this clarification that I am seeking so that I can become part and parcel of the explanation that you are going to give. I believe the time when Government came up with this programme, it must have had a policy document to back it. You are now telling us that this is a programme at a pilot level. There are 112 districts in this country; will you tell us where this programme is being piloted? Because piloting means it is being implemented in specific areas such that the lessons you learn from there will be applied when you are expanding the programme -(Interjections)- you said so, that this was at a pilot level. 

I would really like to know which districts have been taken as the pilot districts, because when you quickly divide the Shs 25 billion by 112 districts you get roughly Shs 200 million or something like that. So, you help us understand, was this programme well conceived with a proper conceptual framework and a programme document? I mean, that is how a sane or normal Government operates. You do not just wake up and direct Ministry of Finance to dish out an amount of money without such kind of documents. Tell us so that we can follow and appreciate your explanation. Thank you.

MR ALEX RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we were convinced to pass the budget for the youths, we very well knew that the government had got a very comprehensive plan that is going to roll out the youth fund. It is not the first time that the youths are given promises. Even as way back as 2006, the youths have been given promises and they are very eager, and as we speak today, the unemployment rate among the youths is close to 80 percent.
 
This is a crisis. If at this point in time we cannot have the responsible ministry concentrate on this very important segment of our society, then, I think there is a fundamental problem that we have to deal with. When you look at the basement and bedrock of entrepreneurship, if you see the role our jua kalis in Katwe played in facilitating the -(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give to my friend is that during our Committee of Gender, we asked Ministry of Gender to tell us how they have been handling the issue of youths and this is a ministry that hosts the Ministry for Youths. We thought that actually, it would be the best ministry to handle this fund and Ministry of Gender had actually told us that they were having similar programmes of entrepreneurship skills among the youths. Why couldn’t the Ministry of Finance, if they wanted to pilot, learn from what the Ministry of Gender has been doing in terms of how the youths are becoming more of entrepreneurs. 

In addition to that, I believe that this youth entrepreneurship fund would actually have been better handled by the Ministry of Gender, since it has been handling similar programmes for the youth, other than coming up with the Ministry of Finance and not undertaking the needs assessment of various youths across board. 
When you talk of the youths having an O’level certificate, what about a youth who dropped out of school in senior three. What about senior two and what about that youth who has been promised that there is a youth fund that is coming and every youth is going to benefit from that programme?

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence on this. When our scientists at Makerere produced the first car in the history of Uganda, in their submission they confessed and said that without the Katwe input, they would not have come up with the parts that would have made up that car. Which means that our scientists value the non-educated sector, which is very innovative. For me, it is extremely wrong when we look at the statistics of this country; for any sane person to come up and put conditions like an O’level certificate on money meant for young Ugandan entrepreneurs. I think there is something going terribly wrong. 

I would even like the Members of this august House and yourself, Madam Speaker, to agree with me that these banks are not the right avenues through which this fund should be channeled to the youths. These banks, even for us the elite and well qualified Ugandans, and even as businessmen, we find it very hard to access the loans. Their conditions are so prohibitive. The culture of encouraging entrepreneurial Ugandans is so bad in this country and the policy is only favouring external people. That is why these people who can access cheap credit out there - I am a Ugandan; to access a credit in the bank is a nightmare!

Now you can see, we are taking the same fashionable structures to these young people and killing the youth entrepreneurship. This is not right! We have the Micro Finance Support Centre in this country, which has learnt how to deal with the poor people. Why can’t we use these SACCOs; why can’t we use our micro finances, and why should we stick to these very formal institutions that are so prohibitive?

I would really request and implore our Executive to take these matters seriously because these young people out there need jobs. They have to sustain themselves and you are here because they have declared you to be here. So, we do not want other people to recruit these young people to fail us. We want to make sure that this government moves forward and gets an enterprising Ugandan community which is competitive globally.

This means we must soften on these hard stances that make you even leave the innovation and the vision you have in order to go and engage into something. The youth power is full of energy, full of innovation, but this innovation needs to be inspired. This innovation needs to be facilitated and it is the role of Government to do this. So, please go back and really come up with something more tangible for our country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: May I just inform the House and the minister that despite being the Speaker of this country, despite my several degrees in law, UDB declined to give me money for my hotel; Uganda Development Bank and even Post Bank. So, if with all my education and status I cannot get money, why are you subjecting the small people to these conditions? (Applause)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I am glad that I have listened and heard the tempo and the temperature of the Members of Parliament on this issue. Therefore, I am begging this House once again. Next week - I think I will propose Thursday because Tuesday may be a bit too near - we will come with a full statement on the history of the project, the players involved and the conditionalities they have given us so that when we are debating and you are guiding Government, you guide us with knowledge of the background and the information that you need in order to argue your cases out. 

So, Madam Speaker, I beg you to allow me go back to the ministry and come back on this Floor of Parliament. And I am suggesting Thursday next week so that we can give you the whole history because I cannot give you everything now in a simple statement.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, I think what we shall do, we shall devout the whole of the sitting to that matter. No other business except that, to settle the issue of the young people. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS BY THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR NEXT WEEK

3.27
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to inform the House that the following will form part of the Government Business for the week of 13 to 19, February 2012:

Bills for First Reading:

•	The Anti-Money Laundering Bill
•	The Narcotics and the Psychotropic Substances Control Bill
•	Regional Governments Bill
•	Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill
•	Geographical Indications Bill
•	Industrial Property Bill
•	Chattels Security Bill
•	The Companies Bill
•	Marriage and Divorce Bill
•	Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill
•	The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill
•	The Uganda Forestry Association Bill 
•	The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill
•	The Anti-Pornography Bill, 2011

Ministerial statements: 

Statement on the progress of the implementation of Parliamentary resolutions on the cotton sector by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

•	 Statement on performance in PLE, USE and Government commitment to increase salaries of teachers by the Ministry of Education and Sports

•	Statement on financing of roads

•	 Statement on the state of the economy, and now, statement on money for the youths by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 

•	Statement on the nodding disease. This will be for debate. It was laid on Table yesterday.

•	Motion for a resolution from Parliament to borrow Units of Account 46 million and another Units of Account 10 million from the African Development Bank and Nigerian Trust Fund, respectively, for financing the improvement of health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and the City of Kampala by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Madam Speaker, I also want to request and make proposals that this pending trip of the Committee on Local Government tomorrow be suspended due to the pending Presidential Address of the House so that they have an opportunity to hear what will be said. Thank you.

3.31
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi): Madam Speaker, having listened to the Leader of Government Business on the item that he has just concluded, I suggest that the Rules Committee examines this particular rule in view of the fact that the business of this House is determined by the Business Committee chaired by the Speaker. Because I see a lot of untrue statements in this statement in view of the business that was lined up by the Business Committee. Is this rule still relevant? What is superior? Is it the determination of the Business Committee or the statement of the Leader of Government Business? I think we need to examine this. Otherwise, I do not think that in those two days, we shall be able to deal with this business in view of the business that has been lined up by the Business Committee.

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, thank you. In effect, the Leader of Government Business’ statement serves to amend the Order Paper more or less because as far as the Order Paper of the day is concerned, the Leader of Government Business is deferring the business to the week of 13th to 19th. I think Rule 22 is clear; that the Speaker sets the business of the House and not the Leader of Government Business. So, I just need to be guided because as far as this statement is concerned, I think it serves to amend the Order Paper or something. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know. This should not cause you a problem because other than I think Bill No.14 and probably Bill No.12, all the other Bills were discussed in the Business Committee. I think what the Prime Minister is saying is that he will present them for first reading. I think it is okay. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, this rule of our Rules of Procedure, Rule 25, is what I am following and these Bills must be for the first reading. It helps me follow up so that – I do not think there is any contradiction because I am just saying, “Next week, this is what we are intending to do” and I give it ahead of time to the House and the Speaker. I think we will go ahead with her usual procedure. I do not see any problem really.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is okay. You know, we have been blaming the government for not helping us plan together. So, now the Leader of Government Business has said, “I am going to bring the following so that you can set your committees,” so that if there are committees which are handling subjects under the sector, they can finish their other work between now and Tuesday, when he gives them new business. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think we need to scrutinise, because in part (b), Ministerial Statement - because in today’s Order Paper there is a statement on the state of the economy and then, there is a statement on the financing of roads. But in the business to follow next week, in part (b), it is also repeated there. So, we need to harmonise these two such that it is not a repetition because number three says, “The statement on financing of roads (Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development)” for next week. But in today’s Order Paper, we have it also. So, we need to harmonise these two because it is a repetition -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is no problem. In fact, I am happy that the Prime Minister has finally complied with Rule 25. (Applause) Next item. Yes, Committee on Local Government.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, the Committee on Local Government has sought permission from your Office to complete the report and some Members have already set off for Kabale and it is too late for the Prime Minister to request that the committee suspends the business.

THE SPEAKER: I think the absence of 20 Members will not affect the President’s Address. I had given them authority before. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, in future, I think let us agree that such coincidences should be harmonized. If these people left and we are aware that this Presidential visit is going to take place and yet all the same they left –(Interjections)– no, I am just saying that for future incidents like that, the Presidential visit should take precedence over local visits that can be taken afterwards. The President’s speech is very important to all the Members in the House. So, if they miss it, they then come and begin to speak out of context.

So, I appeal to the Speaker that future trips that coincide with the Presidential address to the House should be suspended. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

STATEMENT ON THE RECRUITMENT OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITY

3.40
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I am here to make a statement on the process of the recruitment of the Executive Director for National Forestry Authority. 

Item No.1, Section one, requires me to make a statement today to Parliament and I think the request was made by hon. Tinkasiimire. 

So, today I have the honour to present to this august House the process followed to recruit the Executive Director of National Forestry Authority. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall that the post of Executive Director of NFA fell vacant following the interdiction of the former Executive Director, Mr Akankwasa Daniel, over large sums of money that were allegedly stolen by his spouse from his house; and the none renewal of his contract when it expired. 

In December 2010, NFA advertised for this position through a consultancy firm, namely, JAVA Consulting Ltd. The adverts were ran in the New Vision, the Daily Monitor and The East African newspapers, and a total of 11 applications were received.

Seven candidates were shortlisted by the consultancy firm and in February 2011, they were subjected to a written and oral interview by the same consultancy under the supervision and monitoring of NFA Board of Directors. 

From the oral and written interviews, six candidates were selected and subjected to a psychometric test, otherwise known as aptitude test, by the same firm, and four were selected for oral interviews. The oral interviews were conducted by the NFA Board of Directors with technical guidance from JAVA Consultancy Firm Ltd. 

Out of the four candidates who were finally interviewed, three were recommended for security vetting. Two of the candidates failed to go through the security vetting and the third one was not agreeable –(Interjections)– the third was not agreeable to the development partners in the sector. I was, therefore, left with no option but to re-advertise the position. 

Madam Speaker, I have not given the details of these because they hinge on personalities. 

When applications were being reviewed, a petition was lodged with the IGG’s Office who stopped the whole process pending the investigations. I was summoned to the Office of the IGG and subsequently NFA was cleared and advised to proceed with the exercise.

The position was re-advertised in July 2011 and eight candidates responded to the adverts. The NFA Board of Directors reviewed the applications, but no candidate was found to fit the requirements of the job at that time. Thereafter, a decision was reached to re-advertise the position, therein expanding a variety of professional qualifications and relevant experiences as provided for in the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003, Section 5(2). 

Again, Madam Speaker, I was left with no option but to re-advertise. The position was re-advertised again in November 2011 in the New Vision and Daily Monitor and 31 applications were received. Detailed and comprehensive short-listing guidelines were developed and 19 candidates were shortlisted by a panel of NFA Board of Directors with the help of the Director of Human Resource Management from the Ministry of Public Service. 

These were subjected to a written interview, set by the resource person in the Ministry of Public Service. Ten candidates passed the written interview and were subjected to the oral interview; still with NFA and the Ministry of Public Service.

Pursuant to the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003, Section 55, the Board of Directors recommended four candidates by the names of Michael Mugisa, Francis Mugambe Byaruhanga, John Peter Mujuni and Nicodemus Mugira for security vetting – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members; please continue. 

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Madam Speaker, I have not heard what they are saying so I am going to continue. 

A second petition was lodged in the Office of the IGG regarding the interview process, that led to the selection of the above four mentioned candidates. An explanation was given to the IGG to this effect, who later gave a no objection to proceed with the appointment. 

The vetting exercise was also conducted and thereafter, Michael Mugisa, who was the best candidate during the interviews, was selected and appointed. 

Mr Mugisa assumed office on 1 February, 2012 and I am happy to report that NFA now has a substantive director. 

I would like to assure all of you here and indeed the whole country that all the above have been done in good faith and in national interest. The process of recruiting the Executive Director for NFA has been undertaken in the most transparent manner. For God and my Country!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, the matter was raised by hon. Tinkasiimire; let us see whether he still has issues.

3.48
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga Country West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I want to thank you for your statement. I raised this statement and I was crying that you come and state your case because we read in the press – I picked this matter in the Daily Monitor of 14 June 2011, where you the minister said, after journalists asked you about State House fronting the man you have finally appointed – you confirmed in the same paper that he had been fronted. Madam Speaker, I have also carried a copy of her interview –

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you can come down otherwise you are going to hit the Minister for Security on the head. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: The Minister, hon. Mutagamba, in her person was asked by the journalists about Michael Mugisa – it was written by Gerald Tenywa, a reporter with The New Vision, when he asked her about the irregularity in the appointment, and she confirmed that Michael Mugisa had been fronted by State House. She confirmed in the same paper that Michael Mugisa could not be appointed because he had not been shortlisted. She confirmed that the three individuals she talked about in her statement in paragraph (5), the emerging candidates who were led by Nabanyumya Robert, Andrua Hudson and Arthur Mugisa, none of them could be appointed for security reasons. They asked her if security had given her the report and she said they did not give any reason and that she did not have the report. 

I want to use this opportunity to ask her to lay on Table all the security reports concerning these individuals stating reasons why these people were rejected. (Applause) I had previously laid on Table the same document, but I want to lay it again on Table stating these facts. 

I thank the minister for coming to make this statement. She is stating that various interviews have been conducted. I am requesting the honourable minister to bring and lay on Table the names of all those people who responded to the advertisements and their respective qualifications and CVs. This is just a litany that I personally cannot take in. You are deliberately saying in paragraph (4) that six people responded and consequently - you are avoiding mentioning their names for reasons well known to you. Then when you turn to your favoured candidate whom you very well confirmed was fronted by the State, you state the name. 

Madam Speaker, I again want to go into her statement on paragraph (8). I have been following this matter very closely and there are a number of persons who responded to this subsequent advert. She says they were eight and I want to name them: Richard Kapere, Kiiza Wandera, Arthur Mugisha, Damba John Muli, Michael Mugisa, Kyakulagga Bwino Alfred, Edison Kakuru and Namuyangu Kacha J. Byakatonda – I think this is a former minister. 

These are minutes of the Board of NFA signed by hon. Sarah Nkonge, a PhD holder from Makerere University, the great institution where I went, confirming that on 30th September they could not get any candidate including Mugisa Michael who after two months, has acquired the required experience to be in NFA.

Madam Speaker, hear this; that Mugisa Michael got a Master’s Degree from Nkozi University in 2011, in Development Studies. I have confirmed from Nkozi University that this man has not yet graduated –(Interjections)- this man was a former Chairperson for Kabarole District. The same person named in this paper that I have laid on Table –

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the Vice-President.

MR SSEKANDI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking information from the presenter as to how he procured the document and the authenticity of the document he is producing for us. (Applause) 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, this honourable House is well aware that Monitor Publications Ltd has been in this country for a very long time. They have an office at Namuwongo. This circulation, at a fee by then of Shs 1,000, was affordable and I got a copy. 

Madam Speaker, if they doubt the authenticity of this article, just give me a day and I will bring confirmation that this was published by the Monitor Publications Ltd. There is no time the honourable minister ever went to the press to say that they lied about what she said. 

The second matter relates to the minutes of the board, which were signed by hon. Sarah Nkonge Muwonge. Each page is signed –

THE SPEAKER: I think that is what the Vice President wanted to know - the source.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Definitely, you know that I have been interested in this matter for outstanding reasons – (Interjections) – Please allow me lay it on the Table – (Interruption).

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am raising a very serious point of order in respect to what the honourable member holding the Floor has said. Is it in order for the honourable member to even confess before us in the august House that he has a personal interest in this matter while knowing that he has a personal conflict with the wife of Mr Mugisa Michael? (Laughter) Is it in order for the honourable member to use this august House to fulfil his selfish needs?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am unable to rule on that matter because I do not know who that man’s wife is. I do not know how she is related to hon. Tinkasiimire. So I am not in a position to rule on that. (Applause)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I know, honourable members, you are before a competent Speaker. So, if you think you can come here and allege anything – The interest, I will tell you, is that I personally got a job in Tororo on merit and I worked there for five years. I had never been discriminated against but I was terribly disturbed to read such a thing in the media.

In the summarised minutes of the board, they state that Mugisa Michael, by 30th of September last year, could not qualify because his experience was not at managerial level of an organisation. He did not even qualify to be shortlisted. Madam Speaker, allow me lay the minutes of the board on the Table – (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, the Vice President raised a very pertinent issue of the source and authenticity of the document. The honourable member laboured to explain the source. I have been in this House for some time, but many times the practice is that photocopies of documents are either certified or you submit the original documents. The documents that hon. Tinkasiimire is laying on the Table are neither certified nor original. 

A precedent was set in this House and there was a ruling by the Speaker, if you bother to check the Hansard, to the effect that documents laid on the Table should either be original or certified. So, is it procedurally right for this House to receive documents that are not authentic?

THE SPEAKER: I do not recollect that ruling; but hon. Tinkasiimire, please tell us where you got those documents.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I think some members - because by that time she was a minister and very busy with other activities, she did not get to know that we passed the Whistleblowers Act. So, it is within my mandate, under the protection of the law, under Article 40 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. In any case, if you want information, you will get it if you are a serious legislator. This information can be verified. Even if I brought here a certified copy, you can still say that I got the stamp from Nkrumah Road.

Madam Speaker, using your office – (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Parliamentary Privileges Act was enacted with Parliament being given some immunity in order to enable the members deliberate on all matters without hindrance. We are not going to start preventing people from bringing information to this House. The only thing we may require is to set internal rules that the House cannot make a decision on such matters until that information has been verified. That will enable the progressive use of any information when it becomes available but also it will not prevent members from volunteering information without which Parliament may not be able to deliberate.

May I, therefore, propose that during the amendment of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, this matter be considered so that it is specifically provided for? Otherwise, any attempt by this House to prevent Members of Parliament from providing information to the House because such information is not authenticated yet it can be verified will be procedurally wrong and will hinder democratic governance. I thank you.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Hon. Minister, the statement is yours and so I do not see the reason you should panic. 

Madam Speaker, when you go to paragraph 8, all I am interested in is for her to do the same thing I requested in paragraphs 4 and 5. As chief whistleblower against this injustice, I want to know the names of these people. If they differ from those on the document I have tabled and the minutes signed by hon. Nkonge, I will withdraw my minutes. She has only stated the number but I read the names and there are actually eight who responded. I have given you the names and the summary as to why this man could not be shortlisted. 

I have seen that Michael Mugisa, in paragraph 12, has been appointed. Using this House and your office, I am interested in the minister telling Ugandans where, in a period of two months, this new executive director got the required experience to fill this job. She should also lay on the Table the summary of the security details.

Madam Speaker, I have equally got additional information that this country is running at a risk. The three persons who qualified at first could not be recruited because they opposed the policy of foreign companies, of donors, pushing for leasing of our forests. You know that the issue of leasing is not degazetted. Leasing is done by the Executive Director. 

I am afraid. I come from Bunyoro where half of the land is occupied by forests. I would not want to see a situation where this ED, who has acquired an accelerated experience in two months, leases the Bunyoro forests in an hour. It is very unjust. 

We are taking our children to school; I would be terribly hurt if my child would only be picked simply because he is my son and not because he is qualified to fill the job. I want people to advertise and on merit, we recruit people. This is why we saw cases such as those of Akankwasa, because he was handpicked, turning his bedroom into a bank of Shs 900 million. The same thing, I am afraid, is likely to happen. We are now dealing with issues of KCCA where a one Agaba out of the blue is appointed and he is shooting people. I can cite very many examples. 

Is this where we want to take our country? I am interested in the stability of this nation. I see that the people who qualified were Robert Nabanyumya and Hudson Andrua. One comes from the north and the other from the east. When they qualify, they are not given the jobs; how do you think this affects our security and stability when they pinpoint and say the job was given to a westerner, whom they mentioned in the papers? 

I rest my case, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

4.13
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the statement. I am a committee member of natural resources, a committee I have diligently served for six years so far. 

This was a very big issue in the Committee of Natural Resources. We monitored the activities of NFA and we have carried out field visits regarding the activities of National Forestry Authority. We visited Rakai, Sembabule and many other districts, but at least I can mention those two. One of the activities taking place in the forest lands is that the land for NFA is being leased out and is being used for cattle grazing and not tree planting. 

This brings to question the issue of leadership in the issues regarding NFA. Ironically, the minister here has brought the list of candidates who qualified. In the first interviews that were conducted by JAVA Consultants, colossal sums of money were spent on this activity only for the exercise to be aborted and discarded. That is all nothing but taxpayers’ money put to waste. It is a very great pity. 

A meritorious and credible exercise was carried out and a candidate was identified in the name of Mr Nabanyumya Robert. He is a professional and he has the relevant experience. Going by what was presented to the Committee of Natural Resources, he had all the qualifications that this position required, only to be left aside. It is so absurd that the issue being quoted for his missing this position is “security reasons”. I want to request Government; in all honesty, if you are going to continue wasting taxpayers’ money, rather go handpicking the people you want other than wasting resources to look for candidates. You spend colossal sums of money only to handpick your candidates that you want. 

In the committee, I want to quote and I do not think I am about to withdraw this, as someone who comes from the eastern part of the country, Madam Speaker, I will cry for this beloved country. I will authoritatively say, we are tired of escorting people in prestigious positions who but come from the other side of the country. (Applause)I still stand to repeat this. Once a northerner, an easterner and once in a while someone from the central gets a position on merit and on credit, he is not given the position. Our children are going to bad schools; they cannot compete. When will a Ugandan stand to equitably compete? 

I belong to the Committee of Equal Opportunities. Why are you telling us that we all have equal opportunities in this country? I share the sentiments of hon. Ruhunda. This is your constituent, I understand. I would possibly behave the same way you are doing now. But on this, honestly, I can tell you that we are tired of escorting people who come from other parts of the country when we struggle so hard to study under difficult conditions. We qualify, we compete, but they are given the positions. Where should we go? Tell us where we should go. 

On this note, Madam Speaker, I go to the question of leadership of the Ministry of Water and Environment. National Forestry Authority, NEMA, National Water and Sewerage Corporation are failing to perform because of the leadership of this ministry. We moved a motion in this House on tree planting. Most of the hills of the country are really bare and there was an initiative that there should be at least some trees planted on all the bare hills. A motion was moved by hon. Mukitale and seconded by hon. Faridah Kasasa; what happened? The minister fought this motion and at the end of the day, we are having land for NFA being used for cattle grazing because of poor leadership. 

There is this wetland around Ntinda, Spear Motors; a petrol station is being erected there. What has the ministry done with all the resources under their charge? This inefficiency in the Ministry of Water and Environment, under the leadership of hon. Mutagamba, has failed this country completely. If I read through this statement, she has said “I”; she keeps on employing and withdrawing at will and at the end of the day, we have the likes of Akankwasa. Where is the leadership of this ministry?

If I had powers – (Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you so much, my sister, for giving way. The information I want to give is actually not friendly but to inform the Members and the nation that so many times, some of us who were born in a certain area have been victimised for no reason. Hon. Mutagamba, that name sounds liken one from the central; hon. Munaaba, sounds western but I think it is from the east; hon. Betty Bigombe is from the North although the name also sounds western. Well, I have not had time to check the people that you used to interview and even shortlist. 

I wish hon. Mutagamba could help us because we feel bad when everything – (Interjections) – Yes, it is a fact that when you look at the list, they are all westerners, so it looks like indeed it is western. When you go on like this, some of us feel really hurt when such things come up like this. Can you help the government, when such a thing comes up, by bringing out everything? I want to know who selected the chairman of the board, so that we know and we stop being misunderstood. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Please close.

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much for that information. I was just going to refer you to paragraph 10 if the information was not friendly but now that it is friendly, I rest my case. 

Conclusively, I say we are not going to rest on this particular matter. It was a case under the IGG’s office and we are going to follow it up. We will not just let this die and we will never let this go. Let Uganda belong to all of us and create an atmosphere that makes all of us belong because we are studying under very difficult situations. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.23
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for this statement. I think it is in order that when Members of Parliament raise questions, government comes to explain to the representatives of the people. 

Madam Speaker, it cannot be true that government discriminates against certain regions when it comes to appointment on merit. The structure of this House is evidence enough. When his Excellency the President is appointing Cabinet, for example, there are members of Cabinet from the central, from the north, the west and the east. Now, that allegation is not correct. 

Secondly, I do not think it is fair to allege that Mr Michael Mugisa, whom the National Forestry Authority board found suitable, is not qualified and inexperienced. I have my version of Mr Michael Mugisa’s education and experience. I studied with him in secondary school; he completed senior six in Nyakasura School. I was at Makerere University doing law and Michael Mugisa was doing a Bachelor of Science degree in forestry studies. We were in Makerere University at the same time. So, it is not correct that Mr Michael Mugisa does not have the academic qualifications. 

Mr Michael Mugisa managed the district of Kabarole as Chairman LC V, and that is a managerial position. I know Members of Parliament who completed five years in this House and some of them are now permanent secretaries, others are chief executives of government corporations. So, being a Member of Parliament, being a Chairman LC V or even LC II in my view gives somebody sufficient exposure to manage people and resources, what Michael Mugisa is going to do. 

Apart from the professional education which he acquired in the Faculty of Forestry in Makerere, he also worked in the environment department of Fort Portal Diocese as an expert for a very long time. So, really, it is not fair for anybody to allege that he does not have the academic qualifications or the managerial experience. That is the testimony I would like to give.

Secondly - (Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is speaking about a person I know and he has spent a lot of time defending the qualification and suitability of Mr Michael Mugisa as if he is going to explain also the suitability of the other candidates who did not get this job. Is it in order for the honourable minister to give a chronology of the experience and expertise of a person in question, who happens to be his OB, without necessarily giving the qualifications of others who were failed?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he is responding to the allegations that he was never qualified in the first place even to be on the shortlist. I think that is what he is trying to put forward. (Applause) 

MR MWESIGE: Much obliged, Madam Speaker, for your very wise ruling. This institution is very important – (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am rising on a point of procedure. I am aware that the honourable minister studied with this man in question. However, when he talks about his qualifications, I have not seen him at least lay on the Table something indicating that he actually completed at Makerere University. When I was in front there, I laid on the Table minutes of the board signed by hon. Dr Sarah Nkonge, PhD on every page. Is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to proceed and confuse everybody without clearly substantiating because we are talking about documents?   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of documents can come later but I think the Minister is talking from a point of personal knowledge of this individual. (Applause)

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, there are two types of evidence; there is documentary evidence and oral evidence. What I am giving is oral evidence and it can be verified. 

Now, I was saying that really the institution of Parliament – I know some institutions can falter but the institution of Parliament should also give the benefit of doubt to other bodies whose job is to make appointments in this country. 

4.30
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would first of all like to thank the Minister for having brought this statement. I would like to start straight away with the misleading information as having been given to this House by my friend, hon. Adolf Mwesige. 

I want to inform the Minister that although he cited ministerial appointments, even when you look at the ministerial positions, they are skewed in terms of roles and responsibilities and in terms of importance that the government attaches to those specific ministries. This I say without fear or favour. Look at the North; who do you have there substantively as a minister other hon. Hilary Onek and the acting Leader of Government Business, which position they said was unconstitutional, and yet you say we all belong to one country? Even when you look at the east, but that is not the point. 

I would now want to go to the substance of the report that has been given. In any sane organisation, when you are undertaking recruitment the first thing that you address is the job specification. What kind of qualities do you want from a person to fill the job? What are the responsibilities which go with that job? Short of that, your recruitment instrument will be seen to have faulted in one way or the other. I am quite sure Java Consults, which is a professional body, meticulously followed those outlines of professional recruitment. Where did we go wrong? 

Today we are here talking about Mr Michael Mugisa but I want you to reflect and refresh your mind with one story that appeared in the New Vision when His Excellency the President went to Kabarole after the elections. It was the same Michael Mugisa who said, “Your Excellency, some of us are here; we hope that you will be able to consider us for some appointment.” That was already an entry point for this person. It was no longer a matter of merit. This, you must accept, was not merit. 

In any serious organisation like NEMA, you need to rise through the ranks. Here are people like Hudson Andrua, a graduate from the university in forestry, obtained his Masters degree and worked in the Forestry Department, then under Ministry of Agriculture, and rose through the ranks to the point of being a deputy and you say such a man is incompetent! Again, you say that it is for security reasons you cannot consider him!
 
Even the former minister, Jennifer Namuyangu, how could she have been, as far as security matters are concerned, correct when she was a minister but because of this job, she cannot pass the security test? What is that yardstick? If you are really telling us that it was for security reasons that these people could not go through, what are those security tenets that they cannot be charged with that you are hiding under security? (Applause) This is a common practice in this country even among the armed forces. I am happy the Minister for Security is here. When there is anything wrong, they come and say, “For security reasons... civilians are not allowed.” That is a way of hiding. 

I want to challenge you, honourable minister; we have institutions in this country which clearly show that recruitments are not correct. Look at the CDO that we were talking about yesterday or at URA, NEMA now, ISO, ESO, UIA, Export Promotions Board; who are the people who head these institutions? From which region do they come? (Applause) Really, we must be correct when we say that we as a country must move together. 

It now brings me to another issue. At one point President Museveni was quoted saying, “I have killed my animal, I am still eating it and you want me to go away; where do I go?” So, he is now inviting the people who should partake with him at the dining table. This is not correct. We really need to look at ourselves as a country and move together. Where there is any recruitment without merit, certainly it will cause pain in people’s hearts and they will begin to think otherwise. Are we really in the same country? (Member timed out)

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, hon. Tinkasiimire is known for saying that it is going to get bloody-(Laughter) - but I think this debate is going to take a course that might be politically correct but not morally correct, not equitable. I do not think that this House in this sitting can really resolve this matter because there is what I consider a very useful document, which hon. Tinkasiimire has tabled and needs to be verified. Unfortunately, we cannot verify it here now. So, I am sure that a debate in the heat of the moment is going to make us even say what we ought not to have said for the people of Uganda to hear. 

I, therefore, would like to propose that if we actually want to be fair and ensure that there is equity in what we are dealing with, then this matter has to be referred to a forum where there can be some sort of equity. Everybody should be heard fairly, because you can only see the unfairness that one person is being spoken for and others are not being spoken for. You can also see that almost all of us are going against our own rules; people are saying they have interests. Now, Rule 80 says you must declare what type of interests, which we have not; so we are getting into very muddy waters. 

It is my submission, therefore, that you, Madam Speaker, should refer this matter to an appropriate forum where equity can be dispensed to everybody concerned. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that is a good proposal. We have heard a little from both sides but we need time, research and more information. So I will refer this matter to the Committee on Natural Resources to report back within one month.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.39
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the statement is being distributed, I would like you to allow me make one statement on the previous topic. Hon. Dombo talked about the Rules and Procedure being amended. Now that we are in the process, from my point of view if we are going to amend procedures, let it be known that before a ministry appoints, we should consult the Parliament or relevant committee. This process has taken us a year and a half and each year there is a whistle blower and we are wasting money going back to the exercise. I think we need to be clear. 

Having said that - (Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. The honourable minister made her case in a statement laid before this House. I had previously asked her to come and make the same. She read my prayers, I have not changed anything. With your wise ruling, you have said we cannot resolve this matter here and now, after the contribution by hon. Otada. The honourable minister is making tireless efforts as a public relations officer of the appointed executive in this House. 

Is she in order, when you have ruled that we take this matter to the Committee on Natural Resources, to continue deliberating on the same issue when you have made a ruling and when you have asked her to read another statement, which we have actually received? Is she reading the statement on heat waves? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want a situation where the ministers think that Parliament should not take an interest in the way you run your ministries and their agencies. We have committees of this House, which carry out oversight over your expenditures, management and so on and they report to this House. So, it is in that light that the honourable member raised these issues. Parliament has power to check how you are doing your work even in your agencies. Please, go to the heat wave because it is very hot.

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope my brother has got the message. 

On the agenda, I have another statement to make that is on the current heat wave in Uganda. I will give a full description in the paper here but I want to summarise it one way here that currently, there is no universal definition of a heat wave and the term is relative to the usual weather in the area.

Temperatures that people from that hotter area or climate consider normal can be termed a heat wave in a cooler area if they are outside the normal climate pattern for that area. I want to say that currently in Uganda you cannot describe what we are experiencing as a heat wave. At least it has not reached that, and no death has been reported because normally with heat waves there are causalities reported.

Secondly, people’s bodies are acclimatized to such hot temperatures. Whereas in the Netherlands the temperatures of 28.5 degrees Celsius can be considered a heat wave, here in Uganda people can accommodate temperatures up to 39 degrees Celsius without resulting into death. As of now, the temperatures are oscillating around 30 degrees Celsius. 

Having said that, I want to draw the attention of Members of Parliament to the statement I have made, and this is to give a detailed background and the situation as it is. It is a bit technical but we shall gamble through it.

Introduction 

Drought and floods have become more common over the past two decades. This is consistent with the report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which stated that the world has become more drought and flood prone over the last 25 years and will still increase the frequency of droughts and floods in the future. Last week, I was in New Delhi on the same panel of climate change and this is still a stigma globally and a global challenge.

Two, the greater Horn of Africa experienced severe drought that affected several countries leading to famine last year. However in Uganda, we received above normal or enhanced rainfall that led to some floods and landslides in some mountainous areas like Mt Elgon, Bundibugyo and Karamoja region, which is semi arid.

Uganda experiences two major rainfalls, call them bimodal and unimodal. The bimodal regime is experienced near the Equator, with the first season occurring between the month of March to May, and we summarise that as MAM. The second season is observed from the month of September to December and we have summarised it as SOND.

Both wet seasons coincide with the passage of the Inter Tropical Convergence Zone when it is lying over Uganda. The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone means the winds of the tropics both from the North and South converge over an area. The two rainy seasons are separated by two dry periods in December to February and June to August. 

However, the northern parts of the country further away from the Equator experience a unimodal rainfall regime. They receive considerable rain during the month of June to August. We call it JJA and it extends sometimes to October with a slight relaxation around June and July.

Some regions close to the Equator and Eastern Uganda receive three rainfall seasons exhibiting a tri-modal regime with a third peak occurring from July to August due to the moisture influx from the Atlantic Ocean and the moist Congo basins by the westerly winds. 

It should be noted that February is the driest month in Uganda and it becomes drier when the La Nina event is evolving. The term “La Nina” is used to describe the periodic build-up of unusually cold waters in the eastern and central equatorial Pacific Ocean. I have given you some pictures attached to the document you have. 

On the other hand, El Nino, which is a Spanish word for “the Christ child”, refers to the periodic build-up of a large pool of unusually warm waters in the same ocean basin as seen in figure 1(b); thus La Nina and El Nino are phenomena that periodically occur in the equatorial Pacific Ocean region. In general, most of El Nino events are immediately followed by La Nina events that have often resulted into floods following droughts or vice versa in many parts of the world. 

When large pools of warm or cold waters are observed in the Nino regions, the atmosphere and neighbouring oceans respond to the cooling and warming in various ways. The atmosphere, for example, may respond to strong El Nino and La Nina events by shifting the east-west air circulation cells, commonly referred to as the Southern Oscillation. 

The close linkages between La Nina and El Nino events and the atmospheric circulation response have made many scientists to often refer to the two systems simply as El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO). In such cases, El Nino and La Nina phenomena are simply referred to as the warm and cold ENSO phases, respectively. These phases are known to trigger worldwide anomalies in ocean currents and atmospheric air circulation that consequently have various impacts on rainfall and temperature in specific areas around the world. You can see this in figure 2.

It has been observed that during El Nino and La Nina events, worldwide weather and climate extremes such as droughts, floods, cold or hot spells, tropical cyclones and others are common even in some regions that are very far from the Pacific Ocean basin. In Uganda, the La Nina event is associated with droughts while El Nino is associated with floods. Such weather and climate extremes are often associated with far-reaching socio-economic impacts, including loss of life and property; mass migration of people and animals; and lack of water, energy, food and other basic human needs.

What is the current situation of the La Nina event? La Nina conditions that were re-established in the tropical Pacific during August 2011 after a brief period of neutral conditions in May to July 2011 have reached their peak and are now declining. The current La Nina is considerably weaker than the La Nina events of 1949, 1964, 1970, 1973, 1983, 1988, 1998 and 2007. Those of you who can remember may have noticed that in 2007, we had the hottest temperatures in Uganda and that is when the Lake Victoria water level went down by two metres. 

Climate models indicate that a gradual decline in the strength of the La Nina will continue over the coming three months. That means that the current heat is likely to be reducing gradually within the next three months. 

Current weather patterns in Uganda indicate that most parts of the country are currently experiencing dry conditions with frequent winds associated with dust or dust storms. I was in Karamoja yesterday and saw how the people there are suffering with dust and wind. Figure 3 below shows how the current temperature extremes are compared with long term mean – these are technical terms. It can be observed from the graph that the current temperature extremes are above the long term mean but less than the ever recorded temperature extremes in the current dekad. My graph should have been coloured; you will have to pardon me for that. However, I think you can see the different thicknesses of black on that graph. The top one is the extreme temperature ever reached in the dekad 3 and the middle one is the current extreme temperature, and the lower one is the lowest temperature in the current dekad. 

The factors responsible for the current weather and climate patterns over the country include: 
a) 	Position of the overhead sun, which is currently in the southern hemisphere. This gives more heat to the southern hemisphere. As a result of this heating, surface air expands, becomes lighter and rises, creating a low pressure region over this sector. 

	The rising air in this region is replaced by converging winds emanating from all high pressure zones. Such areas of convergence are the ones expected to receive enhanced rainfall. These areas include parts of southern Tanzania and several countries in Southern Africa, of course including Uganda. 

b) 	Another important factor is that La Nina conditions, which have been prevailing across the tropical Pacific basin since October 2011, are now close to their peak, with a gradual decline expected over the first quarter of 2012. La Nina is characterised by unusually cold oceanic temperatures in the Equatorial Pacific. Once it occurs, several parts in Uganda, especially Karamoja, are normally associated with dry conditions.

It should be noted that at this time of the year, Uganda receives winds that originate from the Arabian Desert. These northeast winds blowing over Uganda have a continental track through Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan. Therefore by the time they reach Uganda, they have already lost moisture on their track hence becoming hot and dry, affecting the country with hazy conditions.

The climate outlook for February 2012 shows that during this month, there are high chances that several places in Uganda are expected to have dry and sunny conditions. This is coupled with more frequent dry winds that are likely to expose the communities to wild fires and burning of houses. However, the Lake Victoria Basin itself and some few parts of south western Uganda are likely to experience few isolated and light rains because of the moderating local effects of the lakes and western highlands. The hot and sunny conditions are expected to intensify in February.

The expected potential impacts of current weather patterns include:

i) 	Outbreak of diseases associated with dry conditions among both humans and animals.

ii) 	The sunny and dry weather conditions are likely to lead to reduced foliage and pastures for livestock and also reduce availability of water resources.

iii) 	Likelihood of high daytime temperatures, especially in north-eastern and eastern Uganda, which may give rise to heat waves which are a potential health risk. It should also be noted that cases of meningitis disease may also occur in such places.

iv)	 Problems associated with dust or dust storms may occur in some isolated areas as a result of dry conditions.

v) 	Wild fires are expected to intensify.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is what I had to say about the question that was put to me. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I had hoped that you would tell us how to mitigate the situation. (Applause) You have left us hanging.

4.57
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for the statement. We have a serious situation at our hands. It is not just in a few areas but it is actually cutting across. I would have expected the Minister to do two things, apart from what she has given us as a statement. One, I would have expected her to show us the effects of the current weather in the various regions. What is the effect, what is coming out? Secondly, I would have expected her to give us the special interventions that the ministry and government have prepared for this country. 

We would have expected to hear something in the short term; for example, if there are some places you have identified which are facing an acute shortage of water, supply them with water especially the institutions like the schools and health units. If you have identified problems of hunger in some places, provide food relief to those most affected areas. If you are saying we are going to face a situation of bush burning, what are you doing as a ministry together with the local governments to enforce the law against bush burning? If you are telling us we are likely to face meningitis, what is Government doing to prepare the health units for this situation? 

Again, also prepare the country in the long term because we seem not to manage the environment. We seem to simply sit down and one year it is floods, another year it is heat. So, what can we do in the long term in terms of irrigation, weather forecasting, revitalising the weather stations upcountry, environment protection and giving seedlings to the various constituencies? 

I thought the Minister would go a step further. Instead of telling us simply that there is a problem, there is heat, it is high and so on, she as government should tell us as a country that this is what is being prepared and this is what we are advising Ugandans to do. I hope the Minister can do that. Thank you.

4.59
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to what my colleague has said, I do not know the communication the government can pass to the farmers. I remember last year the technocrats were predicting rain during a sunny period and they were predicting sunshine during the rainy season and they blamed it on the machines they were using. That affected our productivity.

In my constituency now, we have lost more than five lives due to wild fire. Just yesterday in Koch-Goma sub-county, Nwoya District, Mr Oloya Felix lost a boy less than one year old to wild fire. In the next sub-county called Alero, we lost three people - a mother and her two children. They were caught up while they were collecting firewood and she perished with all her children. This morning I got a report from my constituency that almost a whole village has been affected and food stuffs were burnt in the granaries. In our culture we keep food stuffs in granaries during the dry season.

This is a very serious matter. We request the government, and especially the line ministry, to help us implement, if it is there, the law that would stop bush burning. You should also help us with what to communicate to the farmers because in my place, we were expecting that the rains would be back in the next month; we do not know whether this still stands. The farmers are preparing their gardens for the next rainy season. So, are we expecting a dry season up to April and May? We need to know so that we prepare our farmers. Thank you.

5.02
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Water and Environment for the statement. Indeed, the issue of environment, the drought and the floods have disorganised all our farmers. In the past, we used to have regular seasons and you could prepare your field, put your crop then you would harvest at the right time. Today, it may rain in March and you plant your crops but by May it is dry and all the crops are burned up and then when it comes to the rainy season, there are floods. 

In Northern Uganda and West Nile in particular, we have hailstorms that really destroy crops like the one in July in Koboko where all the food stuffs were destroyed and we could not plant anymore and there is hunger. Honourable minister, we thank you for the water you gave to Koboko Town Council but because of this dry season, this water just comes in form of drops. We are back to collecting water from the bad sources. So it is really a big problem. 

As mentioned earlier, tell us the meteorological forecast so that we can prepare accordingly. Secondly, together with the Minister of Agriculture, I am requesting them to provide the people of Koboko with seeds and planting materials because they have not stored anything. Also to the Ministry of Education, some classroom roofs were blown off and the children are now studying under trees. So, what liaison do you have among these ministries to support those areas which are faced either with floods or by drought? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kagwera, Kiwalabye, Kabahenda. Honourable members, I am looking for those who did not contribute yesterday.

5.04
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the statement but this climate change - droughts, floods, hailstorms, heat waves – are now common here and we know. However, the honourable minister stopped short of telling us really what is causing this. 

One, there is deforestation, which is under her ministry; two, draining of swamps which is under her ministry; bad agricultural practices under the agriculture ministry. Also, there is the way we dispose of the buveera, which is still under her ministry. There is also bush burning, still caused by negligence in the country; and worse still, the meteorological department forecasting weather in the opposite direction. 

I would like to ask the minister to make another statement because she is telling us on page 7 about the doomsday that hangs over this country; surely, what do you want the citizens of this country to do? You are not giving a solution but you are just telling us this is what is to befall this country. What do you want the citizens of this country to do when you have not controlled what I have just been listing?

I remember in the Eighth Parliament, we had problems with hon. Jessica Eriyo about the buveera, up to today; really is this how we are going to run the country? I would ask the honourable minister to make a statement showing what is causing this and showing us what the way forward is, such that the people can know. Otherwise, telling the citizens that this is what is on you, you are about to die - the Bible says that there is doomsday but they tell us to repent but you are not telling us any solution. Really, I do not see why you have made this statement, with due respect. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: So you are suggesting that you are not satisfied with this statement? Let us hear from hon. Anywar

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. The issue we are discussing, as my colleague put it, is like we are on death row. The issue of varying and threatening climatic differences is real. We have been told for quite a while that climate change is a monster hanging over our heads. 

My sister, the Minister, at least has been in that ministry long enough to give us all the information that can save us from the problem. She has attended all the workshops internationally where the mitigation and adaptation measures have been discussed. This statement would have been very complete if we give a way out, first of all as Members of Parliament, so that we know how to explain to our constituencies in partnership with her ministry how Ugandans can take precaution, can adapt to the climate change and can grow seeds which are resistant to drought and the like. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that the Minister is left to go back and give us that most desired information on how we can take measures and protect this country and advise our people about the climate change effects?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, actually that is why I said, “what do we do now that you have told us?” I was hoping you would say that you are asking the Ministry of Health to provide so many doses for meningitis or you are asking the Ministry of Agriculture to arrange for these diseases of the animals, which you have talked about, so that these people can tell their farmers. I do not know what they will tell the farmers. They said there is going to be a disease, so what? What are you going to do about the wild fires now that there are going to be wild fires?

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the Members of Parliament. You will appreciate that this question came to me on Tuesday and it was such a hot Parliament that even now I am still going through the tapes of what transpired here to know what exactly was required of me. 

From the statement that I received, which is just on the Order Paper, they wanted a status on the heat wave. Of course, from my representation, I have shown you what the likely effects are. 

To come out with a conclusion, I need to consult Government. I need to know how Ministry of Health is going to respond; I need to know how the Ministry of Agriculture is going to respond and I need to know whether Ministry of Finance has got the resources to do that. I cannot come here and say, “Ministry of Health, go and buy drugs” when I have not consulted. So, I am asking this august House that if you want me to make a second statement, I will need time to consult Government and then we come out with a conclusive Government position on how to respond. I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister was scheduled to give us a statement. In her docket, she interacts with colleagues from the different ministries in their Executive meetings. We would expect, as she comes to the House to brief us, that she has done her homework, consulted the colleagues and had a consensus rather than coming here and is in the same dilemma as us who are expected to know from her. Is it in order for the honourable minister to come and show ignorance or lack of consultation with colleagues rather than giving us what she has already concluded and the way forward with colleagues? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, I know you have been out of office for some time, but I think you know that when you have a problem with the Order Paper, you ring the Speaker and say, “I have a slight problem; today, I will not be able”. I then remove you and inform the House that, “I have removed this issue; it will come on Thursday”. 

When you keep quiet and members are given the paper, they expect that you will do the needful. I think we should ask her to go and give us a proper paper with solutions. You have told us we are going to die but - (Laughter) - without solutions including what Government is going to do.

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to bring it to the attention of the House that pushing people to come in the shortest possible time, this is the result - (Interjections) - If you ask me to come - like yesterday they were shouting, “One week, three weeks, two days” but they do not know the implications. Now when my ministers have no time to do thorough research, this is what it comes to. So I beg for more time. May I ask for more time?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but I do not want you to blame the House. We sat in the Business Committee where you led the government side. This issue was brought up that the country wants to know what is happening. (Laughter) We sat in the Business Committee with you, Prime Minister.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Honestly, whatever the case, I have asked for more time on this particular paper. I have now asked specifically for more time for the Minister to come back in three weeks. From today, give us three weeks so that we can come with a comprehensive report. 

That is why I am saying, in terms of time, since we are the ones going to do that work, these colleagues should not interfere because you cannot tell me two weeks when you do not know the implications. Honestly, I apply for three weeks so that we can close this matter and we go ahead.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we want solutions from the experts. Let us give the Minister the three weeks to consult the ministers of health, agriculture, the Police and everybody.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to appreciate the conditions under which the Minister provided this paper. To me, it is informative. However, there is something that we need to know because this paper also raises very important issues about the health of the people. Indeed, the Minister should have sat in the Cabinet so that they invent mechanisms of dealing with this issue including all sectors that are concerned. We would expect, even before the three weeks elapse, that government crafts short-term and medium-term solutions and within the three weeks they can talk about handling the long-term effects of this phenomenon. 

If we say that within three weeks they will come back with an answer, we shall have failed ourselves in the realisation of the actions that they are going to take from today to the next 21 days that we are proposing. Therefore, I propose that the Leader of Government Business convenes Cabinet and crafts mechanisms of handling the short-term effects including the disease control. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to interfere with how Cabinet does its work, but the issues you raised touch many ministries and the solutions are needed from many ministries. We hope all your colleagues will assist you to find solutions and you come back here telling us how many doses of meningitis we are going to buy for this case. 

5.18
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my Leader of Government Business and colleagues for the concern you have raised, and indeed, it is deliberate that we get that concern. 

Secondly, I want to call upon Members of Parliament; this is not an act of Government alone but it is for everybody. It is our environment, our heritage and our survival. I would not like to see a Member of Parliament coming here to pinpoint Government when you cannot do a single thing in your constituencies -(Interjections)- I am asking and I am requesting Members of Parliament –(Interjections) - Please listen to me. I am not pointing at anybody but it is the bitter truth that Members of Parliament should take lead in monitoring the environmental issues if we are going to survive as a nation.  

We have had initiatives in different parts of the country where we have gone and planted with Members of Parliament. I want to take an example of Soroti, Kaberamaido, Kumi where I spent more than Shs 50 million to go and plant trees. If I ask Members of Parliament today if those trees are still around, they will all say, “No”. So, it is up to everyone of us to take some action. -(Interjections)- While you expect Government, and Government is going to do their part, I request Members of Parliament to take action. You may not plant trees, but at least stop people from cutting them down. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

DRAFT LABOUR DISPUTE, ARBITRATION AND SETTLEMENT (MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION) REGULATIONS 2011

5.20
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I would like to present to you the Labour Disputes, Arbitration and Settlement (Mediation and Conciliation) Regulations 2012, for your consideration.

The regulations are supplementary to the Labour Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act 7. Section 42 of the Act requires that regulations must be approved by Parliament before they are formally signed.

The objectives of the Labour Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act are, among others, to establish an efficient and expeditious mechanism for resolution of labour complaints, grievances and disputes and by so doing, the law facilitates social dialogue, maintenance of industrial harmony thus contributing to higher productivity.

The major elements of the regulations include, among others, establishment of a joint consultative council at the enterprise level, handling ordinary and inter-union disputes, referral of disputes to the Industrial Court, procedure for handling emergency disputes, and procedures for handling unlawful industrial action, strike or lock-out.

The guiding principles underlying the regulations are the following - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you seem to be going to the Second Reading of the regulations. We need to send them to the committee and then you can justify when you return.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I thought I was giving a preamble but with your guidance, permit me to lay on the Table the regulations. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the regulations are remitted to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for scrutiny and you report back. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

5.22
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, I am representing the chairman of my committee and I beg to lay on the Table the Financial statement for Uganda Broadcasting Corporation for the financial year ending 30 June 2009. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, I think you should lay all of them sequentially. I think all of them are from your committee. 

MR TODWONG: I equally beg to lay on the Table:  

i) 	National Social Security Fund (NSSF) Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2010;

ii) 	Capital Markets Authority (CMA) Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011; 

iii) 	Dairy Development Authority (DDA) Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2010; 

iv) 	Uganda National Council of Science and Technology; transfer and commercialization of low cost charcoal manufacturing technology for entrepreneurs and farmers in Uganda, Project Ug-0074. Financial statements of the six month period ended 30 August 2011;

v) 	Uganda National Roads Authority – Road Sector Support Project 1. ADF Loan Nos. 21001500059644 & 2100150013494 and Grant No.2100155004668, Kabale-Kisoro/Bunagana-Kyanika Road Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011;

vi) 	Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited, Power Sector Development Operation Project – Thermal Power Generation Component (IDA Credit No. 42970-Ug): The Report and Opinion by the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December, 2010;

vii) 	New Vision Printing and Publishing Company Limited Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011;  
	
viii) 	National Housing and Construction Company Limited Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2010;

ix) 	Uganda Wildlife Authority Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011; 

x) 	Broadcasting Council Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2009;

xi) 	Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) Financial Statements for the year ended 30 September 2010; 

xii) 	Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II), Rural Electrification Agency,  IDA CR. No. 4554-Ug and GEF Trust Fund Grant Agreement No. Tf:094484  Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011; 

xiii)	The Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2011;  

xiv)	National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011; and

xv) 	National Council of Sports Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2010.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those emanate from the Office of the Auditor General. They are remitted to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS (SDR) 65,900,000 FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) FOR FINANCING THE NINTH POVERTY REDUCTION SUPPORT CREDIT (PRSC 9)

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I lay on the Table of this august House, the proposal to borrow Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 65,900,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) for financing the Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC 9). I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the request is hereby remitted to the Committee on National Economy, but they will be supported by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION TO HABA GROUP OF COMPANIES LTD AND RHINO INVESTMENTS LTD IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

5.30
THE CHAIRPERSON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, on behalf of the members of the Public Accounts Committee, I have the pleasure to present and lay on Table the report of the PAC on Government compensation to HABA Group of Companies Ltd and Rhino Investments Ltd in the Financial Year 2009/2010.

Madam Speaker, this report has been signed by a total of 26 Members who attended the workshop for the report writing out of 29, and the three were those who for reasons – could not avail themselves to attend this exercise.

This report was prepared after the committee interfaced with the following witnesses: The acting Solicitor General, Mrs Harriet Lwabi; Ms R.G. Rwakooja from Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Mr C. Gashirabake from the same institution; Mr Bafaki K. Ernest, the undersecretary in the ministry; Mr Albert Mugyenyi Rugambwa; a senior assistant secretary from the same ministry; Mr Owen Busingye from the same ministry; Mr Alfred Magezi a senior officer from the same ministry; Mrs Mary Lutaaya a senior accountant from the same ministry; Ms Hope Byaruhanga, the principal personnel officer from the same ministry; Mr Francis Atoke, an Administrator General from the same ministry; Mr J.B. Tibamanya from the same ministry; the former Government Chief Valuer, Mr A.J. Bwiragura; the former Attorney General; hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya; and we also interfaced with the Executive Director of KCCA, Ms J. Semakula Musisi.

We also met with Mr Moses Charles Waibi from KCCA; Mr J.B. Karugonjo, from KCCA; we interfaced with Peter Kaujju from KCCA; and we also met Mr Charles Ouma from the same institution; Dr Bakka Musujja from the same institution; Mr Julius Raymond  Kabongo from the same institution; Mr Caleb Mugisha from the same institution; Mrs Ruth Kijjambu from the same institution; Mr Gordon Mwesigye, former Town Clerk of Kampala City Council then; we also met Mr Muwonge-Kezaala who was also serving in that same institution; we met Mr James Ssegane, one time town clerk in that place; Mrs Robinah Kayongo from the same institution; we met the technical evaluation committee members, that is, Mr Kenneth Mugambe; Geoffrey Atwine; Patricia Anabo; Mary Nankabirwa; and then Mr Kazahura; and Abbey M. Yiga. 

We also met the Managing Director Haba Group of Companies, Mr Hassan Basajjabalaba, and Mr Obed Mwebaza, Advocate to Haba; we met Mr Paul Tusubira, who is also an advocate of Haba; we met Mr Geoffrey Nangumya, an advocate of Haba; we met Mr Moses Kayondo, MD’s assistant in Haba Group of Companies; we met the Managing Director, Rhino Investments Ltd Col (Rtd) John Mugenyi; we met with the permanent secretary/Secretary to the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance; we met hon. Syda BBbumba, former Minister of Finance; we met His Lordship, Justice Billy Kainamura, who at that time was the Acting Solicitor General in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; we met with the Governor Bank of Uganda, Mr E. Tumusiime-Mutebile; we met H.E. the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; we met the Aides to H.E. the President, Ms Joy Kabatsi and Mr Edward Muhoozi.

The attachments that are going to be laid together with this report include an advertisement from City Council of Kampala published in the New Vision of Friday June 15th 2001. We also have another advertisement from Kampala City Council published in the Daily Monitor of Friday December, 23 2005. 

We also have correspondents from Kampala City Council addressed “Yudaya International” – that is under Haba Group of Companies - talking about development of the Constitutional Square and the letter is signed by Robinah Kayondo, and copied to many other people.

We also have got from City Council a receipt acknowledging payment of Shs 235,000,000 from Yudaya International, which is one of the companies under Haba Group of Companies. We also have from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, a letter dated 28 November, 2002 addressed to His Worship the Mayor of Kampala City Council and this letter is written by Mr L. Kibaruha Ag. Solicitor-General. 

We also have another letter dated 29th November 2002, written to the Solicitor General, Government of Uganda, on Victoria International Trading Company Ltd and Sheila Investments – these two companies are also members of Haba Group of companies. The letter was signed by Mr J. Sebaana Kizito, Mayor, Kampala City Council. 

We have another letter from the Registrar General addressed to the City Advocate Kampala, on Victoria International Trading Co. Ltd Vs. Sheila Investments Ltd, and the letter is signed by Ben Turyasingura, Assistant Registrar General. 

We have a letter from State House dated 16th June 2009 addressed to the honourable Minister of Justice in the Attorney General’s Chambers, on Haba Group of Co Vs. Nakasero Market, and the letter is signed by His Excellency Yoweri K. Museveni. We also have another letter from Haba Group of Companies dated 18th November, 2009 addressed to the honourable Attorney General Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs talking about the evaluation report for compensation claims by Haba Group of Co. Ltd, Nakasero Market. 

We also have another letter from Haba Group and this letter is dated 18th November, 2009, and addressed to the Honourable Attorney General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. It is talking about the evaluation report for the compensation claims by Haba Group of Companies Vide Nakasero Market, Shauliyako Market, Constitutional Square and Balikudembbe/Owino Market. This letter is signed by Hassan Basajjabalaba, Chairman Haba Group. 

We have another letter from the same company, Haba Group, dated 20th November, 2009 and addressed to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, and it is on the compensation of Haba Group, and this letter is also signed by Hajji Hassan Basajjabalaba, Chairman Haba Group.

We have another letter which is an appendix and is dated 24th November, 2009 originating from State House, and addressed to the Minister of Justice/Attorney General on compensation for Haba Group, and the letter is signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President. 

I have another letter which is an internal memo written by the Attorney General/Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to the Acting Solicitor General dated 3rd March, 2010 and it is about Yudaya International Ltd/Constitution Square; M/S Sheila Investments Ltd/ Nakasero Market, and it is signed by Hon. (Dr) E. Khiddu Makubuya (MP) Attorney General/ Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and also copied to his deputy.

I have another attached, which is again also an internal memo originating from the Attorney General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, addressed to the Acting Solicitor General of the same ministry and dated 29th July, 2010, on the subject matter of Compensation for Haba Group. It is talking about the amounts of money to be paid to Haba Group. The letter is signed by Hon. (Dr) E. Khiddu Makubuya (MP) Attorney General/ Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

I also have another letter here from the Office of the Minister, Ministry of Local Government, dated 23rd March, 2007, and addressed to: The Town Clerk, Kampala City Council. It is talking about Development of Nakasero Market, and is signed by Kahinda Otafiire (Maj. Gen.), Minister for Local Government. 

I also have another letter from State House, dated 30th July, 2008, and addressed to: Hon. Khiddu Makubuya, Minister, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Attorney General. It is talking about compensation for sub-leased lands and management contracts of Haba Group. It is signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President.

I also have another letter here from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, dated May 14th, 2009, and addressed to: The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Lands and Urban Development; Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works and Transport; Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government. It is talking about the committee to determine the legality of claims by Haba Group in respect of the sub-leased lands. This letter is signed by B. Kainamura, Acting Solicitor General.

I also have another letter from State House, dated 16th June, 2009, and addressed to: The Hon. Minister, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Attorney General. It is talking about Haba Company Vide Nakasero Market and this letter is once again signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President.

I also have another letter from State House dated 24th November, 2009 and addressed to: The Hon. Minister, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Attorney General. It is talking about compensation for Haba Group and it is signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President.

I also have another letter here from Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, dated November 11th, 2011, addressed to: The Chairman, Public Accounts Committee. It is talking about request for special audit of compensation claims to Haba Group of companies. It is signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba (MP), Minister. She was the former Minister but she wrote it from the new docket that she had as the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development.

I have also attached a letter from Ministry of Finance, dated 2nd December, 2010. It is addressed to the Auditor General. The subject matter is, “Compensation claims to Haba Group of Companies,” and the letter is signed by Keith Muhakanizi for Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury.

I have another internal memo attached originating from the Attorney General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs addressed to the Acting Solicitor General of the same ministry. It is dated 14th December, 2009. The subject matter is, “Evaluation report for the compensation claims by Haba Group of Companies Vide Nakasero Market, Shauriyako, Constitutional/City Square and St Balikuddembe/Owino Market.” This is signed by Hon. (Dr) E. Khiddu Makubuya (MP) Attorney General/ Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

I also have another letter dated 15th December, 2009, addressed to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance. It is talking about Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. It is signed by B. Kainamura, Acting Solicitor General.

Then I have another letter dated 18th December, 2009 talking about the same subject matter and signed by Kainamura Billy. I have another letter dated 4th of January, 2010 originating from Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, addressed to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works, Communication and Transport. The subject is, “Review of the Evaluation Reports for the compensation claims by Haba Group of Companies: Nakasero Market and Constitutional (City Square).” The letter is signed by B. Kainamura, Acting Solicitor General.

I have a letter here dated 15th January, 2010 from Bank of Uganda, addressed to the Managing Director, United Bank for Africa, Uganda Limited, and the subject matter is, “US$ 10,000,000 facility to Haba Group,” and the letter is signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor. 

There is another letter also dated 18th March, 2010 addressed to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and this letter is from Bank of Uganda. The subject matter is, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies,” and this letter is signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor. 

I have another letter here dated 6th April, 2010, from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development addressed to the Solicitor General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The subject matter is, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” This letter is signed by Keith Muhakanizi for Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the treasury. 

I have another letter from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development dated 16 March 2010, addressed to Governor, Bank of Uganda. The subject matter is, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” This letter was signed by Mr Chris Kassami, Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury –(Interjections)– it was signed by Mr C.M. Kassami and not Kassiano. (Laughter) I know the difference between Kassiano Wadri, which is a pure Roman Catholic name and Kassami, which is a name from Tooro. (Laughter) Please, do not lead me into temptations.

Madam Speaker, I have a letter from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development dated 18 March, 2010, addressed to the Chief Executive Officer of the Uganda Development Corporation, Uganda with a subject reading: “Haba Group of Companies – M/s Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Ltd.” That letter was written by Mr Keith Muhakanizi for the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. 

There is another letter dated 14 May, 2010 still from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is addressed to the Solicitor General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the subject matter is, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” That letter was also signed by Mr Chris M. Kassami, Permanent Secretary and Secretary to Treasury.

I have another letter attached from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, dated 7 June, 2010. It is addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. The subject matter is Compensation to Haba Group of Companies. The letter was signed by Ms Syda N.M. Bbumba, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

There is a letter from that same ministry dated 14 June 2010, addressed to the Chief Executive, Haba Group of Companies with the subject being, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” This letter was signed by Ms Syda N.M. Bbumba, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

We also got a letter from Bank of Uganda dated 12 August, 2010. This one is addressed to the Managing Director, United Bank for Africa, signed by E. Tumusime Mutebile. In the same vein, we also have another letter from Haba Group of Companies, addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with a subject matter being, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” This letter was signed by someone from Haba Group of Companies.

Bank of Uganda also wrote a letter addressed to the Managing Director, Orient Bank, talking about compensations. It was signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of Bank of Uganda. 

The committee also obtained a letter dated 30 July, 2010, addressed to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, again talking about Vote 7, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. That letter was signed by Mr B. Kainamura, Ag. Solicitor General.

We also got an internal memo, dated 29 July, 2010, from the Attorney-General to the Ag. Solicitor General, on the same subject matter. A copy is attached to this report and signed by hon. E. Khiddu Makubuya, MP and Attorney-General.

During our investigations, we also came across another letter from State House, dated 24 November 2009, addressed to the Minister, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs/ Attorney-General. The letter’s subject matter is, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” This letter was signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President.

There is also a letter from Haba Group of Companies, dated 2 July, addressed to His Excellency the President of Uganda at State House, Kampala about the same subject matter and signed by Hassan Basajjabalaba, Chairman.

The committee also got another letter from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is dated 3 September, 2010 with the subject matter being, “Additional Cash Limit of Funds of Shs 8.1 billion on Vote 7, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Statutory Court Awards for the FY 2010/2011. This letter is addressed to the Solicitor General and signed by Mr Patrick Ochailap, for Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance.

Also in our possession, is a letter from Ministry of Finance, dated 24 September, 2010. This letter is addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda, with the subject being, “Compensation for Haba Group (U) Ltd,” and it is signed by Ms Syda N.M. Bbumba, MP and Minister of Finance.

There is another letter from Ministry of Finance, dated 27 September 2010, addressed to the Ag. Solicitor General with the subject matter being Compensation to Haba Group of Companies. That letter was signed by Mr Keith Muhakanizi, for Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury.

We also got a letter from Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs dated 28 September, 2010 and addressed to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance with the subject matter being, “Compensation Claims to Haba Group of Companies.” That letter was signed by H. Luwabbi, for Solicitor General.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, there is a letter from State House, dated 13 November, 2010 and addressed to Honourable Dr E. Khiddu Makubuya, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, with the subject matter being, “Compensation for Sub-leased Lands and Management Contracts for Haba Group, and Government Contribution towards the Construction of KIU Teaching Hospital, Ishaka. That letter was signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President.

The committee also got hold of another letter from Ministry of Finance, dated 27 September, 2010, addressed to the Ag. Solicitor General and the subject matter is, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” That one is also signed by Mr Keith Muhakanizi.

Madam Speaker, there is another letter from Ministry of Finance, dated 30 September 2010, addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda with the subject matter as, “Compensation Claims to Haba Group of Companies.” It was signed by Ms Syda N. M. Bbumba, MP and Minister.

Also attached is a letter from Bank of Uganda. It is dated 29 September 2010 and addressed to the Managing Director/CEO, United Bank of Africa, Uganda, and talks about $10 million facilitation to the Haba Group of Companies. It is signed by Mr Tumusiime-Mutebile.

We also got a letter from the Office of the Minister of Finance, dated 3 December 2010, addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda and the subject matter is Compensation Claims to Haba Group of Companies. It is signed by Ms Syda N.M. Bbumba, MP and Minister.

We got hold of an internal memo from the Attorney-General, dated 22 November 2010, and addressed to the Ag. Solicitor General, Ministry of Justice and Constructional Affairs and signed by hon. Dr E. Khiddu Makubuya, MP.

Also in our possession is a letter dated 28 October 2010 from Bank of Uganda and addressed to the Managing Director, Orient Bank (U) Ltd and the subject matter is proposed facility of $10 million to Haba Group Ltd. It was signed by Tumusime-Mutebile.

We also got a letter from Bank of Uganda dated 25 November, addressed to the Managing Director, Tropical Bank (U) Ltd, with the subject matter being Credit Facility of $10 million to Haba Group (U) Ltd. It was signed by Tumusiime Mutebile.

The committee also got a letter from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, dated 29 November 2010, addressed to the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The subject matter is, “Compensation claims to Haba Group of Companies.” It is signed by H. Lwabi, Acting Solicitor General.

On the 30 September 2010, another letter originated from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development addressed to the Governor Bank of Uganda. The subject matter is compensation claims to Haba Group of Companies and it is signed by the then Minister of Finance, hon. Syda N.M. Bbumba. 

There is also another letter from Haba Group Uganda Limited dated 18 October 2010, addressed to the Attorney-General’s Chambers Kampala, attention of Prof. Khiddu Makubuya. The subject matter is compensation to Haba Group. This letter is signed by Haba Group. It is the only a signature on it. 

On the 29th of November 2010, another letter also originated from Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs addressed to the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury and this letter was signed by Harriet Lwabi. 

There is another letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development addressed to the Auditor General, dated 2 December, 2010. The subject matter is, “Compensation claims by Haba Group of Companies.” The letter is signed by Keith Muhakanizi for Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury.

On 3 December, 2010, another letter was sent from the Office of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. The subject matter is, “Compensation claims to Haba Group of Companies”, and the letter is signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba, MP. 

There is another letter addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development originating from Haba Group of Companies and the subject matter is, “Compensation to Haba Group.” The letter is signed by somebody who only put a signature and put there Haba Group.

There is another letter from Bank of Uganda dated 30th December addressed to the Managing Director Bank of Baroda. The subject matter is, “Credit facility of $1 million to Haba Group of Companies”, and it is signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile. 

On the 8 January 2011, there was a letter from State House addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. The subject matter is, “Compensation for Haba Group.” The letter is signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President.

There is another draft letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. This draft is from Syda N.M. Bbumba.

On 24 February 2011, from the Ministry of Finance to Governor, Bank of Uganda, on the subject matter of: “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” This letter was signed by honourable Syda N.M. Bbumba, MP, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The same office, that is, Ministry of Finance, also wrote to the Governor, Bank of Uganda on March 22, 2011, about compensation to Haba Group of Companies. This letter was signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba. 

On 24 February, 2011, another letter came from the Ministry of Finance addressed to the Governor Bank of Uganda on the same subject matter of compensation to Haba Group of Companies, and this letter was signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba. It is hereto also attached. 

On 24 February 2011, the same office, Ministry of Finance wrote to the Governor Bank of Uganda on the compensation claims of Haba Group of Companies and the letter is signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba.
 
On 30 September 2010, the Ministry of Finance wrote to the Governor Bank of Uganda on the compensation claims to Haba Group of Companies and this letter was signed by the then Minister for Finance.

On 14 June 2010, the same ministry wrote a letter to the chief executive Haba Group of Companies talking about compensation to Haba Group of Companies, and it is the then minister who signed it. 

On 7 June 2010, the same ministry, that is, Ministry of Finance, wrote to Governor, Bank of Uganda, on compensation to Haba Group of Companies. The letter is signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba.

We also have a letter from Orient Bank dated March 28, 2011. This letter is addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. It talks about compensation claims for Haba Group of Companies. It is signed by Maxwell Ibeanusi, Managing Director/Chief Executive Officer.

I have a letter here in my possession from the office of the Governor, Bank of Uganda, dated 6 April, 2011, addressed to the Managing Director United Bank for Africa. It is talking about $20 million facility to Haba Group Limited. It is signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile. 

On 4 May 2011, the office of the minister, Ministry of Finance, wrote to the Governor, Bank of Uganda on compensation to Haba Group of Companies. This letter is signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba, Minister of Finance. 

May 4, 2011. The same office of the minister, Ministry of Finance wrote a letter to the Governor Bank of Uganda on the same subject matter of compensation to Haba Group of Companies. The letter was signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba.

On 17 May 2011, there is a letter from the Ministry of Finance addressed to His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda, and it is talking about corruption through loan agreements and claims. The letter is signed by Syda N.M. Bbumba, MP. 

On 8 May, 2011, there is a letter from State House addressed to the Ministry of Finance, which is talking about corruption through loan agreements and claims. The letter is signed by Yoweri K. Museveni. 

There is another letter from the office of the Governor, Bank of Uganda, dated 16, June 2011, addressed to honourable Maria Kiwanuka, Minister of Finance. It talks about recovery of funds paid to Haba Group of Companies on behalf of Uganda Government. This letter is signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile. 

On 25 May, 2010, the Ministry of Finance wrote to the Chief Executive Officer, Uganda Development Bank. This letter is on compensation to Haba Group of Companies. It is signed by Chris M. Kassami, Permanent Secretary. 

From the office of the Governor, Bank of Uganda, there is a letter dated 25 January 2011, addressed to the Managing Director, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. It talks about Haba Group Limited payment of Shs 10.4 billion to Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. This letter is signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile. 

There is also another letter from the office of the Governor, Bank of Uganda, dated 15 June, 2011, addressed to Mr John F. Muwanga, Auditor General. The subject matter is claims for compensation by Haba Group of Companies. This letter is signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile. 

On 4 February, 2011, a letter came from the office of the Governor, Bank of Uganda, addressed to the Managing Director, Orient Bank Uganda Limited. It talks about a facility for Haba Group to pay Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. The letter is signed by E. Tumusiime-Mutebile. 

On March 31, 2009 there is a letter to hon. Khiddu from Haba Group of Companies; it is talking about compensation for sub-lease land, constructions and management of contracts for Haba Group of Companies, and this letter is signed by Hassan Basajjabalaba the Chairman, Haba Group. 

On 5 June 2003, there is a letter from Kampala City Council of addressed to the managing director, Sheila Investments; offset of refuse collection costs in Nakasero Market. The letter is signed by G.T. Mwesigye, Town Clerk. 

There is another letter from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs dated 27 August, 2009, addressed to G.T Mwesigye of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, who at that time was the former Town Clerk, and this letter is talking about evaluation of compensation claims by Sheila Investments Limited in respect of Nakasero Market, and it is signed by B. Kainamura.

There is also another letter here dated 8 September, 2009, addressed to Mr B. Kainamura, the Ag Solicitor-General and the subject matter is evaluation of compensation claims by Sheila Investments Uganda Limited in respect of Nakasero Market. The letter is signed by G.T. Mwesigye, Secretary, Uganda Human Rights Commission. 

There is another letter from Kampala City Council , Office of the Town Clerk, addressed to the Managing Director, Victoria International Trading Company, and it is talking about offset of refuse collection costs in St Balikuddembe Market, and it is also signed by G.T. Mwesigye, town clerk then.

I have another letter here dated 20 June, 2011 from the Office of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development addressed to the Governor, Bank of Uganda, and it is signed by Maria Kiwanuka, Minister of Finance. 

I also have a letter from the Courts of Judicature. It is dated 22 September 2011 addressed to the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, and it is talking about proceedings or documents in respect of, “Miscellaneous Calls No.83 of 2011,” and it is signed by John Eudes Ketirima, Deputy Registrar, Civil Division. 

I have a letter dated 4 July, 2011, from the Uganda Revenue Authority, addressed to the Registrar of the High Court, Kibuli Division, and it is talking about the consented judgement vide civil suit No.83 of 2007, 590 of 2007, 646 of 2006 and 21 of 2006. It is signed by Moses Kajubi, acting commissioner then. 

I have another letter here dated 5 July, 2011, addressed to the Ag Commissioner General, Uganda Revenue Authority, attention of Moses Kajubi. It is talking about consented judgement vide civil suit No.83 of 2007, 590 of 2007, 646 of 2006 and 21 of 2006. It is signed by John Ketirima.

I have another letter here dated 5 July 2011 addressed to the Ag Solicitor General Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. It is talking about consented judgement between Haba Group Uganda Limited, representing Sheila Investments Uganda Limited, First Merchant International Trading Company Limited, Victoria International Trading Company Limited and Yudaya International Limited on one part, and the Attorney-General on the other, and this is signed by Moses Kajubi, acting commissioner. 

I also have got an annexure from the High Court attached in that regard, and the whole consented judgement from the High Court is also hereto attached. It is about Haba Group of Companies Limited representing the four companies vs. Attorney General, the defendant in this matter, and this is signed by the plaintiff and this signature is of Hassan Basajjabalaba and that of the counsel for the defendant and the registrar.

I have another internal memo dated 7 April, 2011, from the Attorney-General, addressed to the Ag Solicitor-General. It is about a report of the committee on evaluation of the compensation claim – that is First Merchant International Trading Company Limited, in respect of interests in property comprising of leasehold registered No.47715 Volume 3447, folio 23, plot No.36 adjacent to Nakawa Market. It is also hereto attached and it is signed by hon. Dr E. Khiddu Makubuya, MP. 

There is also the executive summary of the committee on evaluation of the compensation claim by First Merchant International Trading Company Limited in respect of its interests in the property comprised in the leasehold, registration No.47715 Vol. 3447, folio No.23, plot No.36 adjacent to Nakawa Market. The executive summary is hereto attached. 

I also have another letter dated 30 July, 2010, addressed to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. It is all talking about Vote 7 of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, signed by Billy Kainamura. 

Also attached is another letter dated 29 July 2010 to the Ag Solicitor-General addressed by the AG of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and it is signed by hon. Dr E. Khiddu Makubuya, MP. 

I also attach a statement to the Public Accounts Committee by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic Of Uganda. This is dated 21 December, 2011, at Nakasero State Lodge. 

I also attach a letter dated 3 February 2012 addressed to hon. Kassiano Wadri, Chairman Public Accounts Committee, originating from State House and the letter is signed by His Excellency, Yoweri K. Museveni, President. 

I also have another letter from State House dated 1 February, 2012, addressed to hon. Kassiano Wadri, Chairman Public Accounts Committee, originating from State House and the letter is signed by Yoweri K. Museveni, President. 

Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Public Accounts Committee, which I want to formally lay on table for this Parliament to consider at an appropriate time. It is also my pleasure to share with my colleagues and the entire Parliament the documents that my committee used in order to arrive at this report, apart from the interface we had with the persons that I have already made mention of. I have got the evaluation report for the compensation claims by Victoria International Trading Company Limited in respect of management of contracts to operate St Balikuddembe/Owino Market. It is dated 30 October 2009. I beg to lay on Table. 

I also beg to lay the evaluation report for the compensation claims by Yudaya International Limited in respect of the sub-lease to re-develop the Constitutional Square dated 20 October, 2009. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the evaluation report for the compensation claims by Sheila Investments Limited in respect of the management contracts/ joint venture and sub-lease to operate and develop Nakasero Market dated 30 0ctober, 2009.

I also beg to lay on Table the evaluation report for the compensation claims by First Merchant International Trading Company Limited in respect of sublease to re-develop Shauriyako Market, and it is dated 30th October, 2009. I beg to lay.

I have here with me addendum to the evaluation report for the compensation claims by Haba Group of Companies, which is an addendum to the main report which I have submitted. I beg to lay.
  
In my hand here is a report on Shauriyako Market, which was considered before arriving at the figure for compensation as being short. I beg to lay.
 
I have an audit report from the office of the Auditor-General addressed to the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda dated 26th July, 2011 which talks about value-for-money-audit of these markets and the claims as required. I beg to lay. 

In my hand here is the brief on compensation of Kisekka Market, which was managed by Rhino Investments. I beg to lay. 

I also have here a full report of the evaluation committee, which considered the compensation claims in respect of Kisekka Market by Rhino Investments International. I beg to lay. 

Rule 148(2) provides that the Public Accounts Committee shall be assigned the examination of the audited books of accounts showing appropriation of sums granted by Parliament to meet the public expenditure of the Central Government and the Judiciary. The Auditor-General audits the accounts of Government and submits a report of its findings to Parliament. 

In the report of the Auditor-General to Parliament, of the year ended 30th June 2010, it was reported that, “Government is incurring a lot in compensation to companies and individuals for loss of business arising from cancellation of contracts they entered into with Government. It was also noted that in a number of cases, trade taxes have not been assessed or collected.” The report highlighted the compensation claims brought against Government by Haba Group of companies Ltd and Rhino Investments Ltd and approved as follows:

Haba Group of companies was paid Shs 142.6 billion allegedly on account of its management contracts and sub-lease for markets in the city having been cancelled by Government. 

Haba’s subsidiary companies are: 

(a)	Sheila Investments Ltd, which was awarded Shs 70,589,528,007 for loss of management contract and sub-lease over Nakasero Market; 

(b)	Victoria International Trade Co. Ltd, which was awarded Shs 2,801,585,133 for loss of its management contract over St Balikudembe (Owino) Market; 

(c)	First Merchant Trading Co. Ltd, which was awarded Shs 5,652,231,004 for loss of sub-lease over Shauriyako Market; 

(d)	Yudaya Investment Ltd, which was awarded Shs 63,654,752,244 for loss of its sub-lease over the Constitutional Square; and

(e)	Rhino Investment Ltd, which was paid Shs 14,965,569,313 allegedly on account of its lease over Kisseka Market having been cancelled by Government.

The committee’s attention was drawn to the huge sums of money that Government was paying to companies as compensations for breach of contract, and decided to examine the matter in detail to determine the propriety of these claims.  The committee was deeply concerned when it received a report from the Auditor General indicating that whereas Government compensated Haba Group of Companies with Shs 142.6 billion, an independent assessment of the claim by KPMG had shown that the Haba Group instead owed Government a net of Shs 999,039,186. 

The Committee is pleased to present its report to the House on its findings and recommendations on the compensation settlement between Government and the above entities.

Terms of Reference

The committee’s inquiry was guided by the following terms of reference:

i.	Establish whether each of the contracts in question was entered into or executed according to the law;

ii.	Establish whether the cancellation of the contracts was done through proper procedures and in public interest;

iii.	Establish whether the compensation claims lodged by the affected companies were evaluated competently, transparently and rationally to arrive at appropriate and justified compensation payments;

iv.	Establish whether all taxes associated with the transactions between Government and the companies in question were remitted to the Uganda Revenue Authority;

v.	Establish whether any public officials at the level of contract award, management, cancellation and compensation acted contrary to the established legal framework and/or public interest; and

vi.	Make recommendations to the House on the next course of action.

Methodology  

In order to obtain the relevant information and evidence, the committee adopted a multi-pronged approach, which entailed:

(a)	Interviews:

i.	Interviewed officials in the relevant ministries and Government departments that were involved in these contract claims;

ii.	Interviewed the former and the present Ag. Solicitors General and the former Attorney General in light of their roles as provided for in Article 119(5)of the Constitution;

iii.	Interviewed the directors of the two companies mentioned;

iv.	Interviewed the members of the compensation committee which evaluated the claims that were lodged by HABA Group of Companies and Rhino Investments Ltd;

v.	Interviewed the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury;

vi.	Interviewed the former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the role she played in processing the compensation claims;

vii. Interviewed the Governor Bank of 	  Uganda;

viii.	Interacted with the President; and

ix.	Interviewed the Presidential Aides.

(b)	Perusal of Documents
	(i)	Contract documents; and
	(ii)	Court judgements on cases taken to 		court

The list of the names of the witnesses is attached as Appendix No.1.

Challenges

•     In conducting this inquiry, the Committee 	       encountered a number of challenges:

•	Some witnesses were uncooperative and hostile like the former Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, who initially challenged the locus of the Committee to investigate the issue of compensation. 

•	Limited time in respect of the volume of work.

•	Inadequate financial resources. We could not visit some of these sites as you very well know that the Public Accounts Committee has zero in terms of resource allocated to inland movement, and this I brought to your attention, Madam Speaker. We could not as a committee visit these sites. Nevertheless, we are very grateful, more particularly to your office. 

Acknowledgement

The committee acknowledges all the offices that helped and supported it in the course of its inquiry, in particular, the support it received from the Public Accounts Committee Secretariat and the staff of the Auditor General’s office, who tirelessly worked with us throughout our course of investigation up to when we produced this report.
Below, the Committee presents its findings, observations and recommendations.

Haba Group of Companies Limited

Haba Group of Companies represents the following companies, namely: Sheila Investments Ltd, Victoria International Trading Company Ltd, Yudaya International Trading Company Ltd and First Merchant International Trading Company;

    a) Sheila Investments Ltd (SIL) in respect of Nakasero Market;

    b) Victoria International Ltd (VIL) in respect of St Balikuddembe Market;

    c) Yudaya International Trading Company Ltd (YIL) for Constitutional Square; and

    d) First Merchant International Trading Company (FMITC) for Shauriyako market.

Background to the contracting out of markets

As far back as May 1995, Kampala City Council (KCC) made a decision to contract out the management of markets to private entities so that Council staff could concentrate on the core function of service delivery. In 2002, the Council took a decision to contract out management of Nakasero and St Balikuddembe markets, and after competitive bidding, M/s SIL and VIL respectively, emerged the winners. The other objectives of contracting out management of the markets were: to maximise revenue collection; minimise collection costs and minimise risks in revenue collections. 

One of the issues brought to the attention of the Committee was that by KCC contracting out the management of markets to private entities, it had privatised people’s markets to private individuals, which was against the government policy. This is captured by the concern of the President as follows: “…why sell to an individual what belongs to many people? If you want to sell, why not sell to the people themselves?”

On 29th November 2002, KCC entered into a management contract with SIL and VIL to manage, control and maintain Nakasero and St Balikudembe markets respectively, for three years. In return, SIL would remit an annual contract fee of Shs 256,410,251 payable in advance plus VAT of Shs 43,589,748, and VIL would remit Shs 1,066,666,668 as annual contract sum payable in advance, and VAT of Shs 181,333,332.

The committee found that before the tendering process was concluded, the Acting Solicitor General on 28 November, 2002, wrote to the then Mayor, hon. Sebanna Kizito, requesting him to stay any dealings with VIL and SIL to allow for investigations into the companies’ existence in law. 

However, the following day, 29th November 2002, the day KCC entered into contract with the companies in question, the Mayor responded to the Solicitor General that the companies had already accepted the offer and paid the required monies to KCC and, “...hence a contract was made between KCC and the companies, which can only be altered by mutual consent or unilaterally by KCC at our peril.” This is what is quoted from the Mayor’s letter.

Beyond the request by the Ag. Solicitor General to stay the tendering process to enable investigations into the legal status of the companies in question, which request was rejected, there was no evidence that the Attorney General’s Chambers cleared the contracts between KCC and the two companies in question. Article 119(5) of the Constitution requires that all contracts involving Government departments should be cleared by the Attorney General before signature. 

Official Expiry of the Initial Contracts

The management contracts for the two markets officially expired in November 2005. After the expiry and before new tenderers could be procured, the President in his letter of February 2006, which forms an attachment to this report, directed that the renewal of the contracts for managing markets be halted. This directive was lifted by the President in his letter of 31st July 2006.  

In the meantime, the then Town Clerk, Mr Ssegane, on 9th December 2005, wrote to M/s SIL and VIL, allowing them to continue to manage the Nakasero and St Balikudembe markets respectively, on the same former terms.  When Mr Ssegane appeared before the committee, he indicated that he took the administrative action to extend the contracts in order not to allow a vacuum to prevail in the collection of revenue from the markets. 

He also indicated that his action was supposed to be a temporary measure to allow the constitution of the new council, which would take a policy decision on the matter. Nonetheless, the management contracts for the two markets as extended by Mr Ssegane on 9th December, 2005, were terminated in a letter dated 2nd February, 2007, signed by Mrs Kijjambu, the then Acting Town Clerk. 

The committee observed that the action by Mr Ssegane to extend the contract without council approval was a huge administrative error. 

The committee found that the termination of the management contracts was not the basis for the compensation claim. Rather, it was the frustration of the sub-lease agreement that KCC had entered into with SIL. The origin of the sub-lease agreement referenced in Daily Monitor, 23rd December, 2005 is indicated as an attachment of 2005 refers.

Joint Venture and Sub-lease in respect of the Nakasero Market

During the subsistence of the first management contract between KCC and SIL over the management of Nakasero Market, the two parties entered into a Joint Venture (JV) Agreement on 2nd September, 2005, for the development of Nakasero Market. Clause 1(ii) of the JV Agreement stated that KCC was to contribute the land for the development, while SIL was to provide the funds. 

However, the JV Agreement was never implemented and the term of the Mayor Kizito and his council expired. When the new Mayor and council took office in 2006, they discarded the idea of a Joint Venture and instead opted for sub-leasing the land to SIL. Consequently, on 4th June 2007, KCC and SIL signed two sub-lease agreements for plots 4B and 7B in respect of Nakasero Market. 

In the said sub-lease agreement, SIL was supposed to pay a premium of Shs 2,080,000,000 and annual ground rent of Shs 104,000,000. The said premium and ground rent were revised to Shs 2,913,200,000 and Shs 104,960,000 respectively. The said amount of money was subsequently paid to KCC. 

However, before the sub-lease title could be transferred to SIL, market vendors protested the re-development, compelling Government to intervene by the letter dated 30th July 2007 from the President cancelling the sub-lease.

The committee observed that the Joint Venture between KCC and SIL of September 2005 and the sub-lease to SIL when the JV could not proceed were not subjected to competitive bidding.
 
Subsequently, on 31st March 2009, Haba Group on behalf of SIL lodged a compensation claim to Government of Shs 47,838,134,213. The claim was later revised by Craven, the agent of Haba, to Shs 61,905,018,734 and resubmitted to the office of the Attorney General on 15th June 2009. The details of this claim are in this table as shown below, which you can see and understand, I believe.  

VIL in respect of St Balikuddembe Market

The circumstances under which Nakasero and St Balikuddembe markets were placed in private management hands were similar. Victoria won the tender to manage Owino Market in 2002 for a three-year contract. The initial management contract expired in November 2005, and was extended by the Town Clerk, Mr Ssegane, in the same circumstances that SIL’s contract over Nakasero was extended on 16th April, 2006. 

Meanwhile, between February 2006 and April 2007, there were riots and demonstrations by the market vendors, which culminated into KCC re-assuming management of the same market from 16th April 2007. 

Arising from the foregoing, VIL under Haba petitioned His Excellency the President, to have the former compensated in respect of the frustrated management contract. 

In March 2008, VIL lodged a claim of Shs 23,589,121,708 to Government. In July 2008, the President directed the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs/Attorney General to examine the legality of the claims and advise him. The claim was subsequently revised by CRAVEN, the agent of Haba Group of Companies, from Shs 23,589,121,708 to Shs 21,281,197,817 as detailed hereunder. The table is shown indicating the various aspects considered in the compensation claim lodged. 

Meanwhile, VIL had problems with KCC due to its poor remittances. This resulted into a court case and judgement was entered into on the 26th February, 2008 in favour of KCC. Court ruled that Shs 2,164,029,816 (VAT inclusive) was payable to KCC plus interest of 15 percent per annum from 7th May, 2007, the date of filing the counter-claim, till the date of full payment. 

Following the failure by VIL to pay the decremental sum, KCC filed a winding-up petition against VIL. Before the said petition could be heard, the Ag. Solicitor General, Mr. B. Kainamura, now a judge of the High Court of Uganda, on 23rd August 2010, advised KCC to discontinue its chase for the decretal sum as the sum would be deducted from the pending compensation by Government to VIL and remitted to KCC.  

First Merchant International Trading Company in respect of Shauriyako Market

On 5th July, 2006, Nakivubo Shauriyako Market Vendors Association was given the sub-lease offer over Plot 35A by Kampala City Council to develop Shauriyako Market. The procedure by which the vendors obtained the sub-lease was that they approached KCC with an application for a sub-lease and KCC accepted the proposal. The terms for the sub-lease indicated that Nakivubo Shauriyako Market Vendors Association (NSMVA) was required to pay a premium sum of Shs 500 million – that “per annum” is an error, please note it - and ground rent of Shs 10 million per annum and the sub-lease was for an initial period not exceeding 49 years.

On July 10, 2006, NSMVA wrote to KCC requesting for permission to enter into a partnership with First Merchant International Trading Company to re-develop Shauriyako Market. On July 24, 2006, Mr Ssegane on behalf of KCC wrote back to NSMVA giving it a no-objection to engage First Merchant International Trading Company as a development partner. The same letter indicated that Nakivubo Shauriyako Market Vendors Association could transfer its interest to First Merchant International Trading Company, provided that the latter complied with all the development obligations under the sub-lease offer.

Meanwhile, in a document entitled: “Memorandum of Understanding made on this 12th day July, 2006 between First Merchant International Trading Company and NSMVA Executive Committee” indicated that the First Merchant International Trading Company paid Shs 750 million to the executive committee of Nakivubo Shauriyako Market Vendors Association for the purpose of lobbying vendors to agree to sign their interest in the property to First Merchant International Trading Company. It also indicated that First Merchant International Trading Company was to pay another separate amount of Shs 810 million to distribute to the members of NSMVA. On July 14, 2006, NSMVA assigned its sub-lease interest to First Merchant International Trading Company for a consideration of Shs 810 million. 

On the same day, First Merchant International Trading Company on behalf of NSMVA paid Shs 500 million and another additional Shs 10 million to KCC as premium and ground rent, respectively. However, on August 15 2006, KCC signed a sub-lease agreement with another entity, namely, Nakivubo Shauriyako Market Company Ltd.

The decision by KCC to sign a sub-lease agreement with another company called Nakivubo Shauriyako Market Company Ltd, prompted First Merchant International Trading Company to file a civil suit against NSMVA, and on August 18 2006, a decree was issued by court directing KCC to transfer all rights, interests and documents in Plot 35A to First Merchant International Trading Company.  The Town Clerk of KCC was ordered to release the sub-lease documents to First Merchant International Trading Company.  

Before the First Merchant International Trading Company could enjoy their interests and rights in Shauriyako Market, the President issued a directive to the effect that no sub-lease interest should be passed over to First Merchant International Trading Company and that the sub-lease belongs to NSMVA.

On March 31 2009, First Merchant International Trading Company through Haba Group of Companies lodged a claim for compensation for an amount of Shs 19.7 billion to Government. On June 15 2009, Haba Group of Companies through its agent, Craven & Associates revised the original claim from Shs 19.7 billion to Shs 20.7 billion and re-submitted to Government. Details of this claim as lodged by Haba Group of Companies via Craven Report in respect of Shauriyako Market is as detailed in the table below.

The committee observed that First Merchant International Trading Company should not have claimed Shs 510 million in respect to equity contribution, premium and ground rent. This is because, by court decree dated October 16 2007, KCC was ordered to refund the amount of Shs 510 million to First Merchant International Trading Company. Subsequently, on October 31 2007, KCC refunded Shs 400 million and on November 16 2007, KCC refunded the balance of Shs 110 million. Hence, the claim by First Merchant International Trading Company for Shs 510 million was fraudulent.

(d) Yudaya International Trading Company in respect of the sub-lease to re-develop the Constitutional Square. The bid for the development of the Constitutional Square was advertised in the New Vision newspaper on June 15, 2001.  The advertisement indicated that the closing date for receiving the bids was on July 17, 2001. Only one company, namely, Yudaya International Trading Company, responded to the advertisement. The committee noted with concern that KCC proceeded to award the sub-lease to Yudaya International Trading Company to re-develop the Constitutional Square after receiving one bid only. The committee would have expected KCC to re-advertise, but it did not. 

By letter referenced Square/YIL/2001 dated August 6 2001, Kampala City Council gave a sub-lease offer to Yudaya International Trading Company, with the following terms: Initial period of two years extendable to 49 years; payment of Shs 635 million as premium; payment of Shs 3,175,000 as ground rent; avail within 30 days from the date of offer an original letter from ABN AMRO of Amsterdam, in form of a tested message through any commercial bank in Uganda, for the equity funds to KCC and, submit evidence of equity from their local bankers, Standard Chartered Bank.

On August 23, 2001, Yudaya International Trading Company duly accepted the sub-lease offer. On September 18, 2001, it paid to KCC Shs 235 million as part payment towards clearance of the premium. Before other conditions of offer could be fulfilled, in December 2001, before KCC could process the sub-lease agreement with the Yudaya International Trading Company, the then Minister of Local Government - hon. Jaberi Bidandi Ssali - intervened, stopped the sub-lease arrangement and ordered that a commission of inquiry into the leasing of the Constitutional Square be instituted. By Legal Notice No.14 of 2001, the Commission of Inquiry into the Leasing of the Constitutional Square by KCC to a private company was instituted. The commission produced its report dated March 2002. It recommended that the Constitutional Square should not be leased to a private developer. 

On March 31, 2009, Mr Basajjabalaba of Haba Group of Companies lodged to Government a claim on behalf of Yudaya International Trading Company for the amount of Shs 55.4 billion. The above claim was revised by Craven, the agent of Haba Group of Companies, to Shs 27.8 billion with details contained in the table on page 16. The committee observed that KCC awarded all the contracts to manage and re-develop markets to companies all associated with Mr Basajjabalaba’s Haba Group of Companies.

Evaluation of the Compensation Claims

The Committee was informed that in 2007, on various occasions, Mr Basajjabalaba approached the President claiming for compensation as a result of Government having frustrated his investments in the aforementioned markets in Kampala as well as the Constitutional Square. Upon receipt of the compensation claims from Mr Basajjabala, the President, on 30 July, 2008, wrote to the Attorney-General directing him to examine the legality of the claims and advise the President as soon as possible. 
PAC observed that the then Attorney-General never replied the President’s letter of 30 July, 2008, on the legality of the claims. 

On 25 March, 2009, the President, in response to the petition by Basajjabalaba requesting for the intervention of the President in his compensation claims, convened and chaired a meeting. The meeting was attended by the Attorney-General, Minister of Local Government, Minister of Finance, Permanent Secretaries of the foregoing ministries and officials from Haba Group of Companies. The meeting of 25 March, 2009, unanimously adopted the following resolutions as passed to the Minister of Justice and Attorney-General by the President on 16 June, 2009: 

i)	That the inter-ministerial committee be constituted under the chairmanship of the Attorney-General and comprising of Ministry of Local Government, Kampala City Council, Minister in charge of the Presidency, Ministry of Finance and the Auditor-General;

ii)	That the inter-ministerial committee authenticates and evaluates HABA Group of Companies’ input in purchasing the markets;

iii)	That the Ministry of Local Government causes Kampala City Council to take responsibility for its indulgence in an illegal transaction of selling the market without a policy and compensate the buyers;

iv)	That Government retains Nakasero Market and all its other assets of that category because they are public goods; and

v)	That Basajjabalaba withdraws from court the suit against the Government of Uganda for breach of the contract.

However, it was on 31 March, 2009, that Basajjabalaba wrote to the Attorney-General submitting the claims for compensation for losses suffered by the four companies related to Haba Group of Companies, totalling to Shs 131,734,996,651.  

On 16 June, 2009, the President, wrote to the Attorney-General reminding him about the resolutions made by the meeting that the President chaired, and informed the Attorney-General that he was supposed to resolve this matter within 60 days from receipt of “this” communication.

Instead of constituting an inter-ministerial committee whose composition had been unanimously defined in a meeting convened and chaired by His Excellency the President, on 25 March, 2009, the Attorney-General resurrected a committee of seven members that had been used previously to evaluate the compensation claim by Rhino Investments Ltd in respect of a frustrated sub-lease agreement over Plot 9A Kyaggwe Road, commonly known as Kisseka Market, to evaluate the claims by Haba Group of Companies. 

The team consisted of:

i)	Mr Harry Kazahuura, Commissioner Building, Ministry of Works and Transport, who acted as the chairperson of the team;

ii)	Mr Bwiragura A., Chief Government Valuer, Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban Development;

iii)	Mr Kenneth Mugambe, Commissioner Budget Policy and Evaluation, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;

iv)	Mr Abbey Iga, Assistant Commissioner, Urban Administration, Ministry of Local Government;
v)	Ms Mary Nankabirwa, Senior State Attorney, Legal Advisory Services, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;

vi)	Mr Jeffrey Atwiine, State Attorney, Directorate of Civil Litigation, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;

vii)	Ms Patricia Anabo, State Attorney, Legal Advisory Services, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;

The committee, therefore, observed that the Attorney-General did not conform to the directives by His Excellency the President, in constituting the inter-ministerial committee. The Attorney-General re-constituted an already existing technical committee contrary to the President’s directive.

In addition, the Attorney-General did not chair the committee, and did not involve Kampala City Council, the Minister for the Presidency and the Auditor-General as directed by the President.

The recommendations made by the committee are contained in this table as shown below. You can see the committee recommended that out of the claim of Shs 131.7 billion Government should have paid Shs 22.7 billion.

Observations of PAC on Questionable Awards by the Evaluation Committee

Reimbursement for Collection and Disposal of Garbage to VIL

The committee noted that with respect to VIL, the amount recommended by the committee included claims of reimbursement of refuse collection amounting to Shs 1,976,080,000. 
	
The committee observed that much as this was an obligation imposed on VIL under the contract, by letter referenced CR/115/18 and dated 5 June, Kampala City Council permitted VIL to carry on with the refuse collection exercise in the market, and the cost thereof would be offset from the management contract sum and further, such cost would be in accordance with the council’s refuse collection rates. 

The committee further observed that under clause 5.2 of the general conditions of contract, VIL was obligated to, among others, collect and dispose of garbage.

When the Public Accounts Committee inquired from the evaluation committee why they awarded VIL for collection and disposal of garbage, they responded that they had written to the then Town Clerk, Mr Gordon Mwesigye, who was purported to have written the letter mentioned above requesting him to verify the authenticity of the said letter, but the committee had not received any written response from him. And in the absence of a written response from Mr Gordon Mwesigye, disputing the contents of the said letter, the evaluation committee resolved the doubt in favour of VIL.

When the Public Accounts Committee interviewed Mr Gordon Mwesigye, he indicated that he had responded to the inquiry about the letter and categorically indicated to the evaluation committee that the letter was a forgery. The then acting Solicitor-General, now a judge of the High Court, Mr Billy Kainamura, when he appeared before the Public Accounts Committee confirmed that indeed, Mr Gordon Mwesigye, responded to the inquiry and his response was forwarded to the evaluation committee for consideration. PAC observed that Shs 1,976,080,000 was awarded to Victoria International Trading Company Ltd in error by the evaluation committee.

Compensation Payment to Vendors in Nakasero and Shauriyako Markets

Sheila International Ltd and First Merchant International Trading Company claimed Shs 1,700,000,000 and Shs 750,000,000 respectively, as reimbursements paid by the two companies to the vendors to buy their interests. The Public Accounts Committee noted that it was not one of the obligations in the contracts that the companies had to compensate the vendors. It would not, therefore, be fair for the government to reimburse the companies’ money they allegedly paid to vendors to buy their interest, when the same Government was fighting to return the markets to the vendors. On the contrary, if there was any money to be reimbursed to the companies on the account of their contracts over markets having been cancelled in favour of the vendors, it should be the vendors who should compensate the companies. In that way, the interests in the markets would shift from the companies to the vendors.

Award Given to SIL and VIL in respect of Collection and Disposal of Garbage

SIL and VIL claimed Shs 1,387,200,000 and Shs 1,976,080,000 respectively, as expenses incurred in the collection and disposal of garbage. The evaluation committee recommended that the said cost of Shs 1,387,200,000 and Shs 1,976,080,000 be reimbursed to SIL and VIL in the absence of the written response from Mr Gordon Mwesigye the then Town Clerk disputing the contents of the letter from HABA Group of Companies to Ministry of Justice and Attorney-General that purportedly made the collection and disposal of garbage an obligation of KCC contrary to the agreement between KCC with SIL and VIL. 

However, when Mr Gordon Mwesigye appeared before the committee, he denied the allegation that he had failed to substantiate the contents of the letter. He actually confirmed to PAC that he duly notified the evaluation committee that the letters attributed to him were forgeries. The evidence by Mr Gordon Mwesigye was corroborated by Mr Billy Kainamura, the former Solicitor-General, in his submission to the Public Accounts Committee.

The committee observed that:
1. 	The letter presented by Haba Group of Companies backing its claim for collection and disposal of garbage was forged.

2. 	There was no need to award any money to Haba Group of Companies in respect of collection and disposal of garbage since the contractual obligation to collect and dispose of garbage fell on the shoulders of the contracted company.

3. 	The awards to Sheila Investments of Shs 1.3 billion and Victoria International of Shs 1.9 billion in respect of garbage collection and disposal were not justified.

Submission of New Claims and the Re-evaluation Exercise of Haba Group of Companies’ Claims

Re-evaluation by the Evaluation Committee
Upon receipt of the evaluation report which recommended that Haba Group of Companies should be paid Shs 22.7 billion, Haba Group of Companies, on 18 November 2009, wrote to the Attorney-General accepting awards to Sheila Investments Ltd in respect of the management contract of St Balikuddembe Market and to First Merchant International Trading Company in respect of the sub-lease agreement over Shauriyako Market. 

With respect to awards to Sheila Investments, Haba Group of Companies accepted all the items reimbursed but contested the following items:

•	Loss of business opportunity award of Shs 2.3 billion instead of Shs 20.1 billion.

•	Invoice No.149 of Shs 983,500,000 in respect of the services rendered by Ornate Designers to Sheila Investments.

•	Advance Payment of 10 percent of the total project cost of Shs 30 billion, which comes to Shs 3 billion, in respect of the services rendered by Travellers Choice Ltd to Sheila Investments as per agreement dated 1 June 2007.

The committee observed that:

1. 	The claim of Shs 983,500,000 by Haba Group of Companies that it had contracted Ornate Designers in respect of project management for re-development of Nakasero Market was defective since Ornate was contracted seven months before the lease to Sheila Investments.

2. 	A prior contractual obligation could not be in contemplation of KCC at the time of the award of the sub-lease. Therefore, at the time of the termination of the sub-lease, KCC could not be held liable.

3. 	The payment to Travellers’ Choice was not applicable.

Haba Group of Companies on behalf of Sheila Investments also made additional claims as follows:
•	Reimbursement of legal fees amounting to Shs 1.1 billion. 
•	Interest on Shs 4.4 billion from the above three items.

•	With respect to the awards to YIL, which is in charge of Constitutional Square, Haba Group accepted all but contested the following claims:

•	Loss of business opportunity of Shs 1.8 billion; 

•	Invoice No.020/01 by Id Forum of US$ 532,733; and

•	Receipt No.12577 from Mugoya Construction Company of US$ 2,628,677. 

Haba Group of Companies also made an additional claim, that is, the interest on additional claims of Shs 2.9 billion.

On 20 November 2009, Haba Group petitioned the President bringing to his attention the contested areas. They also complained that the evaluation committee did not consider documents, which were submitted in support of some items. Further, they claimed that the evaluation committee had not used the same formula it had previously used in evaluating compensation payable to Rhino Investment Ltd in relation to Kisekka Market.

On 24 November 2009, the President wrote to the Attorney-General directing him to conclusively resolve all the issues raised by HABA Group in their petition. On 16 July 2010, Mrs Joy Kabatsi, writing on behalf of the Principal Private Secretary to the President, wrote to the Attorney-General reminding him about the President’s directive dated 24 November 2009. 

On 14 December 2009, the Attorney-General, through an internal memo, wrote to the Solicitor-General advising that Government should effect payments to Mr Hassan Basajjabalaba for the awards that he accepted, that is, First Merchants totalling to Shs 56 billion and Victoria International Trading Company totalling to Shs 2.8 billion. 

He further advised that with regard to awards which were contested namely, with respect to sub-leases for Nakasero and Constitutional Square, the evaluation committee should examine the grounds on which the claimant contested the two evaluations. Consequently, the evaluation committee was recalled to review the grounds for contesting its earlier report and the new claims that were submitted by Haba Group. 

The committee was informed that while all the members of the previous evaluation committee accepted to evaluate the new claims by Haba Group, one member, the Chief Government Valuer then, Mr Bwiragura, declined to participate. When he appeared before the Public Accounts Committee he argued that he declined because he was satisfied with what the evaluation committee had recommended and therefore, saw no need to review the new claims, the Presidential directive notwithstanding.

Nevertheless, the rest of the members proceeded to examine the grounds advanced by Haba Group to reject evaluations in respect of Nakasero Market and Constitutional Square and to evaluate the new claims. The evaluation committee finalized its report dated 2 February 2010 wherein the figure that they recommended was raised from Shs 22 billion to Shs 54 billion.

Re-evaluation by the Attorney-General leading to the Escalation of Awards
On 3 March 2010, the then Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, through an internal memo wrote to the acting Solicitor-General then, Mr Billy Kainamura. Among other things, he acknowledged receipt of an addendum to the evaluation report, thanked the evaluation committee for a job well done, agreed with the committee’s recommendations and communicated that Haba Group vide its letter of reference HB/CHG/8/26/02/2010 of 26 February 2010 had accepted the recommendations of the evaluation committee in their entirety. 

The Attorney-General decided that Yudaya International’s total approved payment was Shs 22 billion and Sheila Investments Ltd’s total approved payment was Shs 24.1 billion. This was in addition to the already agreed claims of Shs 2.8 billion in favour of Victoria International and Shs 5.6 billion in favour of First Merchants, giving a grand total of Shs 54.6 billion. Delete that last sentence, please, honourable colleagues.

Strangely, on 29 July 2010, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, through another internal memo, wrote to the acting Solicitor-General on the subject of compensation to Haba Group. In the internal memo, the Attorney-General set aside the work that the evaluation committee had just done; for example, in paragraph 2 of the internal memo dated 29 July 2010, the Attorney-General submitted that, “The matter of compensation to Haba Group was substantially handled by the technical inter-ministerial committee with some of its recommendations being accepted by Haba Group itself”. 

In paragraph 4, the Attorney-General indicated that Haba Group has challenged the methodology used in valuing the investment by Sheila in respect of Nakasero Market and Yudaya International in respect of Constitutional Square. In paragraph 8 of the internal memo, the Attorney-General made a decision on what Government should pay as follows: “My decision on the actual award is that Government should pay to the claimants 75 percent only of the original claims.” 

The revision by the Attorney-General radically and completely ignored the awards as recommended by the evaluation committee which, ironically, the claimant had agreed to in totality. 

The committee noted with concern:
    1. Why did the Attorney General institute an evaluation committee to review the contested claims and later completely ignore the report of the committee he had put in place? 

    2. Why were public funds used for an exercise whose results were completely ignored? 

    3. Why did the Attorney General agree with the recommendations in the addendum report only to ignore them later? 

    4. If it was true, as the Attorney-General communicated to the Acting Solicitor-General that Haba Group had agreed with the recommendations of the evaluation committee in its addendum report in their entirety, why did the Attorney-General revise the figures upwards? 

    5. Lastly, in whose interest did the Attorney-General apply 75 per cent of the original claim to award Haba Group? 

On the 8 November 2010, Haba Group petitioned His Excellency the President in respect of the compensation for the sub-leased lands, management contracts and Government contribution towards the construction of KIU teaching hospital in Ishaka. 

In the petition, Basajjabalaba complained that the methodology used by Government’s evaluation committee in evaluating Rhino Investments’ compensation for the latter’s interest in Kisekka Market was not the same that was used to evaluate Basajjabalaba’s claims. 

In response to the petition, on 13 November 2010 the President wrote to the Attorney-General on the subject, “Compensation for sub-leased lands and management contracts of Haba Group and Government’s contribution towards the construction of KIU Teaching Hospital, Ishaka.” In the said letter, the President indicated that he had earlier made directives to the Attorney-General to put in place a mechanism that conclusively resolves the matter pertaining to the compensation of Haba Group for their losses regarding investment in the various entities. In spite of this directive, the President indicated that he kept receiving more petitions to the effect that their claims had not been conclusively resolved to-date. 

Consequently, the President directed the Attorney-General to resolve all the issues raised in the petition by Haba Group already mentioned above within the shortest possible time. By copy of the same letter, the President directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to liaise with the Governor Bank of Uganda with a view of settling all the outstanding claims in respect of the above matter. 

Public Accounts Committee observed with concern that in all the letters written to the Attorney-General by H.E. the President, the Attorney-General did not respond to the President giving him an update on evaluation of the claims. The claimant exploited lack of feedback to the President from the Attorney-General by continuously filling petitions to the President, thereby creating the impression to the President that Haba Group claims had not been assessed by the Office of the Attorney-General. 

Payment of Compensation to Haba Group of Companies 

The Requisitioning Process

On the 13 December 2009, the then acting Solicitor-General, Mr Billy Kainamura, wrote to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the approval and release of Shs 8.4 billion being compensation to First Merchants International Trading Company and Victoria International Ltd.

On the 5 March 2010, the same officer wrote to the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury,  Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the approval and release of Shs 46.2 billion as compensation to Haba Group of Companies in respect of Sheila Investments Limited and Yudaya International Limited.

On the 30 July 2010, the same officer wrote to the PS/ST Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to approve and release Shs 88 billion as compensation to Haba Group of Companies.

As a result of these numerous requests on the same subject from the acting Solicitor-General, on the 27 September 2010, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, on behalf of the PS/Secretary to the Treasury Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote to the Acting Solicitor General requesting for clarity on whether the revised figure of Shs 88 billion was inclusive of the earlier request of Shs 54.6 billion or was in addition to the said amount. (Interjections)

Public Accounts Committee noted with concern the frequency of the requests by the Acting Solicitor-General to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury as referenced in the letters above.  
	
On the following day, that is 28 September 2010, the new Acting Solicitor-General, Madam Harriet Lwabi, responded to the letter by the PS/ST Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the grand total payable to Haba Group of Companies was Shs 96.4 billion only.

On the 18 October 2010, Mr Hassan Basajjabalaba of Haba Group of Companies wrote to hon. Khiddu Makubuya contesting the clarification that the Ag Solicitor-General had provided to the PS/ST Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development where she had stated that the grand total payable to Haba was Shs 96.4 billion only. In the letter, Haba Group referred to the clarification by Harriet Lwabi, Ag Solicitor-General, as erroneous and bizarre. Haba Group requested hon. Khiddu Makubuya to clarify the matter and show that the total of Shs 88 billion was additional to the earlier award of Shs 46.2 billion.
 
Indeed, Hon. Khiddu Makubuya did as was requested by Haba Group of Companies and set aside what his Ag Solicitor-General had clarified. On the 22 November 2010, hon. Khiddu Makubuya wrote an internal memo to the Ag Solicitor-General, Harriet Lwabi, and in paragraph 3 of that internal memo, hon. Khiddu Makubuya submitted as follows: “Having worked on these issues for some time, my view was and still is that the new values were additional to the original values rather than simple enlargements of the original values.”

Consequently, hon. Khiddu Makubuya put the position on the total awards as follows: The original claim by Haba was Shs 131.7 billion. The second revised claim was Shs 159.3 billion. The first award by the technical committee was Shs 22.7 billion. The revised award was Shs 54.6 billion. Later on, the learned Attorney-General, using Rhino formula of 62.5 per cent, raised the figure to Shs 81.7 billion and using the formula of 75 percent, raised it to Shs 96.4 billion. The second award by the learned Attorney-General, without any basis, was Shs 142.6 billion. (Interjections)

Hon. Khiddu Makubuya went on to indicate that the grand total for all companies would be Shs 142.6 billion and advised the Ag Solicitor General to advise the appropriate authorities accordingly.

The Public Accounts Committee observed that the computation by hon. Khiddu Makubuya was astonishing because:

•	First, the basis of the so called original values was very mysterious. It would appear they included what the evaluation committee had recommended upon contestation of its first report.

•	Secondly, the additional values, which hon. Khiddu Makubuya arrived at by adding the original claim by Haba Group by 75 per cent, was in sharp contrast to the figure that the evaluation committee had recommended.

•	Thirdly, advising that the new values were additional to the original values would tantamount to double counting. The net effect would be inflated payments to Haba Group of Companies by 161 per cent, all attributable to the single handed act of hon. Khiddu Makubuya. 

In response, hon. Khiddu Makubuya indicated that he had instructions to act on Haba Group’s petitions, and in any case, he just gave advice to the Ag Solicitor-General. 

As directed by the Attorney-General, the Ag Solicitor-General, Ms Harriet Lwabi, went ahead to communicate to the Permanent Secretary/ST the new award, contrary to her earlier clarification. On 29 November 2010, Ms Harriet Lwabi wrote to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the subject of compensation claims to Haba Group of Companies. 

In her letter, she clarified that the revised amount payable – the grand total - to Haba Group of Companies now was Shs 142,698,096,388, just one million shillings more than what the Attorney General had awarded. She stressed that the revised total figure was Shs 142,698,096,388 and not Shs 96,461,393,376 as earlier communicated by her in her letter of 29 September 2010 already referred to above.

When Ms Lwabi Harriet appeared before PAC, she explained that the additional one million shillings came about due to correction of the wrong summation by the Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya. 

The Public Accounts Committee observed that Ms Lwabi Harriet, the accounting officer who was supposed to be custodian of public finances in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, simply complied with the directives of the politician, the Attorney-General, on matters pertaining to financial management. 

The Role of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the Haba Compensation Payment: The Technical Officials and the Minister 

The Public Accounts Committee established that the initial response by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was professional. The ministry demanded for substantiation and independent assessment. As already seen above, when the PS/ST received a constant stream of requests for approval and release of funds for compensation to Haba, he sought clarification on the quantum of payment. However, as also already seen, the clarification sought did not clarify the matter as contradictory requests were instead submitted shortly afterwards.

In light of the continuous escalation of the compensation figures to Haba Group of Companies coming from the Office of the Solicitor-General, upon receipt of a request from the Solicitor-General for the release of Shs 142,698,096,388 to compensate Haba Group of Companies on 2 December 2010, Keith Muhakanizi, on behalf of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, wrote to the Auditor-General requesting him to establish the value for money in respect of the claims by the Haba Group of Companies before the said payments could be effected.

Accordingly, the Auditor-General appointed KPMG to conduct an independent assessment of the claim by Haba Group of Companies at a cost of Shs 750,000,000 only. The firm presented its findings to the Auditor-General on 25 July 2011, and the same report was presented to the Speaker of Parliament on 26 July 2011, and I laid it on the Table.  

The Role of hon. Syda Bbumba, former Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in this Compensation
By the time the Auditor-General presented the said report, the Governor Bank of Uganda, upon request by the then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda Bbumba, through her letter of 7 June 2010, had issued guarantees (letters of comfort) to various commercial banks. This enabled Mr Basajjabalaba to access credit facilities totalling to US$ 46 Million as testified by the Governor, Bank of Uganda, when he appeared before PAC on 1 December 2011. The letters of comfort are contained and attached to this report as I did indicate earlier.

Section 4 (1) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act vests in the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the responsibility of ensuring   that systems are established throughout Government for planning, allocating, and budgeting for the use of resources in order to improve the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of Government. The Public Accounts Committee observed that while technical officials - the PS/ST and the Deputy ST - in the Ministry of Finance were instituting due diligence to verify Haba claims, the Minister seemed to be undermining the said measures, contrary to the spirit of the law. 
	
Long before the President directed her to liaise with the Governor Bank of Uganda, with a view of settling all the outstanding claims in respect of Haba Group and KIU Teaching Hospital (see the President’s letter dated 13 November 2010), the Minister had already briefed the Governor, Bank of Uganda, on the pending compensations to Haba Group of Companies and requested the latter to provide any assistance he deems fit. 

On 7 June 2010, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to the Governor Bank of Uganda on the subject of compensation to Haba Group of Companies. She indicated that she had been requested to assist Mr Basajjabalaba regarding his indebtedness to various banks, which were threatening legal action. 

She further informed the Governor that the Solicitor-General had requested for a supplementary of Shs 46,236,701,612 to compensate Haba Group of Companies. She also informed the Governor that part of this money had been included in the budget for the FY 2010/2011 to cover Haba’s indebtedness to Government of Uganda and Uganda Development Bank. She then requested the Governor to provide any assistance he deemed fit.
	
The following day, on 8 June 2010, Mr Basajjabalaba wrote to hon. Bbumba, the Minister of Finance, requesting her to clarify to the Governor, among other things, that when debts owed to Government and Uganda Development Bank are netted off, the balance in favour of Haba becomes Shs 28,610,267,162 and to indicate how much she had provided in the budget and when she would be ready to settle the balance. On the same date, the Minister sought advice from the PS/ST and the latter advised that all that was available in Financial Year 2010/11 was enough to cover obligations to Government of Uganda and Uganda Development Bank, and that the balance would be paid possibly in three financial years.

On 14 June 2010, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to Haba Chief Executive responding to his letter of 8 June 2010, and gave a copy to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. She clarified that in the 2010/11 Budget, under Vote 130 Treasury Operations, funds to cover Haba’s indebtedness to Uganda Development Bank and Uganda Government had been provided as follows:

    1. Uganda Development Bank, Shs 3,500,000,000.

    2. Government of Uganda, US$ 11,575,000.

She further informed Haba Group that there was another provision in the FY 2010/11 Budget to the Ministry of Justice to settle claims. However, she did not disclose the amount. She advised Haba Group that the balance would be paid in the subsequent two financial years, a position which contradicted the advice given by the PS/ST already seen above in paragraph 93.

On 30 July 2010, Mr Billy Kainamura, then Ag Solicitor-General, wrote to the PS/ST communicating that following an appeal to H.E. the President by the chairman of Haba Group to reconsider evaluation of his compensation claims, the Attorney-General, having been directed to handle the issues for Haba Group conclusively, had revised and approved the compensation claims totalling to Shs 88,007,579,239. 

Upon receipt on 5 August 2010, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury requested the guidance of the Minister and pointed out that the methodology used to reach the figure was not clear; the quantum was not warranted by the nature of investments; and whether the Ministry was permitted to demand a professional and independent valuation. He suggested to the Minister to take up the matter with His Excellency the President. The Minister responded that she concurred with the advice on further consultation with H.E. the President. 

The Public Accounts Committee, however, observed that there was no evidence that hon. Syda Bbumba consulted with H.E the President as advised by the Permanent Secretary.

It would appear that for a while, the Minister ignored the revised and enhanced compensation figure of Shs 88 billion. On 24 September 2010, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to the Governor and made reference to her previous letter of 7 June 2010 confirming that Shs 54,690,517,149 was still owing to Haba Group as compensation, less Shs 24,500,000,000 owed to Government, which would be channelled directly through Bank of Uganda in accordance with the payment schedule earlier agreed upon and communicated to him.

Meanwhile, on 27 September 2010, Keith Muhakanizi, on behalf of the PS/ST, wrote to the Ag Solicitor-General seeking clarification on the whether the new figure was inclusive of the earlier Shs 54,690,517,142 or was in addition to the said amount. He copied the letter to the hon. Syda Bbumba, the Minister for Finance then.

On 28 September 2010, the Ag Solicitor-General, Harriet Lwabi, responded to Mr Keith Muhakanizi’s letter clarifying that the grand total payable to the Haba Group of Companies was Shs 96,461,395,376.

On 30 September 2010, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to the Governor communicating the new figure of Shs 96 billion as clarified by the Solicitor-General as Government’s total indebtedness to Haba Group, and reminded the Governor that other terms remain as earlier communicated.

On 13 November 2010, the President wrote to the Attorney-General with a copy to the Minister for Finance. Among other things, he directed her to liaise with the Governor Bank of Uganda with a view of settling all the outstanding claims by Haba Group. However, the letter was silent on the amount payable to Haba Group. The directive came at a time when the Minister and the Governor were long in liaison on how to settle the claims by Haba Group. It therefore energised the Minister in the work she had already embarked on.

On 22 November 2010, the Attorney-General advised the Ag Solicitor-General that the grand total for all companies was not Shs 96,461,395,376 but actually Shs 142,697,150,388.

Consequently, on 29 November 2010, the Ag Solicitor-General again wrote to the PS clarifying that the revised amount payable to Haba Group now was Shs 142,698,096,338 and copied the letter to the Minister for Finance and the Governor, Bank of Uganda.

On receipt of this new figure of Shs 142.6 billion, on 1 December 2010, the Minister sought guidance from the PS/ST on how to handle the issue. The PS/ST advised the Minister to request the Auditor-General to verify the claim to establish its value for money before payments could be effected.

On 2 December 2010, Mr Keith Muhakanizi wrote to the Auditor-General requesting his office to audit the claim and advise the Ministry before payment could be effected. The letter to the Auditor-General was even copied to hon. Bbumba, Minister for Finance.

The following day, on 3 December 2010, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to the Governor reminding him about the directive by the President in his letter of 13 November 2010. She also communicated to the Governor the new figure of Shs 142.6 billion as advised by the Ag Solicitor General in her letter of 29 November 2010, and reiterated that the Ministry had no objection to any arrangement to assisting HABA Group through any financial institution to sort out their immediate financial obligations.

The committee observed with concern that despite a request by the PS/ST, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, to the Auditor-General for a forensic audit on the claims - that is on 2 December 2010 - the following day, on 3 December 2010, the Minister, hon. Syda Bbumba, wrote to the Governor Bank of Uganda stating that she had no objection to any arrangement to effect payment to Haba Group to the tune of Shs 142.6 billion.

On 8 January 2011, the President wrote to the Governor Bank of Uganda and gave a copy to the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The President informed the Governor that he had been made to understand that the amounts owing to Haba Group in form of compensation had now been evaluated and quantified by the relevant Government ministries. However, he continued, this compensation was to be met over the next two financial years. He then advised the Governor to assist the company to access funding without suffering interest. 

The Public Accounts Committee observed that the reason for the request made to the Governor, Bank of Uganda, had now changed. In the previous requests by the Minister for Finance, the reason was to help Haba Group settle its creditors. In the new request by the President, the reason was to assist Haba Group access financing without suffering exorbitant interest rates, which would have negative financial implications on its operations. 

Following the above advice by the President to the Governor to assist Haba Group access funding without suffering interest and even before this advice was given, the Governor wrote letters of comfort to a number of banks which enabled Haba Group to obtain funding. By February 2011, some of the payment dates had fallen due. 

Consequently, on 16 February 2011, Mr Basajjabalaba wrote to hon. Syda Bbumba informing her that the Governor had assisted him with a small portion of financing from various financial institutions, and the liability was due for settlement. He, therefore, requested the Minister to authorise the Governor Bank of Uganda to sort out the portion of whatever assistance was rendered to him with the financial institutions.

On 24 February 2011, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to the Governor, Bank of Uganda, requesting him to sort out repayment of the funds that financial institutions had extended to Haba Group of Companies. The Governor requested that the letter be signed by the PS/Secretary to Treasury, but the latter refused.

On 22 March 2011, hon. Syda Bbumba further asked the Governor to clear loans which banks had extended to Mr Basajjabalaba. She wrote, “This is to confirm that you can repay the proceeds of the earlier programmes with the banks. As soon as the budgetary arrangements allow, I will authorise repayments to the Haba Group through Bank of Uganda from which payments you can deduct the extra money to pay to the banks the extra loans you will have arranged for the Haba Group.”

The committee observed that:

•	The conduct of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in facilitating the clearance of the compensation claim by Haba Group exposed the taxpayer to high risk. 

•	The Minister acted in a reckless manner. She did not advise the President when the approved claims by the Attorney-General kept escalating. 

•	The Minister did not heed to the advice of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury.

•	The Minister misled the Governor by indicating that the payment to Haba Group would be effected within two financial years, yet the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury had advised her that it would possibly be cleared within three financial years. By then, the planning figure, of course, was Shs 46.2 billion and not Shs 142. 6 billion.

•	The Minister misled the Governor to believe that there was budgetary provision in the Financial Year 2009/2010 to cover the compensations when she had been advised that there was none apart from clearing Basajjabalaba’s outstanding indebtedness to Government. 

•	Even when the figure was astronomically raised, the Minister kept the Governor informed that the previous commitment of providing the resources within two years would remain. 

•	Even when the Minister knew very well that her ministry had engaged the Auditor-General to audit the compensation awards before effecting payments, she kept pressing the Governor to assist Mr Basajjabalaba on the basis of the receivables from Government, when she knew very well that these were questionable. 

•	By hon. Syda Bbumba continuing to press the Governor, Bank of Uganda, to facilitate Mr Basajjabalaba to access funding when she had instituted a value-for-money audit of the compensation award, which exercise cost Shs 750,000,000, was a wastage of public funds.

In response, hon. Syda Bbumba indicated that she acted on the strength of the letters from the Ag Solicitor-General and the legal advice by the Attorney-General showing that Haba Group of Companies’ compensation claims had been ascertained and quantified by the competent offices. She argued that she was bound by the legal position given by the Attorney-General on compensations, and that she had no mandate to question the Attorney-General’s decision. 

She also acted on the basis of the letter from the President directing her to liaise with the Governor to sort out the outstanding claims. She also submitted that she did not want to disobey the advice of the Attorney-General and the Government with its attendant consequences. 


The Role of the Governor, Bank of Uganda
Below, we examine how the Governor, Bank of Uganda, came to be involved in the compensation of Haba Group. We have already seen the letters that hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to the Governor, asking him to assist Haba Group. Here, we examine how the Governor responded to the requests made on behalf of Haba Group.

In response to the Minister’s letter dated 7 June 2010 advising that a sum of Shs 46,236,701,612 had been cleared by the Solicitor-General for payment to Haba Group of Companies, and advising that the Governor could render assistance to the claimant on the basis of that assurance, the Governor issued a letter of comfort dated 11 June 2010 to Orient Bank, and another dated 12 June 2010 to United Bank of Africa. The letters read in part: 

“I am writing to confirm that the Government Budget read yesterday included provision for payment of the government debt owed to Mr Basajjabalaba and Haba Group. Although the budget may be approved by Parliament soon, it may take a maximum of three months before the budget is approved and the money paid to Mr Basajjabalaba. 

I am, therefore, writing this letter to support Mr Basajjabalaba’s request for further funding from you and I have received assurance from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that they will pay him as soon as the budget is approved. I will inform you when this is done.”

When the Governor appeared before PAC, he referred to the above letters of comfort as being weak since they did not make any commitment to pay. 

However, the committee observed that the contents of the letter by the Governor were not accurate yet he knew the truth that the money provided for in the budget was to settle old indebtedness by Haba Group - to Bank of Uganda, US$ 11.5million and to UDB, Shs 3.5 billion.

On 28 October 2010, the Governor issued another letter of comfort to Orient Bank Ltd supporting a facility of US$ 10,000,000 against a compensation claim from Government totalling Shs 96 billion.

On 25 November 2010, the Governor issued another letter of comfort to Tropical Bank supporting a facility of US$ 10,000,000 against compensation claim from Government totalling Shs 96 billion.

In response to the letter from the Minister of Finance dated 3 December 2010 communicating that the revised payment to Haba Group was Shs 142.6 billion, and advising the Governor that, “As earlier communicated, we have no objection to any arrangement to assisting Haba Group through any financial institution to sort out their financial obligations”, the Governor issued several letters of comfort to various commercial banks to extend credit facilities to Haba Group. Some of the banks that were given letters of comfort as a result of the new information by the Minister of Finance were: United Bank of Africa, US$ 10,000,000; Tropical Bank Ltd, US$ 10,000,000; Orient Bank Ltd, Shs 10.4 billion in favour of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation; and Bank of Baroda, US$ 1,000,000. 

These letters of comfort were in fact irrevocable guarantees. They read, in part, “The Bank of Uganda, therefore, unequivocally confirms that the payment has been approved by the authorized officers and that there is no contingent conditions to the payment now or hereafter that can deter the release of the funds. In the above premises, we hereby with or without demand undertake to remit the monies owing to you from Haba Group of Companies”.

The committee observed that the statement that “there were no contingent conditions on the compensations approved for Haba Group” was misleading. In fact, the conditions were: 

•	 Haba Group should withdraw all court cases instituted against Government; 
•	 hand over the titles of properties to Bank of Uganda; and
 
•	 Pay taxes applicable. 

•	At the time of writing the letters of comfort, the conditions were still subsisting.

•	As would eventually happen, and as no money had been put in the budget for FY 2010/2011 to pay Mr Basajjabalaba except the money he owed Government and UDB, no money was sent to Bank of Uganda for onward transmission to the Haba Group creditors. The Bank of Uganda as a guarantor was called upon to pay the due obligations. Bank of Uganda, in turn, called upon the Minister of Finance to regularise the payment. 

However, on 24 February 2011, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to the Governor requesting the Bank of Uganda to sort out the repayment of Haba Group’s loans with financial institutions. On 22 March 2011, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote again advising the Bank of Uganda to repay the commercial banks and that as soon as the budgetary arrangements allowed, she would authorize repayments to the Haba Group through the Bank of Uganda.

Even after failing to secure payments from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development through the budget process as earlier promised, the Governor on 6 April 2011 issued another letter of comfort to United Bank of Africa for a sum of US$ 10,000,000.

As no funds were forthcoming from the Government to clear Haba Group’s claims, Bank of Uganda paid against the letters of comfort as they matured. The payments were charged to the other debtors account. The Auditor-General then queried the payments and the Governor ceased to issue further letters of comfort.

Instead, on 16 June 2011, the Governor wrote to the new Minister of Finance, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, requesting for a payment of Shs 82,717,548,000 being re-imbursements already made to banks in respect of the Haba Group’s short-term loans, and a confirmation that Shs 63.2 billion as included in the budget for FY 2011/12 would be reimbursed to Bank of Uganda for payments it must make by November 2011. The Governor, Bank of Uganda, also indicated in the letter that there was confirmation that Government had agreed to pay Haba Group of Companies a total of Shs 142 billion in the current financial year, 2010/2011. 

The Public Accounts Committee established that there was no such a confirmation and that there was no provision in the budget that Government would pay Haba Group Shs 142.6 billion in the FY 2010/2011.

On 20 June 2011, the new minister, hon. Maria Kiwanuka, responded to the Governor and informed him, inter alia: 
•	That the Auditor-General had been requested to conduct a value-for-money audit before any payments could be made; 

•	 No provision had been made in the budget for 2010/2011 for any payment to Haba Group; 

•	 Any payment must await the findings of the Auditor-General; 

•	 An audit warrant must be requested and obtained from the Auditor-General in order to make any payments that might arise thereof. (Applause)

The committee observed that Section 29 of the Bank of Uganda Act permits the Bank to guarantee loans to financial institutions. However, the speed and frequency at which the Governor was rushing to guarantee loans to Haba Group was disturbing and its motive questionable. There seemed to be a one-way traffic in the communication between the Minister of Finance and the Governor Bank of Uganda. 
	
The committee further observed that the Governor did not seek clarifications from the Minister and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury on the different letters that were communicating escalating amounts.

The Governor seemed to be at peace implementing requests from the Minister without question and yet the Constitution, under Article 162 (2), provides that, “In performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall not be subjected to the direction or control of any person or authority.” 
 
In view of the above, the Governor Bank of Uganda seemed to be all out to assist Haba Group. Some of the letters of comfort that the Governor wrote contained information which was inaccurate. It is strange that the Governor decided not consult the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury on how to handle the requests from the Minister. It is even strange to note that the Governor did not revert or advise the President upon the receipt of His Excellency the President’s 8 January 2011 letter advising the Governor to assist Basajjabalaba access funding without suffering exorbitant interest rates. 

The committee was further stunned to learn from the Governor that he never involved the Board of Bank of Uganda when he was committing the Bank on behalf of Haba Group of Companies. 

In response, the Governor informed the committee that he acted on the strength of the commitment by the Minister of Finance, hon. Syda Bbumba, to reimburse the Bank of Uganda and the Solicitor-General’s letter that Haba Group had receivables from the Government to the tune of Shs 142 billion.

The Role of His Excellency the President in the Compensation Claims of Haba Group of Companies

Here below, we examine the role played by the President. In 2008, Haba petitioned the President demanding compensation as a result of his contracts and sub-leases having been frustrated by Government.

In a letter dated 30 July 2008, H.E. the President wrote to hon. Khiddu Makubuya, Minister of Justice and Attorney-General then, introducing Hassan Basajjabalaba as an active businessman who wanted compensation for loss of his interest in the people’s markets of Owino, Nakasero, Shauriyako and City Square. He asked the Attorney-General to examine the legality of the compensation claim and advise the President as soon as possible. As already discussed, the President never received the legal opinion on the matter from the Attorney-General.

On 12 April 2009, His Excellency the President wrote to the Attorney-General on the subject “Nakasero Market Issues” reminding him of his earlier directives, among other things, on “settling the individuals or companies who had been sold these markets…”

On 16 June 2009, H.E. the President wrote to the Attorney-General on the subject “Haba Company v. Nakasero Market” bringing to his attention that he had chaired a meeting on 23  March 2009, which came up with a resolution that an inter-ministerial committee be constituted under the chairmanship of the Attorney-General and membership as follows:
•	Ministry of Local Government. 
•	Kampala City Council.
•	Minister in Charge of the Presidency.
•	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development officials.
•	Auditor-General. 

The presidential directive on constituting the committee was never implemented. Instead, the Ag Solicitor-General then, Mr Billy Kainamura, decided to use a committee that the ministry had recently used to evaluate the claims by Rhino Investments Ltd in respect of the Kisekka Market lease offer that was later cancelled.

When the technical evaluation committee constituted by the then Ag Solicitor-General examined the claim submitted by Haba Group of Companies, it recommended a figure of Shs 22.77 billion, which figure was contested by Hassan Basajjabalaba. He further submitted new claims, which were evaluated by the same technical evaluation committee and consequently, the award was enhanced to Shs 54.69 billion. 

Haba Group appealed to the President that its claim had not been fairly evaluated. On 24 November 2009, the President wrote to the then Attorney-General on the subject, “Compensation for Haba Group”, and directed him in that letter to “conclusively resolve all the issues raised in the petition; and to ensure fairness, use the same methodology or formula used in evaluating other claims, and to handle the matter expeditiously”.

On 16 July 2010, the President’s directive was reiterated in a letter written to the Attorney-General by Joy Kabatsi, writing on behalf of the Principal Private Secretary to His Excellency the President.

On 13 November 2010, the President wrote to the Attorney-General complaining that his directive to conclusively resolve the matter was not heeded and that new petitions were coming. He directed the Attorney-General to resolve all the issues in the petition within the shortest possible time. In the same letter, the President directed the Minister of Finance to liaise with the Governor Bank of Uganda to settle all the outstanding claims.

On 8 January 2011, the President wrote to the Governor Bank of Uganda on the subject of Compensation for Haba Group. In the letter, the President indicated that he was made to understand that the amounts owing to Haba Group in the form of compensation had now been evaluated and quantified by the relevant government ministries. 

The President also indicated that the compensation was to be met over the next two financial years, which Haba Group claimed would have negative financial implications on its operations. The President advised the Governor to assist the company, Haba Group, to access this funding without suffering interest. He however indicated that this should only be done after offsetting whatever was due and owing to Government. 

When the Public Accounts Committee met with His Excellency the President, PAC was informed that the letter was drafted by a one Muhoozi, a Private Secretary for Economic Affairs, who had not done enough consultation with the government departments. 

The President indicated that he was not made aware of the figures that had been awarded to Basajjabalaba. He further indicated that he was convinced that on a point of principle, Basajjabalaba was entitled to some compensation but not to the tune of Shs 169 billion, inclusive of Shs 26.8 billion in respect of Nakawa Market compensation which has not been reported on by the Auditor-General to Parliament. 

The President further indicated that he believed that Mr Basajjabalaba was entitled to some compensation as a result of some money he had invested in the markets which had been irregularly sold to him by KCC.

On 8 May 2011, the President wrote to the Minister of Finance on the subject “Corruption through Loan Agreements and Claims”. With regard to the Haba Group’s compensation of Shs 142.6 billion, the President referred to it as being scandalous. 

When PAC interacted with the President on 21 December 2011, it was satisfied with the manner in which the President addressed the concerns raised by PAC on the compensation saga. The committee was apprised on how the letters written by the President on the subject of Haba Group’s compensation were drafted for his signature. 

The Public Accounts Committee was also apprised on the guidelines that have to be followed by the presidential assistants when drafting letters for the President’s signature. 

The President demonstrated to the committee that given his heavy schedules, he could not redraft all the letters presented to him for his signature. However, he only re-drafted those which had glaring factual errors, or those that touched on sensitive matters. He indicated that the letters in question were drafted by his assistants without following the guidelines in place. One of the guidelines is to carry out consultations with the relevant government departments. 

The President named the officers in his office who drafted the letters without following the guidelines as being Mrs Joy Kabatsi, who drafted some letters to the Attorney-General, and Mr Muhoozi, who drafted the letter to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. The President assured PAC that he had never been briefed on the quantum of money that Mr Basajjabalaba had been awarded until intelligence told him much later. The President directed the named officials to appear before PAC and explain their actions.

The committee noted with concern that in this case, the President signed letters directing settlement of claims without knowing the quantum of the claims contained in the letters he referred to as having been drafted for him, which caused the taxpayer such great losses.

The President also wondered about the motive behind the hurried manner in which hon. Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Syda Bbumba acted on his so-called directives, when the same people had actually failed to implement his directive to compensate Mzee Aramtori of Katikekile, Amudat District, whose 298 cattle had been confiscated by the UPDF wrongly. 

The President further indicated that even if he had given directives towards claim settlements, if he was wrong the ministers should have refused to implement the directives. He gave examples of Jennifer Musisi, the Executive Director KCCA, and hon. Bart Katurebe, former Attorney-General who at one point refused to implement his directives.  

While appearing before PAC, the officers named above accepted that they did not make consultations with Government departments when drafting the letters. Mrs Kabatsi accepted that she wrote the letters on the basis of the petitions Haba Group had submitted to the President. However, she argued that she wrote to the Attorney-General who was the principal legal advisor to Government, and that if her letters had legal errors, the Attorney-General would highlight them and correct them. 

Similarly, Mr Muhoozi accepted that when writing the letter in question (dated 8 January 2011) to the Governor, he did not consult with other departments, for example to ascertain the quantum of money that had been awarded to Haba Group. However, he indicated that if the letter was not clear to the Governor or contained objectionable requests, he was certain the Governor would be able to seek clarification from Government departments or even reject them. 

The committee noted with concern that the performance of some officials in State House is wanting. In handling the issue of Haba Group compensation, the committee observed that the officials exhibited incompetence and failed to exercise due diligence and wide consultation in drafting letters for the President’s signature. In view of the above findings, the committee observed that the President played an evident role in the compensation process. 

Legality of the Contract and thus Legality of Compensation 
One of the issues that PAC got interested in was the legality of the contracts that Haba Group of Companies signed with KCC over the management of Owino, Shauriyako and Nakasero markets and redevelopment of the City Square. 

During the committee’s inquiry, two arguments surfaced on the legality of the compensations. The first was that there existed valid contracts after KCC had invited bids, companies responded, their bids were evaluated, contracts awarded, offers accepted and considerations met, whether partially or fully. The second was that the so-called contracts were not cleared by the Attorney-General as is required under Article 119 (5) of the Uganda Constitution, and that therefore, an un-constitutional contract cannot bind Government. 

The latter advanced the precedent in the Nsimbe case, (Nsimbe Holdings v. Attorney General and IGG, Constitutional Court Petition...2006), where the Constitutional Court ruled that any contract involving a government agency that was not cleared by the Attorney-General was un-constitutional and, therefore, void. 

The Public Accounts Committee considered the two arguments. It concurred with the argument that a contract involving a government agency that is not cleared by the Attorney-General is indeed un-constitutional and void. 

The committee observed that the failure to have the contracts cleared by the Attorney-General prior to their signing had the effect of rendering the contracts of the afore-mentioned markets and the City Square void. However, in consideration of the principle of natural justice and equity, the committee believed that the claims could be considered on other merits such as their financial basis.  

Tax Claims on the Haba Compensation Payment
On 29 November 2010, when hon. Khiddu Makubuya advised that Government should pay Haba Group of Companies a total of Shs 142.6 billion, he did also advise that his advice was subject to the tax law of Uganda. However, on 6 October 2010, a consent judgement was purportedly concluded between Haba Group of Companies and the Attorney-General providing that the defendant (the Attorney-General) shall pay the plaintiff (Haba Group) Shs 142.6 billion. 

In paragraph 6 of the purported consent judgement, the parties agreed that the above sums shall not be subjected to any taxes, levies, or reduced by the defendant or its agents in any way. When the Ag Solicitor-General appeared before PAC, she testified that the said consent judgement is a forgery and that the matter has been referred to CID and the Uganda Revenue Authority for investigation. 

The committee established that Haba Group did not pay taxes on the payment amounting to US$ 46 million it was advanced by commercial banks through guarantee of the Bank of Uganda. 

Recommendations
1. 	In the course of these compensations, the acts of hon. Khiddu Makubuya, former AG, tantamount to mismanagement and abuse of office, which acts are unjustifiable, suspicious and unacceptable; therefore:

    • Hon. Khiddu Makubuya should take political and personal responsibility for failing to take due diligence in his work.

• 	The appointing authority relieves hon. Khiddu Makubuya of his duties for causing financial loss.

•  	The IGG and CID should further investigate hon. Khiddu Makubuya’s actions and take appropriate action.

2. 	The committee recommends that in considering hon. Syda Bbumba’s role in the compensation saga, which involved abuse of office, mismanagement and causing financial loss:

•   	Hon. Syda Bbumba should take political and personal responsibility for failing to take due diligence in her work.

•  	The appointing authority relieves hon. Syda Bbumba of her duties for causing financial loss. 

•   	IGG and CID should further investigate hon. Syda Bbumba’s role and take appropriate action.

3.   The committee recommends that: 

•	The President takes note of the violations of the laid down guidelines and procedures by his subordinates and moves to rectify them.

•	The President institutes performance management contract systems for ministers and public officials under the presidency.

4. 	     The committee recommends that:

•	The Governor BOU should be held personally responsible for the loss the Government incurred.

•	The Governor BOU should be relieved of his duties 

•	The Governor BOU should be further investigated by the IGG and CID for abuse of office and appropriate action be taken.

5.   The Committee recommends that:
•	Government recovers from Haba Group all monies paid, including applicable taxes, in excess of what was determined by the Auditor-General. (Applause) 

•	The Haba Group should be investigated for uttering forged documents.

6.	The committee recommends that the then Town Clerk, Mr Ssegane, who extended the various contracts without following the laid down procedures, should be held liable for abuse of office and causing financial loss.

7. 	The committee recommends that the former Ag Solicitor-General, Mr Kainamura, and the 	 current    Ag Solicitor-General, Ms Lwabi Harriet, be investigated by the IGG and CID  for the role they played in handling the compensation claim.

8. 	The appointing authority should expeditiously appoint a substantive Solicitor-General in that 	 office.

9. 	The committee recommends that the Attorney-General’s Chambers be restructured and streamlined.

10.	The committee recommends that a Government Compensations Act, a law that shall stipulate priority schedule of Government compensations and emergency cases, inter alia be enacted.    

Rhino Investments Ltd in Respect Of Kisekka Market (Shs 14.9 Billion)

Introduction

In 2009, Government of Uganda compensated MS Rhino Investments Ltd an amount of Shs 14.9 billion on the account that the sub-lease which had been given to Rhino to develop Kisekka Market by the Kampala City Council was cancelled by the Government. What exactly happened?

Background: 
 
On 12 April 2007, the then Minister of Local Government, Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, wrote to the Town Clerk informing her that he had received a request from the Executive Committee of New Nakivubo Road (Kisekka) Market Vendors Association to develop Kisekka Market in partnership with a developer of their choice, Rhino Investments Ltd. 

He indicated to the Town Clerk that he had no objection to their request and supported that they should have priority in developing their place of work. He requested that they be allowed to develop their market provided they fulfil the following conditions:

i) 	Only vendors with lock-ups and stalls should participate in the project; 

ii) 	They should present an accepted investment plan and should operate as one group to avoid a repetition of various competing groups. 

iii) 	They should present a formal agreement with an investor of their choice

On 27 June 2007, the Executive Director PPDA gave a go-ahead to the Town Clerk with regard to the method by which the procurement transaction was handled, stating that, “under Regulations 127 (1) (b) of the Local Government (Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets) Regulations, an entity is permitted to use a method of direct negotiations with the sitting tenant as it is reasonable to give that tenant the first option to buy. The vendors in this case may be considered so long as they fulfil the Council conditions and their offer is value for money.”

On 22 August 2007, Kampala City Council (KCC) gave a sub-lease offer of land comprised on Plot 9A Kyaggwe Road, commonly known as Kisekka Market, to Rhino Investments Ltd in a joint venture with the New Nakivubo Road Market Vendors Association for a period of 49 years to undertake the redevelopment of Kisekka Market. The sub-lease was offered at a premium of Shs 1,520,000,000 and ground rent of Shs 76,000,000. Rhino Investments Ltd fully paid to KCC the premium and ground rent.

Before the sub-lease agreement was prepared for execution, a section of market vendors rioted, protesting the re-development, resulting into vandalism. This compelled Government to intervene by deploying security to contain the situation and also instituted a commission of inquiry; this is the famous Oulanya Commission of Inquiry. 

Following the recommendation of the Commission of Inquiry, on 10 November 2008 H.E. the President wrote to the Attorney-General directing him to evaluate and compensate Rhino Investments Ltd which had been given the sub-lease offer to redevelop Kisekka Market.

Compensation Claim

On 31 January 2009, Rhino lodged a claim to the Minister for Local Government for compensation to the tune of Shs 23,497,512,109 whose components are detailed in the table below.

Evaluation Committee

The Public Accounts Committee was informed that upon receipt of the Presidential Directive to evaluate the claim of Rhino Investments with a view of determining the compensation amount, the Attorney-General directed the Ag Solicitor-General to constitute an evaluation committee to study the claims lodged in by Rhino. 

The Solicitor-General wrote to the permanent secretaries of the following ministries to nominate persons to constitute a technical team to evaluate the claim: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Works and Transport; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and Ministry of Local Government.

The following persons were recommended by their respective institutions: 

•   	Mr Bwiragura A.J, Chief Government Valuer, Ministry of Lands;
•   	Mr H.E.R. Kazahura, Commissioner, Ministry of Works; 
•   Mr Mugambe Kenneth, Commissioner,  Ministry of Finance; 
•   Mr Abbey Iga, Assistant Commissioner, Ministry of Local Government;
•   Ms Nankabirwa Mary, Senior State Attorney, Ministry of Justice; 
• Ms Mutesi Patricia, Senior State Attorney, Ministry of Justice; and 
•   Ms Anabo Patricia, State Attorney, Ministry of Justice.
 
The evaluation committee was to critically analyze, assess and establish the legal basis of the compensation claim and make recommendations to the Attorney-General.

The evaluation committee established that the claim had a legal basis and deduced that there had been a binding contract between Rhino Investments Ltd in joint venture with M/s Nakivubo Road Market Vendors Association and KCC, which contract was breached by cancellation of the sub-lease offer.

Consequently, it made the following recommendations on amounts to be compensated to Rhino Investments Ltd as in the table below, that Rhino was to be paid Shs 6,865,569,313 out of the Shs 23.4 billion that they had requested. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs processed and paid Shs 6,865,569,313 to Rhino in two instalments as follows: On 27 July 2009, Shs 5,278,308,000; and on 7 August 2009, Shs 1,587,261,313.

On 27 October 2009, the Managing Director Rhino, Mrs Hope Banga Mugyenyi, petitioned the President with regard to the way her claim for compensation for Kisekka Market was evaluated. She claimed that her claim was given to the Government valuer to assess and subsequently recommended Shs 6.8 billion. She further claimed that the company mobilised financial and human resources to construct a modern market and to establish support and ancillary services as well as management systems for the market. She argued that one could not assign values to these technologies exactly as you assign values to land. 

In spite of the above, she further asserted, “The Government valuer remained firmly in the box and does not seem to have appreciated the basic difference between the dynamics of resource mobilization and management systems versus fixed or physical assets.” She, however, said they were grateful that Shs 6.8 billion was given to them, and accepted it because, as the Baganda say, nyama ntono okayana eri mu nkwawa. (Laughter)So, you must first hold it here and ask for more. It means that when you are given some little meat, you should first hold it in your armpits before you begin demanding for more lest you lose the little that has been given to you. She requested the President to intervene and authorize that an additional Shs 8.1 billion be given to the company to bring the total compensation to Shs 14.9 billion.

On 26 May 2010, the President reminded the Attorney-General that he had received a petition dated October 27th 2009 from Rhino Investments Ltd claiming that they were unfairly compensated and directed the Attorney-General to consider the complaint and handle accordingly.

The Public Accounts Committee observed that the impression created by the Managing Director, Rhino Investments Ltd, that its compensation claim was handled by the Government valuer single-handedly was wrong as the claim was evaluated by a team of technical officials under the chairmanship of the Chief Government Valuer.

On 28 July 2010, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, then Attorney-General, in an internal memo, advised the Ag Solicitor-General that since Rhino had initially claimed Shs 26 billion and was now requesting for Shs 14.9 billion, “having abandoned Shs 8.6 billion”, the Shs 8.1 billion should be provided to Rhino Investments Ltd as requested. This is in addition to Shs 6.8 billion already awarded by the evaluation committee. 

He advised that the claim of an additional Shs 8.1 billion was reasonable and then stated, “Therefore, I have considered the complaint of Rhino Investments Ltd and hereby approve payment of Shs 8.1 Billion to Rhino Investments Ltd...I so decide”.

On 30 July 2010, the then Ag Solicitor General, Billy Kainamura, wrote to the PS/ST Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for additional Shs 8.1 Billion in favour of Rhino Investments Ltd. On 3 September 2010, the PS/ST approved the funds.

The committee observed the following:

•	That hon. Khiddu Makubuya did not re-engage the evaluation committee to consider the compensation complaint.  

•	The complaint did not raise specific areas where the company felt that it was unfairly evaluated.

•	The Attorney-General, in his consideration of the complaint, did not rebut the wrong assertion that the claim was subjected to valuation by the Chief Government Valuer.

•	Instead of negotiating for a better deal for the government and the taxpayer, the Attorney-General simply accepted and approved in totality the proposal by the private company at the cost of his employer, the taxpayer of this country.

The committee is therefore left with no rational explanation to this abnormal conduct of the person of hon. Khiddu Makubuya apart from concluding that he behaved as such to benefit himself personally.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the former Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, be liable for causing financial loss by unilaterally approving additional compensation of Shs 8.1 billion.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think you should drink some more water. I want to thank hon. Kassiano Wadri and the Public Accounts Committee for this comprehensive report together with the annexure that have been submitted.

I note that the report meets the requirements of Rule 177; 26 out of the 29 members have signed the report. That is much more than the one third required by Rule 177. However, taking into account the volumes involved, we will defer this debate to next week so that members can look at the annexure and study the report in detail.

Honourable members, I want to thank you for your stamina in staying up to this time. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to receive the Presidential address. Thank you very much. We shall meet here in the Chamber.

(The House rose at 8.21 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 10 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
