Thursday 8th February, 2001

Parliament met at 3.20p.m in Parliamentary House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: So far I have, on behalf of my colleagues in this House, requested that we be told to what extent the implementation of the resolution regarding motor vehicle scheme has been implemented (Applause). The other day the Prime Minister gave me a very flowery answer and I did not pick anything out of it. The Minister of Finance, who is in charge of implementing this resolution, has conveniently kept off from this House. We were also told by the Prime Minister that the Minister in charge of trade was Chairing a certain Committee that would soon or later report to this House and that the Auditor General had already or was about to finalise the work. That Minister also has conveniently disappeared from this House and we are left with no option. 

I need your guidance, Mr. Speaker. It is apparent that our life in Parliament is expiring; there is no doubt about that. But we still have this burden and yet this Parliament passed a resolution. Should it just be left hanging or else we shall be forced to take certain actions against the concerned people. I beg to be guided.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter was raised yesterday and was supplemented by hon. Omara Atubo. I said that in conjunction with the Clerk, we are going to check on the list of resolutions including that one so that we can send it to the Prime Minister to react on it. That is what I said yesterday. Therefore, I do not see anything new today that I should reverse what I decided yesterday. Definitely, the matter will be taken into account and the Clerk is actually compiling the list of resolutions and I think the Prime Minister will respond.

MR.WACHA: I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I seem to recollect that at the time when the matter was raised, neither the Prime Minister nor the hon. Minister of Finance was in the House. And if I remember correctly, the House stated that the issue could be raised again today if the Prime Minister was around so that he could respond (Applause).  

About the other resolutions, it was suggested that a list should be compiled and through your office, maybe with the Business Committee, it should be looked at again. But on this specific one, I seem to recollect that you said if the Prime Minister is around, he could answer to the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but I think the order of dealing with this matter, - I know it is of interest to us including myself, but I think let us do it in an orderly manner. Let the Clerk compile the memorandum, the top one will be that dealing with the motor vehicle scheme. I will ask the Prime Minister to give us a plan by Tuesday.

MR.AKIKIA OTHIENO: Whereas I entirely agree with you Mr. Speaker, time is not on side. Secondly, in the past we held several meetings and agreed on a number of things but contrary to what we agreed, actions against this particular scheme have been tripled or quadrupled in several cases. Even the money that was given to Members for mobilisation was encroached upon, reduction stepped up and Members are left without money. Even right now as I speak, Members have nothing for this money because everything has been appropriated towards the motor vehicle scheme against the agreement we signed with the Central Purchasing Corporation and against the agreement we arrived at during the past meetings with the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in the presence of the Clerk.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but hon. Member, the payment to hon. Members of Parliament is not done by the office of the Prime Minister. The payment is done by the Parliamentary Commission and the Accounting Officer is the Clerk. So this is a matter, as far as payments to Members of Parliament is concerned, that has to be explained by the office of the Clerk because he is doing this on behalf of the Commission. 

So, the Prime Minister will not be in position to answer the internal matters that are handled by the Parliamentary Commission. But I assure you that on Tuesday you will get a detailed answer to your query.

MR.PINTO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am reliably informed that the meeting that we were expecting to resolve this matter between the Minister of Trade and the Members of Parliament has sat once and that it has not made significant progress. This is contrary to the deadline that I believe the Prime Minister had given of 10th of last month. So, we would like this matter to be taken seriously, otherwise we are having a palliative care of a very serious matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but you know the problem with that Committee. Hon. Akika is a Member of that Committee therefore he is in position to tell us the progress, but I do not want to ask him to do so. So, I would rather we deal with this matter on Tuesday, please.

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: I opted out of that Committee because I knew there was nothing I was going to do there. I would rather fight from outside.

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, I am getting worried when I listen to the interaction here. I am confident that you, Mr. Speaker, you are the top boss in the Administration of this Parliament. Is the Clerk now assuming powers beyond you?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Apparently, yes, the Speaker is; but for matters of finance, there is an Accounting Officer; he is the top person and we are talking about funds. So, the Clerk will give a detailed account of what is happening and then the Speaker will - but this function of handling funds is vested in the Clerk.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday the Minister moved a motion to have The Local Government Act (Amendment) Bill, 2000 to be Read the Second time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2.
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Deo Rwabita): Mr. Chairman, after Clause 1, we intend to insert a new Clause which will amend Section 2 of the main Act. This is on Section 2(c) of the main Local Government Act, which is going to take care of the marginalised groups. It will read thus: “to establish affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition, custom for the purpose of addressing imbalances which exist against them”. The justification is that this is the spirit of affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups in accordance with Article 32 of the Constitution and Article 35, which talks about people with disabilities. I move to amend that.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you still have some other amendments on Clause 2? Hon. Chairperson, do you have only one amendment on Clause 2?

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, we have also Clause 2(3) of the principal Act. We want to insert a new definition according to the alphabetical order. This is the term ‘persons with disabilities’. It should come after ordinance in the definition. “Persons with disabilities means persons having individual, physical or mental impairment which in their individual capacities substantially limit one or more of the major life activities of those persons.” I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, we are also putting (b) replacing the definition of the Speaker and Urban Council with the following definitions –(Interruption)

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I request that the chairperson of the Committee helps us to follow clearly, because we are talking about the Bill, the report and the principal Act. When you look at the report, it says, Clause such and such of the Bill, but it goes to refer to another section in the principal Act. If he could read these out, it would help us follow very clearly. I thank you Sir.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, in the amendment we are talking of Clause 2 of the Bill, but which covers Section 3 of the principal Act. That is where those definitions are.  I think I am clear this time.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, we shall define the Speaker and Urban Council. This again is in Section 3 of the main Act of definitions. It is a new Section on page 6 of the amendment Bill. “The Speaker means the Speaker elected under Section 12 or Section 24 and Deputy Speaker shall be construed accordingly.”

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.RWABITA: Then we have the definition of Urban Authority. Mr. Chairman, yesterday we had some contribution by hon. Babu and I conferred with the Minister. In this urban authority we have also to include the City Division. Therefore, it will read that “Urban authority includes a City Council, City Divisions, Municipal Council and Town Council”. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman. 

The justification is that we want to have clear-cut authority in the city, municipalities and town councils so that there is an independent authority. Or the authority given in this Clause means that the City will be in charge of all the matters concerning the City and the Municipality also will be the authority in Municipality, so is the Town Council. So, we thought that the terminology ‘Urban Authority’ gives a better understanding of that provision. 

DR.OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I heard the Chairperson of the Committee correctly, he said they have included City Division as a member of the urban authority. What about Division in a Municipality, because there are also Divisions in Municipalities.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Chairman, we have only one city, therefore, this Division is applicable only for Kampala. For now, it is the City Division. But my question goes beyond this definition.  

Yesterday when the Member for Kampala Central was contributing justifying this amendment, there arose, as an example, the conflict surrounding revenue. We even wanted, I think he even suggested that they should be within the Ministry of Local Government Finance Commission, the arbitrator in terms of financial disputes. We have talked of other disputes. Would this now clear the issue or are we still applying the arbitration of the Local Government Financial Commission?  Could this matter be cleared? Are we doing this because of the irregularity that arose within the City Council of Kampala? Is that what we intend to cure or are we curing the subsequent disputes that not only are in Municipal Divisions but also in districts?

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali): Mr. Chairman, I think it is very important that Members follow the point raised by hon. Okulo Epak. The original proposal of the Government was that because of the confusion over an urban council and the powers given to it, in practice it had resulted into, for example, the powers of a municipal council almost being equal to those of its division yet some of the powers could not be handled by the division. We wanted to limit the powers of the urban council. When we refer to urban authority, let us talk about the city, municipality and the town. 

Then yesterday’s debate brought out a proposal by hon. Babu, to say that in case of a city, the Division is not comparable to a Division of a municipality. The Division of a City can have the same ability and potential like any other Municipality and he quoted Kampala Central, he did not quote Nakawa Division, but that is a joke. That any division in a city is capable of handling the responsibilities given to any municipality and town but a Division in the Municipality is not capable of that, especially from the financial point of view. He gave the example of the population of a city division, which goes up 200,000 and above, whereas in the case of a municipal division, you are talking of less people, may be 10,000 or even less.  

So, in order to save the debate, we liased with the hon. Member and the chairman of the Committee. We agreed with the proposal to define an urban Council as a city division, a municipality and a town so that each one for example, can set up and maintain a tender board whereas a division in a municipality cannot. Yet once they say we are also an urban Council, we cannot stop them creating the tender board.  

As regards the clarification sought by hon. Pinto, under the law, in fact, it is constitutional, the responsibility of the Local Government Finance Commission amongst others is to arbitrate between Local Governments and Lower Local Government, between Central Government and Local Governments and between Local Governments at that level. So, whatever be the amendment here, the Local Government Finance Commission will continue to play its role of arbitration in addition to advising the President on how best to improve on the financial base of Local Governments.

MR.PINTO: I seek information from the hon. Minister, especially on the issue he has raised about arbitration.  Let us take the problem that exists now. It has not blown up, but the districts of Rakai and Mbarara share a common border, but this border has not been clearly defined. We have appealed to the Minister for many times and at one time he said that there are several districts facing this problem. Now, let us relate it to finances. When it suits the people along Ntatamuche, which is the border town between Mbarara and Rakai, they move to Rakai. When we in Rakai want taxes from them, they move to Mbarara and vice versa. We would like to take revenue from them because they use our roads, they are using our facilities. We know they belong to us, but because the border has not been clearly demarcated, we are not able to enforce tax collection. I think Mbarara must also be losing revenue. This is one case in point. What do you do in a case like that? Is this a dispute that goes for arbitration to the Finance Commission or is the Minister, as we were saying yesterday, still held responsible for the supervisory role of this? Because it has not been solved and we are very peace loving people. Otherwise we could get to conflict. The matter has been on for a long time.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, let us not mix issues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think let us hear from this side, then you can answer.

MR.WACHA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. My attention is drawn to the justification under this particular area, which says; “it is intended to clear the confusion that has been existing”. My mind goes back to the confusion, which has been pertaining between, I think, the Central Division of Kampala and Kampala City Council. I have two questions in this area. First of all, how is the inclusion of city division supposed to clear that confusion? Are you not compounding it? I thought the original idea of making a distinction between City Council and not mentioning the Division was meant to make the Division in the city lower than the City Council and not an urban authority. 

Secondly, it is true one of the areas where Finance Commission is supposed to function is arbitration. But if it were there and this is a constitutional provision, why has the Finance Commission never come in to try to arbitrate between the Ziritwawula group and Kampala City Council?

DR.OKULO EPAK: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I am sorry to come back. I am not opposing any inclusions, but I want to disentangle something in my mind. My understanding is that ordinarily an urban authority, once it is established, it is surveyed, demarcated and the boundary is legally gazetted, then it becomes an urban authority by City Council, by Municipal Council or by the City status. I do not know of any divisions in urban authorities, which is gazetted. Would this be calling for de-surveying, demarcation and gazetting of divisions as well so that they look the urban authority with a proper – this law is self sufficient, but there are other laws, which require gazetting of boundaries of urban authorities. It might create a bit of interpretation problems. I am not a lawyer.

My second question is, the hon. Minister explained the exclusion of the Municipal division on the basis of capacity rather than jurisdiction. In jurisdiction the Municipal division has the same power as the City division. In fact, some of the Town Councils have less capacity than some divisional councils. So to try to explain the way by capability or capacity is probably not the best way. Because we may have some municipalities in future, which are of the same size of Kampala. You see the declaration of Kampala as city is a political one and a formal procedure only. Otherwise, it is as good as a municipality, but we so decided it should be called a city. 

If we are making this law for a long term, then we might as well include divisions in municipalities to take care of the future sizes. I am not convinced that the question of capacity or capability to handle its own finances or varied functions constitutes a better basis than jurisdiction. But I am glad they could be included in the definition for urban authority. Except this gazetting if the Minister can clarify what the implication is on gazetting of these authorities then I will be happy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, first of all the information or clarification from hon. Pinto who has shared with me an additional information which he wants me to handle. But, I was talking of mixing issues because the issues raised by hon. Pinto refer to the demarcation of boundaries or boundaries between districts, and this is not my realm, it is that of hon. Kajura here. So, that Department is not in my Ministry and I say it that we are liasing with that Ministry in trying to iron out different areas where such problem exists, and the Local Government Finance Commission has no mandate over that, it is only on financial matters.

On the issue raised by hon. Ben Wacha, why did the Local Government Finance Commission not come in? For two reasons, one is that this body is still in its infancy in set up, in its operation, in appreciating its responsibilities. And therefore, the capacity has got to be built. But perhaps more important is that in the Local Government Act, the first point of reference is the Ministry of Local Government by virtue of the mandate of this Ministry in relation to a situation like this one; and that is what happened. When this was being handled, one of the parties which was aggrieved opted to go to the courts of law and under those circumstances there was no way we could stop any party to go to the courts of law. 

Now, let me remind hon. Members that the majority of these amendments are meant to address problems we have discovered on the ground while implementing the Local Government Act, which we passed sometime back. When we propose these amendments and you feel that, that is not the answer, come up with an amendment and improvement because it is a reality. And please do not look at this issue between Central Division and the body in terms of Mr. Sebaana Kizito and Mr. Ziritwawula.  Because the same issue has existed in Jinja between Jinja Central Division and the main Municipal Council. It has been existing for a long time between Masaka Municipal Council and the Central Division, and it has been existing in Mbarara.  

So after our study, we thought that this particular problem was being caused by a definition of the word “urban.”  Urban in our original Act meant “any council”- actually we had meant city, Municipality, Town. But when these people were interpreting the law, they said, ‘yes, we at the division are also a council’. That is qualification number one. We are also urban. Therefore, what an urban council can do at the level of a city, we can do at our level because we are also urban. And this was the cause of the problems they have had. 

So in our consideration, especially so interaction with the Committee, we felt that let us now go to the original idea of saying that by ‘urban’ we had actually meant the city, the municipality and the town councils. Then hon. Babu comes up with a reasoned amendment to say that actually in the case of a city, a division is as big as a municipality. In fact, it would have been called a municipality because it has got the capacity to set up, for example, its own Tender Board to do what and so on and so forth. 

So we thought that we could perhaps do that and remove the problem between the centre and the Central Division in the city by defining under the Schedule what responsibilities are retained by the city Council, and which ones are specifically for the divisions in the city. At the moment it is general;	so we thought by making this amendment and amending the Schedule would also handle the problem of the city as it has existed.

Dr Okulo Epak said that, the municipal division should be included because one day a municipal division could be as big as the city division. But let us recall that there is a provision. If such a situation arose, then it stops being a municipality and qualifies to be a city. 

The question of gazetting urban councils is very well catered for in the Local Government Act by virtue of specifying by an Act, ‘that in order for an urban council for an area to become a town, this what follows and normally it is one of the administrative units which are promoted from administrative to Local Government either as a sub-county or as a town.’

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, I want a clarification from the hon. Minister. How he is catering for that growth when the division which could be equivalent to a municipality or a division or a township? Or how is he catering for that growth if it comes as the city, or municipality or township grows? How is he protecting that growth so that we know that a division, which could grow into a size of municipality, is not being unfairly treated in the principle of decentralisation just because it happens to be either in the city or in a municipality when actually it has the same capacity like a township or a municipality elsewhere? How is that growth being taken care of?

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I do not recall the section but it is the Act, which takes care of that. It is stated somewhere in the Act that in order for an administrative unit to qualify for applying to be a town council, it should have these parameters, these conditions. It is stated somewhere.  

Now for a town to graduate into a municipality, those are stated in the Act. Population especially and a request by the council concerned. I have been told that, it is on page 143.
“Save for those already gazetted, before declaring an area to be a town, municipality or the city, the following requirement should generally exist; ‘population must be, in the case of a town, above 25,000 inhabitants, a municipality above 100,000 inhabitants.” So when a town achieves that it applies for that, and a city above 500,000 inhabitants. These are already stated in the Act.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Save for those already gazetted referring to the existing divisions and so on; does this amendment preserve those gazetted or is it referring to those, which could grow in future?

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Well, I am not a lawyer but to me what it meant was that a town which is already a town legally, whether it has this population or less continues to be a town in its entirety. So is the municipality, so is the city. But once you bring an amendment concerning the relationship between a town and its internal parts, these can also be affected because you are not demoting any of them to a lower status, which is provided by this law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now want to put the question –(Interruption)

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I just want to be clarified about the formulation because when I look at the report, they use City Council, Division Council and yet in the principal Act includes city, municipal and then the councils are at the end. So I want to be sure of the formulation we are using. I thank you.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, the terminology is quite clear. We are talking of urban authority includes a city council, city division, a municipal council and a town council, full-stop.

MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, that is the very problem because when you look at the principal Act, it is neatly drafted.  Now you reach division, you do not add council, yet you have talked about council on all others. Why is this different? Look at the principal Act on page 11, I think, it is a neater way of drafting it. To say urban authority includes city, division, municipal and the town council.  I think that will be a better way of drafting it.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I think the draftsmen will do it properly and the city division is also a council anyway. So, I have no objection on that. So we say, including city division council, municipal council or town council or we put council at the end. So it is city council, city division, division council, municipal council and town council, Mr. Chairman.

MR.ONGOM: I am sorry Mr. Chairman but I am not quite clear in my mind whether the basic question asked by hon. Wacha has really been explained. Is this inclusion of city division in the definition of urban authority, how has it helped to clear the confusion that has existed, for instance, between Kampala City Council and the central division? This question seems not to have been explained to me.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the Minister has explained. What is going to happen –(Interruption)      

MR.ONGOM: Well, I have not understood it. I am sorry, but I think he could –(Interjection)- Please, do not be so rude to me like that.  No, no, I mean, Mr. Chairman, the Member has been very rude to me and I do not know whether you heard him and I do not like to take and not taken.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: No, no. Mr. Chairman, I follow the point of the hon. Member. Let us not look at the confusion as emanating from one side. For example, in this particular case, Kampala Central was saying, ‘we are entitled to setting up our own tender board’. The city was saying, no, we are the ones to set up a tender board to serve all. So you have now in this one cleared one part. It is now clear that the division can also set up its own tender board. That is clearance number one of the confusion.

Part two is what I have said will be handled by the Schedule when you become very clear as to what are the responsibilities under the city and what are the responsibilities under the division. In which case which tender board will handle what? At the moment the confusion has been that it was not clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman I am seeking clarification from the Minister regarding the amendment to Clause 7 of the Principal Act, which is now Clause 3.  The provision under Clause 7 reads “Every Local Government Council shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and may sue or be sued in its corporate name”. 

The amendment reads as follows: 7(1) “Every Local Government shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal, and may sue and be sued in its corporate name and may, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, enjoy or suffer anything that may be done, enjoyed or suffered by a body corporate”. 

The area where I am seeking clarification from the Minister and the Chairperson is with regard to sub-clause 2. It reads: “Notwithstanding the provisions of section (1) of this section, no execution or attachment or process in such nature shall be issued out of any Court for enforcing payment by a Local Government or any money or costs and no person shall be individually liable under any order for payment by Local Government or any Local Government Department or any officer of a Local Government as such, of any such money or costs”. 

This provision is very good. It protects the Local Government and indeed at the moment many Local Governments have been suffering from harassment from Lawyers, Court Bailiffs but sub-section (2) over protects these people (Interjection).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: When you use the word 'harassment', do you mean somebody executing a court order is harassing?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman it depends on the manner in which the execution is being handled. So the clarification I am seeking is as to how the interests of these people who might have rendered genuine services to Local Government are protected. Instead this provision may be denying them what is rightly due to them. Is the provision adequate? This is the clarification I am seeking from the Chairperson and the Minister. I thank you.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman I beg the indulgence of hon. Okumu Ringa that just as he was conscious of this provision so was I and many others were. Indeed there is an amendment, which we were seeking to move in respect of Clause 2 and Mr. Chairman, I beg to move the amendment as follows: “Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section, no execution or attachment or process in such nature shall be issued out of any Court for enforcing payment by Local Government of any money or caused against its fixed assets”. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I called out Clause 3 and there is an amendment namely that Clause 3 is amended. The second part of it is that “Notwithstanding provision sub-section (1), no execution or attachment or process in such nature shall be issued out of any Court for enforcing payment of a Local Government of any money or course against its fixed assets”. So I think here he is restricting it. The protection is on fixed assets namely: buildings. But as far as other assets are concerned, the order is – that is the nature of the amendment.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker can I speak to the amendment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, speak to the amendment before any other person can respond.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman the proposed amendment in the Bill as it stands now is such that it has two legs. First, it seeks to totally protect the Local Government against any form of execution. Secondly, it protects individual officers of Local Government against obeying the order for execution. And if they disobeyed you would have no records to law. I do not think that this is the intention of Government. I know what has been taking place of recent against Local Government as hon. Okumu Ringa has said. Many executions literally paralysed Local Governments but at the same time we should also respect the law in the sense that when an individual has successfully taken a Local Government to Court for whatever reason either based on contract -(Interjection)

MR.OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Speaker I seek your guidance on a matter of procedure. We are proceeding in the Chamber peacefully but there is so much noise from the lobby disturbing us. How can we be protected from our peaceful conduct of business?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Request granted. Please Sergeant, ensure that the House is not disturbed.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman if I may proceed, the importance of legal process is that when you succeed against a person, whether a natural or legal person, it must be conclusively ended especially if it is a civil matter contractually or in tort. And when you have an important legislation of this nature which seeks to protect a legal person in the form of a Local Government by saying you can bring an action against it but when it comes to it fulfilling the legal provision satisfying the Court process, you cannot execute. I think this is a very dangerous provision. What I think should be done is the compromised position we have arrived at in the sense that we protect it from its fixed assets but the Local Government must be liable to pay. If you protect the Local Government totally against execution, you are going to abuse the legal process. 

Secondly, the Local Government will say, ‘Yes, we can enter into any constructional liability, but when it comes to paying, we can sit back and the law protects us’. Therefore, you are going to bring into the relationship of people against the Local Government non-respect and non-compliance of the law.

So, in this case, I think the best the Government can do is simply to protect the Local Government against these fixed assets.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: I am giving you this information so that you develop the argument accordingly. First, the intention was to give immunity that the Central Government enjoys to the Local Government.

Secondly, in one case the Court has allowed an injunction and in fact utilisation of the transfer from the Ministry of Finance to the Local Government, and they have got directed to deduct at source conditional and unconditional grant to that particular Local Government.  So, I would like you to take that into –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you are treating a Local Government, which is a person, with the Government, which is not a person. The Government is not interpreted as a person. Here you have defined a Local Government as a body corporate and therefore, it is a person. Now, you are trying to say there will not be equal treatment between persons. You have given powers to the Local Government to sue me and when it gets a judgement, it can execute against me. But if I sue it, I cannot execute against it.  

The protection of Government has another background; this is the ground. It started with the ground and so on and so forth, and therefore, you cannot equate a Local Government to a Government. That is a capital “G” with a local “g”. 

In any case, when we talk about the immunity or protection of a “G” at least there are provisions that are made that would enable a person who has sued Government to recover what he has got. Apparently in this law, you have not provided any solution as to how a person who has obtained judgement would recover what is due to him. That is the difference, that there will be no equal treatment of persons. Because you have said it is a person, and then somebody will say, “is there equal treatment? We are persons, he has executed against me, but I cannot!”

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for your elaborate exposition of the reasons. There is another, apart from the historical concepts, which we have inherited from the British, that you cannot see the ground.  

There is also another important doctrine – the doctrine of sovereignty. The Central Government or the State of Uganda as such enjoys this sovereignty. That is why when you are taking the Central Government to Court, you do not sue the Government of Uganda, you sue the Attorney General. When you sue the Attorney General, the Attorney General has a whole Department dealing with legal affairs, and once you sue the Attorney General, it has got a budget which we vote here to satisfy all those legal courts and so on. I can assure you as a lawyer in practice that my experience is such that once you succeeded for the case against the Central Government by suing the Attorney General, it will pay you; it respects that. Every practising lawyer, who is here, it may take two, three or 12 months, but eventually the Attorney General sitting with the lawyer on the other side will agree how to pay.  

But the Local Government cannot be compared with the Central Government. As the Chairperson said, we are dealing with the corporate body of a much lower nature. Therefore, you are going to allow these people ready to go to excessive abuse and there is no remedy. We must point it out that you have a budget against which you work, whether it is constructional for supplies, if you go beyond your budget, you are going to suffer legal consequences.  

I think we must begin to educate the Local Government about that. However, we are also conscious that you cannot paralyse the Local Government completely, and we are allowing the fixed assets of the Local Government to be protected, the buildings and a few other things. But when it comes to meeting execution, it has money in the bank, it has a few things, let it be attached or attachable.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank the hon. colleague for the clear exposition he has made about the contradiction regarding the Centre and the Local Government. But as the Minister has clearly pointed out, at this infant stage of decentralisation, it is possible, as it has been in some cases, that there might be collusion at a local level between some leaders, members of the legal profession and some dubious suppliers to hold the Local Governments at ransom.  

The purpose of this Clause was to protect the innocent wananchi in the Local Governments, while allowing the Local Governments to perform their specific programmes and purposes for which they were set up. But at the same time to protect the properties at local level, buildings, land and, in my own opinion, even movable assets. What is important now is for us to reach a compromise. Is it possible for us, I have seen hon. Omara Atubo’s proposed amendment, he is actually explicitly referring to fixed assets. But you will find that in most of these Local Governments, once you deprive them of the movable assets, the Local Government becomes totally paralysed; it cannot function. So, is it possible for us to cater for this under the financial provisions? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Minister, this is not a matter of Finance; it is a matter of enforcement of a judgement of court, which is a property. It is true, as you have explained, there may be a problem complicating Local Government and so forth. But why do you not give them a protection say, no security may be issued within six months from the date so that you give it time to mobilise funds and pay? That execution order will be made within say six months from the date of the court ruling so that you give them time to arrange. But for the execution of the decree, for you to stand and say you can execute, what do you want me to do?  

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. In fact, I must thank you for giving us a way forward but I also want to tell the hon. Minister that if this is allowed it will be creating a very bad precedent because there are other Government corporate bodies. It means you will also have to protect those because they will say there is already a precedent in the Local Government Act. If the Minister had wanted to do what he has done and I can say with certainty it was removed from the Government Proceeding's Act, he should have taken care to include all other provisions. But I do not think even those would apply because the Law has already defined this as a legal entity. Therefore, I would like to call upon the Minister to take the advice you have given that maybe they give them some latitude before they enforce while they sort themselves out. I thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I would like to propose a way forward that since this is a very importing aspect of legislation in this amendment, I propose that we stand over this, we consult, then we see what can be done, so that we can pronounce ourselves on it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see the other thing, for instance you are talking about Government. But again there is a solution as far as Government is concerned. If there is a decree against Government and you can not execute against Government, at least you can seek a note of mandamus against the Treasury officer of accounts for him to pay and if he refuses, the Treasury Offices of Account can be imprisoned. As you see even with Government there is a solution but with this one there is not solution that is being provided. So, I think you will find a compromise so that we move.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I agree with hon. Okumu Ringa because this sub-clause was just extracted from the Government Proceeding's Act. Basing on your advice us that we can not compare a Central Government with a Local Government, I request that we stand it over and reconcile the various ideas so that the Government and the Movers of the amendment come to a proper amendment. I support the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? I think the Mover of the amendment should sit with the Minister and reach a solution. So we shall come to this Clause later.

Clause 4.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, Clause 4 amends section 12 of the main Local Government Act -(Interruption)- We are still on Clause 4.

MR.LUKUMU FRED (Bulisa County, Masindi): Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment of the principal Act section 11. On the composition of district councils, I seek to move a compromise amendment given that constitutional issues have been raised regarding the inclusion of Members of Parliament of the district council. I wish to move that section 11 of the principal Act be amended by adding a new sub-section (2) to read, "Members of Parliament from that district shall attend the council as observers". I concede to the use of the word 'may' so that Members of Parliament who wish to attend the council are free to do so. As it stands now, Members of Parliament can only attend the council with the permission or on invitation yet many Members may wish to follow the deliberations of the council since they have interest in the affairs of the district. Under decentralisation, most of the services down to the grassroots are through the district Local Government. I beg to move Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think what you are trying to say is that you want to insert a new Clause because you see it is not there to this effect. Otherwise, how are you going to deal with your amendment without the Clause?

MR.LUKUMU: Thank you for your guidance Mr. Chairman. It will be called a new Clause that Members of Parliament from that district may attend the council as observers - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Observers?

MR.LUKUMU: Ex-officio members is unconstitutional. Mr. Chairman I have not used the word 'Ex-officio' given the guidance by - (Interruption) - Mr. Chairman, I insist it is as observers because as Ex-officio in my understanding -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you are saying a Member of Parliament shall be entitled to attend proceedings of a district council and therefore you have to introduce a Clause where to put this one. Because we are moving to Clause 4, we have left out Clause 3. Is it between Clause 3 and 4 that you want to insert a new Clause?

MR.LUKUMU: Mr. Chairman, in the principal Act the composition of the council is under section 11.

THE CHIARMAN: But we are dealing with this amendment Bill. I know you want to amend a section in the principal Act but I think you use this document - so you insert a new Clause 4 immediately after 3.

MR.LUKUMU: I wish to insert a new Clause 4 to read that "Members of Parliament from that district may attend the council as observers".

THE CHIARMAN: Then the Clause would say, under Clause 4 you want to amend the principal Act by Clause so and so inserting another one to say so. I think that is how it should go.

MR.LUKUMU: I take your advice Mr. Chairman.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, if I remember very well from yesterday's discussions, we thought it wise that MPs should not involve themselves in the affairs of the councils because they can be misunderstood and if there is any crisis they will be accused of causing it. So if he is bringing it now, I do not see how it will be supported.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, he is going to bring it; if it is not supported then it will not be carried. He is just moving an amendment and he is entitled to make that amendment. 

MR.D’UJANGA: Mr. Chairman, we have a Constitution which governs Local Governments in this country and many other forms of Government functions. I do not know whether the principle of devolution of power will not be infringed upon if we introduce such an amendment. I would like the Mover of this amendment to clarify.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Member, we explained yesterday that Members of Parliament could not be members of the district council. I think that was clear and we understood it. But at the same time, from Members’ contributions, I think they could attend and make contributions. It is not mandatory but they could simply be entitled to attend and maybe give some advice or make some contributions, which is not binding.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I caution Members on this term ‘ex-officio members’ because ex-officio is a category of membership and you are prevented from being members. I am speaking as a layman not a lawyer.  Therefore, we could land ourselves in constitutional courts by saying, member except that you are ex-officio but you are a member and you are prevented from that. I was being persuaded by the amendment, which first run to the effect that Members of Parliament may attend the proceedings. That one is harmless and it is up to you to attend or not except perhaps the legal people could tell us whether the chairman could hide behind that to say, you may attend but I have not allowed you, I do not know.  The only thing is to guard against ex-officio member.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukumu, have you finished your formulation?

MR.LUKUMU: Yes, Mr. Chairman. I wish to insert a new Clause 4 to amend section 11 of the principal Act to read as follows: “Members of Parliament from that district may attend the proceedings of the council”. 

I am inserting this Clause because experience has taught us that there are areas where some district authorities or district councils may be in such relationship with their area Members of Parliament that they may even not allow them to attend these meetings. I feel this will have catered for a situation to allow Members of Parliament who are interested in following proceedings of their district Local Governments and see exactly what is on the ground are not barred by such hostile council authorities. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But when you say ‘may attend’, do you mean as strangers? Do they only attend or you want them to do something there?

MR.LUKUMU: If participation is not prohibited legally, my wish is that they participate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have heard the amendment. I now put the question.

MRS.AKWERO ODWONG: Mr. Chairman, I vehemently oppose the issue of Members of Parliament being in the district council. We have as of now been free, we have been allowed, in fact, the onus is on us to attend the district councils without necessarily putting it in the Local Government Act. I vehemently oppose as I did oppose this sort of amendment in the discussions of the Local Government Bill, 1998. We can still attend our councils without necessarily putting our presence in the Local Government Act. Nobody has stopped us; the onus is on us to go down there. These councillors represent us even in our various places.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, now Members, a motion was moved, it is opposed- (Interruption)

MR.OMARA ATUBO: In this amendment, are we talking of district council only, or are we talking of Gombolola, council divisions, or all councils because I would be very happy to attend the councils in my Gombolola and in my divisions and brief them as well as districts. So I want to be sure that it covers all councils.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, it will be a member being free to attend the respective local councils.

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: While I am not opposing the Member’s amendment, I am seeking clarification. What category now if this Member is to participate, in which legal status is this Member of Parliament participating in this district council? What is the legal position? What is the category?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. minister, a person can attend and participate in a meeting but does not vote in that meeting. He goes there to help the members understand a certain situation because he understands it. That does not make him a member. There are many meetings where people who are not members to those bodies attend and help but when it comes to voting, and when you write the minutes you say in attendance. So, I think that is what is going to happen if you pass it.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, that brings in another element of participation, which is dangerous. I think as the amendment says a Member of Parliament may attend meetings of local councils within his or her constituency. I think that one is I silent enough, and really the onus should also be on the Members of Parliament to create that relationship. Otherwise, if you want to go there by force of law, then there is a problem. So, I recommend really that, if we allow this then let it be as the amendment goes but allow Members of Parliament to be able to attend the sub-county council.  In fact, that is now even more important because millions and millions are going there; those people need guidance and where you have got an understanding chairman, that is the place where you can really guide.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, can you repeat your amendment so that I put the question.

MR.LUKUMU: Mr. Chairman, after this amendment being enriched by experienced legislators, I now see that it is to the benefit of us all and indeed the areas we represent if this attendance extends down even to the lower Government levels below the district. So I beg to move that the new amendment reads: “Members of Parliament may attend all local government council meetings” (Interjections). I am not including the word 'participation' on the advice of the hon. Minister of Local Government because after all participation will be there anyway.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, after that one, we are now moving to Clause 4.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that new Clause 4 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, the old Clause (4), now new Clause 5 –(Interruption)- we are amending Clause (4) in the Bill. Clause 4 amends section 12 of the principal Act and in the amendment Bill, we are amending sub-section (b) where we had 6(a). That 6(a) is being deleted and replaced by the following: “For purposes of removing the Speaker, a notice in writing signed by at least one third of all the members of the council shall be submitted to the chairperson stating that they intend to pass a resolution to remove the speaker and their grounds”.  

Then we want also to insert a 6(b) thus: “Where a notice is submitted to the chairperson under sub-section 6(a), no person shall withdraw his or her signature from the notice and no authority shall issue any order whose effect shall be interrupt the process of the removal of the speaker”.

And 6(c): “A notice made under sub-section 6(a) shall be submitted to the Minister or his or her representative by the Clerk and the Minister or his or her representative shall, within 30 days of receipt of this notice, convene or cause the convening of a meeting for the removal and election of a Speaker.” 

The justification for these Clauses is that the procedure will streamline the process of removing the speaker and deputy speaker from office. Once this process begins, no one should interfere with it. From experience, the executive has got a lot of power and they can manipulate a resolution of this type and even buy some members to withdraw their names. I think if there is already a resolution to remove a speaker, there must be some serious reason. So, we want to see that this process is continued to the end and we know that it was justified rather than half way being interfered with by the executive. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Chairperson, in proposing 6(b) and especially the last part of it – “and no authority shall issue any order whose effect shall be to interrupt the process of the removal of the speaker” - did you take into account of Articles 28(1), 42 and 51 of the Constitution? Because what you are saying is that a person may not go to court to challenge the petition and if you do this, I think you are contravening those provisions, which I have read to you. Maybe for those who do not have the Constitution, I should read these provisions. 

28(1): “In the determination of a civil rights obligation or any criminal charge, a person shall be entitled to a fair, speedy and public hearing before an independent impartial court or a tribunal established by law.”  

Article 42 states: “Any person appearing before any administrative official or body has a right to be treated justly and fairly and shall have a right to apply to a court of law in respect of any administrative decision taken against him or her.”  

Article 50: “Any person who claims that a fundamental or other right of freedom guaranteed under this Constitution has been infringed or threatened, is entitled to apply to a competent court for redress which may include compensation.”  

Now, when you say I cannot go to court to challenge, do you not think you are contravening the Constitution?

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, once again I am drawing the attention of the Members to what has been happening.  A council assembles for the first time and the first duty is to elect a speaker and by majority of Members the speaker is elected. When those who elected the speaker want to remove a speaker, what should be the procedure? This is the issue at hand. We were under the impression that – let us behave like Parliament would behave if you want to remove a Speaker by resolution. 

What has happened in the lower councils is that when this is submitted, then somebody rushes to court for an injunction. This has happened and then a series of wrangles has ensued. The question is, do you see this as worth going to the courts of law if the members who elected the Speaker say they want to remove a Speaker?  This is what we are trying to cure. We might not have put it in good language, but this is what we want to cure that; they can sit and say, ‘you are no longer chairman’. The Speaker may deliberately refuse to call a meeting because he or she knows this may happen to him or her. We have had cases where meetings have not been held simply because the Speaker has not done that, and once the Speaker is there, the Deputy Speaker cannot convene such meeting.  So, we are trying to solve that problem. 

MR.ERESU: Section 6(b) reads as follows: “Where a notice is submitted to the chairperson under subsection (a) no person shall withdraw his or her signature from the notice and no authority….”. I would like the hon. Minister to clarify to me whether in this circumstance where upon the Speaker is to be removed and members have signed to remove him, there would be no room for negotiations. Because you know these are political offices. Sometimes people probably would have put their signatures there by virtue of conviction, in the same way they can also be convinced to withdraw their signatures. If we put this provision in the law, are we now trying to eliminate the avenues, which would be there for a district council to negotiate?
 
MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I would like personally to support that amendment. Once somebody has put his signature on a censure motion he should keep it there.  If in the process he is convinced that the person against whom this censure motion is being moved should not be censured, he will say so when he is actually deliberating on the motion itself to remove the Speaker. I think it is important and I want to agree with the Minister that – You see, there could be chaos –(Interruption). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, we are trying to clear one thing; we have not reached the merits of the amendment.  We are saying, is part of this amendment not in conflict with provisions of the Constitution? Because if it is, then we have to adjust so that it does not. 

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, I can see the background the hon. Minister has given for this amendment, but the cure does not lie in blocking remedy in court. Because the two notorious cases, which went for a court injunction were more concerned with the defective procedure where the Speaker – I think it was Iganga or somewhere else. He said the signatures were not enough or they were obtained in a manner, which was inconsistent with the law and so on and so forth. But if that is the case, the remedy does not lie in blocking this person from going to court; the remedy lies in exactly what you are trying to do, Mr. Minister. You are now trying to streamline very clearly the procedure, which should be followed in removing the Speaker. And I do support you that once somebody puts his signature to remove a Speaker from the House; he is putting in process a very serious legal and political process. Therefore, he should not be allowed to behave prematurely and in the process or when the process is taking place, then he says, ‘I remove my signature’ so that the number is not enough to justify the legal process to continue up to its end. 

So, I think, the remedy is exactly what you have proposed. Let us continue with stopping members from removing their signatures but his going to court is a constitutional matter, you cannot stop him! It is something, which you just cannot put in law of this nature to stop anybody going to court. Let us be very clear in the procedure we want to put in the Local Government amendment Act on how to remove the Speaker. To me that is enough. 

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to concur with hon. Atubo and you in regard to the constitutionality of this matter. I think it is null and void. However, having heard the background the Minister gave and what hon. Atubo said, I propose that we leave room for people to consider whether they are serious about the removal of a Speaker. You could give them a certain period such that if it passes, then there is no way anyone can withdraw his or her signature. Or you could display it but give them latitude of time so that once that time expires, you cannot come back and say now you want to remove your signature. I think this will help if, in between, those problems that the Minister has talked about can be sorted out amicably. But there is no way you can say, ‘you cannot go to court. At any rate, even courts themselves have unlimited jurisdiction, they can look into any matter! I thank you. 

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: You know; the way it is put definitely fetches the explanation. Therefore, the constitutional aspect, - but supposing a councillor at a district felt that the chairman consistently does not give him or her a chance to express himself or herself, would such a person be free to go to court under normal procedure of councils under this provision? Because that is a sort of –(Interjections)- against the chairman for not giving him the chance. Would that be in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think, hon. Minister, the only offending part of this amendment starts with – “no authority shall”, and authority includes a court. You can delete that one and then we move.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, since the second part of this sub-clause has a conflict with the Constitution, I propose that we stop at “the notice”. That is: “where notice is submitted to the chairperson under subsection (a) no person shall withdraw his or her signature from the notice’ and we delete the rest. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman. 

MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, in view of the concern the Minister raised, we better give a time latitude, because we do not want these people not to sort themselves out.  If they can be given sometime, then they can sort their matter out. So, I propose that the chairman adds on a period and after that period has expired, then no one is allowed to remove the signature.

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I think the person of a calibre of a councillor to put his signature to censure the Speaker, he should think twice, and to me there is a remedy anyway. If he changes his mind he can, on the Floor of the Council, tell the Council that he longer supports the motion and vote against it. But this business of saying you can withdraw within two weeks or whatever period will continue to cause chaos in Councils and money will change hands and it will make it impossible to make an effective censure motion. So I -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

DR.NKUUHE: Mr. Chairman, I need some clarification on this matter. I remember we talked of Speaker at the sub-county level. Does this refer to that or is this just for the district? If it refers to all, then I think this idea of a Minister will be a bit cumbersome for him/her to have to go to the sub-county.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think this was meant for the district because I do not think the sub-county Speaker will go to the Minister.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, this is meant specifically for the district.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you want to explain? 

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: I was going to propose that we make an amendment for the Speaker at the sub-county level so that instead of the Minister, it becomes the District Speaker.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, I do now know whether I am right. When I look at the Bill in Clause 7 regarding the Speaker, the 5(a), (b), (c) and (d), I note that there is a time when the Speaker can assume office of the Chairman. What will happen to the position of the Speaker? Will it be automatically taken over by the Deputy Speaker or should we not provide for electing another Speaker? Because now the Speaker is Chairman, he is only stopped from filling the vacancies in the Executive Committee but nothing is talked about replacement of the Speaker once he goes to the Office of the Chair. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, there is a provision in Clause 7. We are dealing with when the Speaker is acting as Chairperson; the Deputy Speaker shall act as Speaker. So, that one is coming, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you have more amendments on Clause 4?

MR.RWABITA: Yes, we have (ii) on that Clause and there is sub-section (viii), which says that, “A Chief Magistrate shall preside at the first election of the Speaker following general elections of Local Councils” and 8(A), “The Speaker shall preside at the election and removal of a Deputy Speaker.”  8(A) is to facilitate the election of a Deputy Speaker because you may not have a chance of getting Chief Magistrates at any time. So we think for a Deputy Speaker, the Speaker can preside at his election and removal. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And then who would preside at the removal of the Speaker?

MR.RWABITA: For the Speaker, I think it will have to be a Magistrate.  It should be put right.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why? The Council is fully constituted and it happens that you are removing a Speaker.  What happens?

DR.OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, the statement here is talking of Local Councils, therefore, there is no exception to sub-county council. This statement here does not restrict the Chief Magistrate to District Council only.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think they were thinking in terms of plural ‘District Councils’ because definitely you do not expect the removal of a Speaker of a sub-county to go to the Minister.

DR.OKULO-EPAK: Mr. Chairman, it would be wiser to restrict this if you want to say district councils because ‘local’ will cover every one of them including municipal, town and sub-county Councils.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is that small correction. Do we agree?

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But my question was, whereas you provide for who will preside over the removal of the Deputy Speaker, you have not told us who presides over the removal of a Speaker?

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, this is in 6(c), It is the Minister. We said, “A notice made under sub-section 6(a) shall be submitted to the Minister or his or her representative by the Clerk; and the Minister or his or her representative shall, within 30 days of receipt of notice, cause the convening of a meeting for the removal of the Speaker.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but does that mean he is the one to preside? Convening is causing the meeting to come and unless you categorise that he is going to preside –(Interruption)

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Again, the idea here was that it was too expensive and too time-consuming to involve the Magistrate in this case of removal. So, leave alone the drafting, but the idea was that the Minister or his or her representative in addition to convening this meeting can actually preside over that meeting of Council and in the case of the lower ones, the District Speaker can do that. I am explaining what we had in mind. It is up to you to say ‘no’ but that is the idea. The expenses involved in bringing the Chief Magistrate and the timing when they say he or she will not be available until and so on and so forth. This, in fact, has paralysed the operation and we thought that what is required really is to preside over and councillors discuss and take their decision one way or the other. So, if that is the case and an office as high as the Minister presiding just for them to decide that is quicker and it lessens this question of expenses involving the chief Magistrate.

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I seek clarification from the Minister as to who is busier, the Chief Magistrate or the Minister? And which one is more expensive; to take a Minister from Kampala to Masindi for example, or having a Chief Magistrate who is based in Masindi to preside over? I suggest that only when the Chief Magistrate is not available or he is busy should the Minister preside or send a representative. I think putting there a Minister will be more expensive in case several speakers mess up and they have to be removed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Kabakumba Masiko, a Chief Magistrate cannot have a representative because it is jurisdiction which is given to himself, so he cannot confer his jurisdiction to another person.

MR.DOMBO: Mr. Chairman, I just wish to be clarified. In the event that one of the parties at variance in that council says that has been unfairly treated in the Council and the Chief Magistrate has presided over, do we specifically provide that a different magistrate will take over in the court? How do we handle that one? Because if the Magistrate presides over in the Council and then somebody disputes the proceedings of the Council and goes to court, does it still go to the same Magistrate who was presided over in the council? Or do we specifically provide that it goes to another court with a different jurisdiction. That must be clarified.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe, we can see some reasoning because for instance, as far as Parliament is concerned, the removal of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker is provided for here. But they say neither the Speaker nor the Deputy Speaker in respect of whom proceedings for removal have commenced shall preside over the proceedings. So, it means if you are removing a Speaker, the Deputy Speaker presides, if you are removing the Deputy Speaker, the Speaker presides. I think we may borrow that one in respect of this one.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, with your guidance on that issue, we accept the amendment that in case of the removal of the Speaker, then the Deputy Speaker shall preside on that council meeting. And then for removal of the Deputy Speaker then the Speaker will preside.

MR.CHEBET MAIKUT: I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like also to be clarified on situation where removal of both, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker arises. Who then will preside over -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, but they will not happen at the same time.  

MR.DOMBO: Mr. Chairman, before you put a question, I still want to be clarified so that I make an informed answer. In the event that one of those offices is vacant, should the council first fill it before? I just wish to be clarified that in the event that the Speaker is around and you want to remove him but the office of the Deputy Speaker is vacant, how do we proceed? Should the council first of all, proceed to fill this position?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, under 8(A) it reads; “The Chief Magistrate shall preside at the first election of the Speaker following general elections of Local councils”. Who is going to preside over the subsequent? First election I think there is –(Interruption)-

THE CHIARMAN: You see, the idea is this. After general election nobody is there to convene the meeting and Members are not there, the Speaker is not there and therefore somebody comes to preside over the proceeding and then he commences you. After that has been done, the council is fully commissioned; it can then start operating normally.

DR.NKUUHE: I am seeking clarification on the sub-county Speaker. I think we said there would be no deputy speaker or something like that. So, I take it that the district Speaker will then preside over the removal of the sub-county Speaker?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have we decided whether there will be no deputy Speaker? If we have not, then we shall wait and see.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, Clause 5 is amending section 15 of the principal Act. In this amendment Bill we are making amendments on paragraph (a) under 1A where it says that, “the holder dies or resigns in writing addressed to the Speaker.” We thought that the word ‘dies’ is superfluous because if some one dies it is automatic that we shall have to elect another person. So, we say, “the holder resigns in writing addressed to the Speaker” so, we delete the words “dies or”. 

And in 1A(b) it was said that “the holder without reasonable cause of the permission of the Speaker”. That is, it requests the Chairperson to ask permission from the Speaker, but we thought that was a bit too much. So, we are changing the word ‘permission’ to ‘notify’. The Chairman should notify the Speaker that he is going on ‘safari’ he cannot attend meetings. So that becomes more reasonable rather than every time he has to go has to ask permission but he should notify because of some reasons why he would not be able to attend. 

Then down in 1A(e) normally somebody is sentenced to death not convicted. So the word ‘convicted’ is changed to ‘sentenced to death.’ Mr. chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Proceed with your amendments or have you finished?

MR.RWABITA: There is again in paragraph (b) subsection 2A, we are deleting the expression “court or any other” that is appearing in the fifth line. “No person shall withdraw his or her signature supporting the petition and no court or any other”. That one is ultra-vires because somebody should have accessibility to court. So, court or any other is deleted. So, we remain with “supporting the petition and no authority shall issue any order whose effect shall be to interrupt the process of removing of a chairperson under this section”. And Mr. Chairman, down -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So actually you are removing more than that so that the Clause stops at petition; because if you say any other, the other words, which I see, do they remain there?

MR.RWABITA: Yes, Mr. Chairman. We can stop at petition and we delete the rest, then it has more meaning. I agree to that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment?

MR.RWABITA:  Yes. In sub-clause (4), “the Minister shall, within 14 days”, we had written seven days, but we thought that is too short, we should give him 2 weeks for consultation. So, seven is substituted by 14 to get more consultation, because within seven days we may not be able to get the Minister's answer. And at the end of that sentence, we say, “Minister shall appoint a tribunal in consultation with the Chief Justice to investigate the allegations”; because the tribunal is an investigative body, so there is no doubt about its function. So this tribunal should be seen to investigate the allegations.  So, we put it at the end of that sentence after Chief Justice. This tribunal should investigate the allegations and that is the end of the amendment of that Clause, Mr. Chairman.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I just want us to be clear of why. I know now why we are removing “and no authority” and so on because it goes into the Constitution. But suppose a chairman who is in the process of being removed applies for an injunction for him not to proceed and the court gives that injunction?  What happens to that paralysis?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We dispose of the initials raised before court and it will depend on the outcome of the decision of court.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: So, that will be in order constitutionally?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: All right. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 6.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, in Clause 6, this is Section 17 of the principal Act. The figure (4) in the second line is deleted and replaced with figure (2) because the sub-section is making reference to sub-section 2 not 4.  So, I think that was a typing error. And we should replace figure (5) in the third line with by figure (2A).  That is,  “2A of that sub-section to 2(a) notwithstanding the provision of a sub-section of 2. 

And at the end of sub-section 4 in the principal Act, we want to add a Clause that will cover the people with disability, and we shall say that and another for persons with disabilities and elderly. Here we are trying to protect the disabled and to be in consonant with Article 32 and 35 of the Constitution so that the disabled people are also presented here. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.
MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I accept what the Committee has proposed, but I have a problem with Clause 5(a). It reads: “notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section, the members of the executive committee shall not exceed one third of the members of the council”. My problem is that in the principal Act, we specify the offices. I have no problem adding persons with disability; but what is the rational of giving room for the executive to create a third of the council to the executives when the current six is causing us enough problems. Could the Minister explain? Because if I take Kawempe for instance, they have 45 councillors and you are giving room for 15 of them to be members of the executive. What is the rational of this change of heart in that 6(5a)?  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to raise a similar issue on this matter. The provision under this amendment did not take into account the sizes of the various districts. Some districts have many sub-counties and therefore many councillors. Some could have even as many as 60 councillors; and one third will be about 20, and I think we should be more specific to provide for the positions that should be created at executive level.  So, I would like also to ask the Minister to clarify on this.
MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I think let us understand the legal implication here. We are saying that the committee shall not exceed, so it can be lower than one third. So, as long as it does not exceed one third, we are covered, Mr. Chairman.  
MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, that is the reason, because you give him a maximum. You are assuming every chairman will be reasonable as not to exceed but he can opt to use that number because it will not be illegal and that is my concern. I have given you the example of Kawempe where there are 45 councillors. He can go up to 15 so long as he does not exceed the one third.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, maybe it is a matter of construction but the principle point is that no executive will exceed a number of seven, but we have had councils where you have 12 members in all. Where you have - I think the least has been about 9. So, this particular provision was to cater for the numbers. If you take for example seven and you have a council of nine or 12, if you make an executive of 7, then councillors are five. Therefore whatever is decided in the executive actually means it is the council decision. So, the first provision is that in normal council, the maximum number of the members of the executive is 7; but in case of a council with lower, this was meant to cater for that; to say that members of the executive shall not exceed one third of those 12. In other words, you cannot make an executive of seven by virtue of the other provision; that is what is meant.

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to appreciate the Committee for making a provision for persons with disabilities to be represented. I am aware that ageing is disabling but if we say, “and another for persons with disabilities and the elderly”, I am not very sure what sort of group of people they are talking about, because these are two different groups of people. As I said, ageing is disabling, can the Minister or the chairman clarify what they had in mind here because it can cause confusion? Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe, let us hear from him.

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you Mr. Speaker. This amendment tempts me to add that there should be another secretary responsible for women affairs. Because the Act says at least one of the offices of the Secretaries referred to in paragraph 2 shall be held by a female, and does not say that that one will be responsible for women affairs. I suggest that there should be a person with disability on the executive who will be Secretary for persons with disabilities. 

I got a problem in Masindi district. Women kept on coming to me to ask, who is the Secretary responsible for women on the district executive? There are two ladies, one is in charge of production, and another one is in charge of health. So, I went to the chairman and put it to him, that we do not have any person responsible for us. He clearly stated that the person in charge of education and Community affairs takes women, children, education, etc. But the problem is, women have not found it easy to go to this gentleman. Even when we have functions, they run to these other ladies who are not even in charge of women affairs. 

So, I will only buy this amendment if you tell us that a female should be in charge of women affairs. Otherwise, if we have somebody, maybe a person with disability on the executive, he should be able to articulate disability issues and the elderly issues in the executive. I would like some clarification from the Minister.  

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Hon. Chairman, hon. Members, let us not understand this amendment as adding another Member on the executive. We are saying under 4, that the chairperson shall assign one of the secretaries to be responsible for health and children welfare. This amendment says he or she will also assign another Secretary to be in charge of people with disabilities and so on. Within those Secretaries, unless hon. Masiko is saying we should also add another one. That he or she should assign another one yet to be responsible for gender. But this one of disabilities, the people with disabilities actually, presented a case, which we appreciated. And that they fall in the same category as children when you are talking in terms of special attention, no persons seems to be caring.  For the women, there is already a third of the whole Council and there is already a female on the executive. But for these ones, there is no person with disabilities on the executive and there are only two in the full Council, that is the logic behind.

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr. Chairman, the word to use is not “another”; it should be “one of the Secretaries”.  

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I am satisfied with the explanation given by the Minister and I think the hon. Member for Masindi should put her case without having to bring down our proposal.
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)
Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think we deal with one amendment and then, we call it a day.

Clause 7.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, Clause 7 is amending Section 19 of the principal Act and on page 8 of the amendment Bill, that is, (5A). We are putting the word “both” between “where” and “the chairperson”. So, it reads: “where both the chairperson and the vice chairperson are unable to perform the functions of the office of chairperson, the Speaker shall perform those functions until the chairperson or the vice chairperson assumes office until a new chairperson is elected”.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is another amendment.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, this is done to enable smooth transfer of powers in the event that the Chairperson is not yet elected. 

We also we have (ii), by inserting new sub-clause (5E) as follows: 5E “During the period the Speaker is acting as Chairperson, the Deputy Speaker shall act as Speaker”. This is to ensure clear separation of powers. 

DR.NKUUHE: Mr. Chairman, I would like to bring it to your attention that this House has been invaded by a very, very serious rodent which is threatening the welfare and life of the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. So, could I ask the Sergeant-at-Arms to clear the rat out of this House?

MR.CHEBET MAIKUT: Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Minister was out of this House at the time she was invaded and I think she is in the rightful seat now.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are in the House. 

MR.RWAKOOJO: Mr. Chairman, I just needed a small clarification as to what the circumstances would be where you would have no Chairman and no Deputy Chairman and the Speaker has to come in? I thought if say the Chairman has problems, he will automatically have the deputy acting.  So what would be the circumstances to have both chairmen not available where you would have to have the Speaker acting?

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: The situation actually arose in Sembabule; you know it very well. The chairman had been voted out and the vice either absconded or something like that. There was a real impact where there was no chairman; there was no vice-chairman. It has happened.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga P.): Mr. Speaker, I wish to report that the Committee of the whole House has deliberated on the Bill up to Clause 7. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga P.): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this is the convenient time to adjourn today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.49p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13th February 2001 at 2.00p.m.)

