Friday, 4 February 2005

Parliament met at 10.39 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I just want to thank you honourable members for agreeing to put in this day to continue with the debate. I know it is not within our rules but I made a request and I am happy that you accepted to come and deliberate on this matter. We shall not take long because the other function is in the afternoon. In the circumstances, the Chief Justice has got a book, which is relevant to the subject before us, but let us see how we will proceed. But I thank you very much.
 
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I too would like to commend the output of the committee in producing this report. I would like in particular to appreciate the fact that this committee allowed the Uganda women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) to have their input and audience with the Committee.

In addition to having time with Kaberamaido District, I also had time with the women civil society and NGOs. The civil society do a good job in getting the views of the women and they did get views of the women on the White Paper. So, I am representing bits and pieces of views from both constituencies.  

First and foremost, Mr Speaker, I was very surprised that the committee agreed with both the Government and CRC report on the repeal of Article 32(2) of the Constitution, which recommends for repeal of Article 32(2) with respect to the Equal Opportunities Commission.   

Mr Speaker, you are aware that after the White Paper was out, the issue of the Equal Opportunities Commission became almost the most contentious issue. It raised a lot of excitement and generated even demonstrations and petitions. The establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission could be an appropriate machinery and authority to handle and safeguard the rights of the marginalised groups including the disabled, the women and others. It is my hope that Government will have some re-thinking about the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission, because this one area of recommendation almost tarnished the outcome of the report as far as the women and other marginalized groups are concerned.

Secondly, is the issue of land: There was only one issue in Kaberamaido District which generated 100 percent consensus and that was the issue of land and I am glad that the report of the committee does not completely support the White Paper. Both the women and Kaberamaido District have these additional reasons why they think that Government should not have the right of compulsory acquisition of the land for investment. We are saying; development is not just about investing in industry or about growth in GDP. It is also about investing in peoples’ welfare and land is about the biggest factor of production for the entire population.  

In Uganda where property ownership especially land is still mainly passed from father to son, the women cannot support the Government position which can easily render many families landless and destitute in the name of investment.

Thirdly, investment policies have to be gender sensitive. Kaberamaido people urge government to provide a facilitative mechanism which makes acquisition of land titles easier and quicker so that land can become a marketable commodity.

On the issue of transition to multiparty system, the people of Kaberamaido and the Civil Society concur entirely with the recommendations contained in page 17 and 18 of the committee’s report. But they also put emphasis on the following: They support the opening because it opens up space for dissenting and minority voices which would otherwise not be well represented in power structures. It encourages vibrancy, democracy, creativity, innovation and diversity of all alternative view points.  

In view of the East African Integration, it would also bring about harmonization of systems in the East African sub-region. But women however call on government to provide sufficient time to enable the population to re-orient themselves to the partisan type of government and for also women to examine the manifestos of all the political parties and know which one offer them a better deal.

On the regional tier of Government, the people of Kaberamaido did not see any justification in having another level of bureaucracy at the regional level.  They considered it a waste of time and money and a risk of causing more pilferage in resources in the name of corruption. They suggested that Government would rather provide regular remuneration to the LC system and Women Councils. 

The people of Kaberamaido say the shorter it is for resources to reach them, the better. They want to feel the effect of Government on the ground. For example, as we talk now, the people of Kaberamaido have been infected by tsetse flies and they are dying and they are saying Government should do a lot more especially the Ministry of Health. People are dying in big numbers and they want to see more intervention of government in terms of prevention and provisions for Lwala hospital, which is taking care, which has run out of beds and space; patients are intense.  

On giving power to the President to dissolve Parliament, Kaberamaido concurs with the committee report. They say if there are any disagreements, the Judiciary should solve them, or at worst it can be taken back to the people. They think this would be infringing on their rights as electorates. They believe that there should be clear separation of power at all levels of Government.  

Same day elections: There were mixed reactions, but we almost came to a consensus, but on condition that there is sufficient time given for civic education so that there is no confusion during election. But definitely for the President and Parliamentary election, there was consensus; it is the District Chairperson, where there were some misgivings.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.50
MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to start by saying that good governance hinges itself on democracy, and democracy has got its own principles one of which is its definition, that democracy is the dictatorship of the majority over the minority. It would be unfortunate, therefore, to begin lamenting that “There are big numbers of DP, they are going to beat us. What do we do?” It is a matter of mobilizing so hard that you get people to be convinced and follow you in the National Resistance Movement as a party.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, these are not parables; these are direct political theories, which I hope you were following very closely. Mr Speaker, I was among those who swore –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: When you said democracy is dictatorship of the majority over the minority, I thought you were coming up with your own new theory in governance. But at the end when you say, these are established political theories, which is your source of that misleading and very fallacious definition of democracy?

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, Hon. Muzoora was quoted two or three days ago in the Monitor as having said that Westerners should work very hard to ensure political power leadership remains with Westerners. 

Hon. Muzoora is an ardent supporter of NRM. Is he supporting NRM because its top leadership is coming from Western Uganda as he was quoted in the papers, or he supports the principles of the Movement administration?

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, this institution we are in, particularly when we are debating a subject of the importance of this magnitude, we need to be a bit careful. I want to get it clearly from hon. Muzoora because he first said one of the tenets of good governance is the espousing of the democratic principles. Then he went on to define democracy as being the dictatorship of the majority over the minority. Clarify to us whether that really constitutes good governance in your opinion.

MR MUZOORA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I repeat that good governance hinges itself on democracy and democracy is the rule of the majority over the minority. If that one is wrong, let me prove it so.

Mr Speaker, I am a student of Political Science and a researcher in that regard and my papers, as I talk now, are being quoted by students of politics at Makerere University. (Laughter). That one notwithstanding, Mr Speaker, you gave me an opportunity where I shall make a personal statement in connection with what was quoted in the Monitor that I could have said in Mbarara. You said you would give me an opportunity to make a personal statement; I would not wish that one to come into my speech today.

Mr Speaker, I think when others begin speaking and begin shouting time, Mr Speaker, you will also protect me in that regard. I also swore to protect and uphold our Constitution, and one of the items in this Constitution, which I must protect and do, is embedded in the Constitution on Chapter 18.  Chapter 18 talks about the amendment of the Constitution and if I am to uphold and protect it without amending, I would be making a criminal case.  

Mr Speaker, I am glad that the Legal Committee made a very big research in connection with the White Paper and the report on the Review of the Commission, and here they made a research and they have quoted that, “Sovereignty belongs to the people as a corporate body. The Government is merely an agent, which has delegated powers, which can be withdrawn or modified as the general will of the people dictates”, Rousseau in the Eighteenth Century.  

When my hon. Member says it is theory, then that one gives a reason why he went to the bush to begin fighting here and there. But otherwise, Mr Speaker, the people of Rwampara are saying that –(Interruption)

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, hon. Muzoora was also in the bush.  Him and I did not consult any Ugandan after the election of 10th December 1980.  There is no Ugandan who was consulted for him and I to decide to go to the bush. Is hon. Muzoora in order to insinuate that we went to the bush-we made a judgment but the people he claim to have authority were not consulted. Why didn’t you first carry out a referendum? Is hon. Muzoora in order?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether in your conscience you had to consult. I think it was simply the good cause you went to fight for. Do you have to consult when you are effecting a good cause?

MR MUZOORA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your great and wise ruling. Mr Speaker, I think thereafter as I wind up we are talking of power belonging to the people and the law on referendum must be clear on the three arms of the state, the Executive as an implementer, Parliament as an observer, Judiciary as an arbitrator but the power of the people must never be used to overturn court verdicts or interfere with the court proceedings, and the results of the referendum must be binding.  

The power to dissolve Parliament: The people of Rwampara have objected to this proposal. The power belongs to the people and the people are the ones who elect the Chief Executive for the implementation of the policy and it is the same people who elect Parliament as the overseer of the Executive and in case of an impasse or stalemate, a referendum should be drawn. This referendum must be drawn by the Judiciary, Supreme Court, who should put the questions having raised a petition either by the Executive or by Parliament.

The opening up of political parties: The people of Rwampara found it very difficult to open up, but after explanation and especially quoting Article 72 in the Constitution, they were convinced and accepted the opening up.

On the regional governments, they said that if Government has seen that regional tier is viable, they should have the following; Buganda, Bunyoro, Ankole, Kigezi, West Nile, Toro, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja, Teso and Busoga as the regional governments and then they said finally that where all the districts in that region reach a highest level of cooperation, the region can be called a federal state in their own way.   

Parliament to remove errant cultural leaders: The people of Rwampara here said since it is covered in Article 246(3)(a) and one can be sued or the cultural leader can sue or be sued. It is already constitutional and should remain so.

Finally, holding parliamentary elections together:  The people of Rwampara are of the view that since the Presidency holds the destiny of this country, election of the president can be held singularly and then thereafter the Members of Parliament and the councillors can be elected the next day.

Death penalty was upheld; for national language Swahili was preferred. On reduction of Member of Parliaments, they said we should maintain the status quo, and lifting of the presidential term, the people of Rwampara prefer to use the peoples’ power to elect the President and remove the President through a vote so long as there are always timetabled elections.

11.03
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono):  I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to convey greetings from the people of Mukono to you Mr Speaker and the honourable Members of Parliament. They wish you fruitful deliberations this year.  

Mr Speaker, in my consultations with the people of Mukono and from my own observations and deliberations with Members of Parliament, I came up with a number of issues. The people of Mukono touched a number of contentious matters and they had their observations and recommendations and requested Parliament to include some of their ideas in the Constitution as we review it.

Mr Speaker, they started with the federal governance.  The people of Mukono say that the federal system should be accorded to all people of Uganda and the areas which wish to have the federal system should be allowed to do so. Mukono people say they like the federal system of governance and requested me to start with it so that you properly record it that it is a very big issue as far as Mukono and Buganda people are concerned.

About removal of the traditional leaders, the people of Mukono feel that since everybody is under the law and we have hereditary leaders and other traditional leaders are elected or they have a rotational type of leadership that maybe the law could be imposed on the leaders who are elected or who have that rotational type of leadership. But for traditional leaders who inherit their leadership it should be left to those groups which hold such leaders in a different capacity of leadership because these are charismatic leaders and the people of Mukono feel that some of these laws stated by the Constitution should at least be waived off in some of the areas.

Mr Speaker, about the parties, the people of Mukono feel that parties would be a good type of governance for the country but their fear was that the majority have never experienced that type of governance. So they are requesting that Parliament should allot some time for civic education so that they know how they are to conduct their campaigns and voting. As of now most of them look at their leaders on individual merit, they have never exercised electing leaders on a party system, so they are not very conversant with how parties conduct election of their leaders.

Mr Speaker, the other contentious issue was on Article 188 about the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) in the districts. They feel that these CAOs should be brought back to the centre, they should be appointed from the centre as this would give them a chance to be transferred to other districts, get promotions and even to be disciplined where need be. As of now CAOs seem to be the heads of the districts and nobody can either transfer them, discipline them or even levy sanctions on their conduct in the districts. Even Chairmen and all councillors bow down before the CAOs because they are the people who give them the money.  

In addition to CAOs, the people of Mukono felt that the District Public Accountants Committee chairpersons should also be appointed from the centre because if it is left to the district chairperson to appoint them. These chairpersons are normally compromised because they also look at the CAOs as their bosses, since they are the ones who decide when they should sit and how much they should pay them.

Mr Speaker, in Mukono we looked at the prisons under Article 33. Currently women are not catered for in prisons; all the provisions in the prisons are for men, especially in Mukono. The women’s ward or hostel had no provisions at all. For the skills they give to the prisoners to prepare them for the life after prison, they are only provided for men.  So, they felt that this should also be included.

About graduated tax, it was felt that it is good because nobody wants to pay graduated tax.  But the LCs felt that they should be told how they are to run the sub-counties -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence for just one minute. On graduated tax, they want to know where to get money for paying and transacting business at the sub-county levels.  

Formation of new districts: They said this should follow the procedures because people just asking for a district from the President without looking into the viability of such a district is damaging the country. Mr Speaker, it was felt that coming up with municipalities, the Parliament should look at the requirements for a town council to be turned into a municipality, and it was felt that Mukono town council and Njeru Town Councils were overdue for becoming Municipalities.

On special interest groups, it was felt that the country should be given a report on the evaluation of the special groups to see whether we should continue with them or not.  

Mr Speaker, finally on third term, they said that Mukono had no problem with third term if formalities and logistics were clearly put forward.  Since we are going into parties, the parties were to come up with their leaders and it would be upon the people to decide on which of the leaders from those parties they would choose to be their President. Civic education will clear this issue of third term. But the people of Mukono felt that it was not a big issue since we are going to start another type of governance in parties, and they felt that if the current President was still able and fit and not over-aged according to the regulations, they would be comfortable with having a third term. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

11.14
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for the opportunity and I also thank the committee for a good report –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I thought you had forfeited your - but anyway proceed.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had collected the document for my reference. 

Mr Speaker I thank the committee for a good report and I thank the government for realizing the mis-spelling of the word “Kibaale” and therefore in the amendment it should be well spelt as it is indicated. 

However, Mr Speaker, there is also a demand that the First Schedule of the Constitution be amended to provide Kibaale of Bunyoro; and it has not featured anywhere yet presentations from the Bunyoro-Kitara kingdom and Kibaale all indicated that Kibaale should be of Bunyoro, in which case Hoima, Masindi and Kibaale will be of Bunyoro for the time being.

Mr Speaker, the people of Bugangaizi are conscious of point 8 of the 10-point programme as revised in 15, which talks of redressing past errors. Mr Speaker you are aware that Constitutions are about protecting people’s rights, and you are well aware that the rights of the people of Bugangaizi for many years were violated and especially the rights to land; and it is our wish and the wish of the people of Bugangaizi that as we amend the Constitution we become explicit and make sure that the rights of the people in Kibaale to land are restored in the Constitution. 

Article 237 of the Constitution merely postponed problems and just said people will enjoy security of tenure.  Security of tenure does not mean my rights to land have been restored. We want to be explicit, and I will move an amendment at an appropriate time to tell Parliament what the people of Bugangaizi want .

Mr Speaker, you are also aware that the rights of Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom were violated when its territory were annexed to another Kingdom by the then Government; it must be this Government to restore these rights. In which case, Mr Speaker, the territories, which have not since returned to Bunyoro-Kitara Kingdom, should be returned and we should see it in the amendments of this Constitution.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like hon. Kasirivu to clarify whether in reviewing the Constitution of 1995 Parliament should bear in mind that the Constitution will empower the people of Uganda, especially the people of Bunyoro-Kitara whose rights were violated by the colonialists, to be able to sue the colonial Government so that we are not encumbered by our own Constitution, but we are empowered. 

Are you trying to propose to the Members to be aware and to ensure that the Constitution of Uganda reviewed empowers us to sue the colonialists for the right of the people of Uganda?

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I have been really surprised that a person from Bunyoro-Kitara can start asking the Government of Uganda to restore the rights of Bunyoro-Kitara, when he knows that there has never been anything called Bunyoro, there has never been anything called Buganda or there has never been anything called- (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, there is established procedure here on how we refer to our colleagues. We know Dr Atwoki as a honourable Member of Parliament for Bugangaizi.  But is it in order for Engineer Gagawala to refer to him as a person from Bunyoro-Kitara without adhering to the principles well established in this House. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think what you have said is the proper way to address; it might have been a slip of tongue.

MR WAMBUZI:  Yes, I really meant hon. Dr Atwoki Kasirivu. I have respect for him and is my friend in very many aspects. We are really debating a serious matter and I should focus at the issue on the Floor.  

My clarification to him was really Bunyoro to be called Bunyoro. You should know yourself that it is because the people of Bunyoro were being pointed at as the people who respect Banyoro. 

You know the meaning of the word “Bunyoro” and you also know the meaning of the word “Buganda,” Buganda has never called itself Buganda, it is the Banyoro or the Basoga who called those people Baganda; those are our brothers we cannot fight them.  Even the Basoga have never actually been Basoga for that matter, it is the Baganda who actually jokingly call them Basoga; those are the people who know how to spear.  So really to refer to them as Kingdoms is a misnomer- (Interruption)- yes, Bunyoro-Kitara the Kingdom which you know used to extend up to the rift valley; it was extending up to Tanzania. 

The people of Buganda are real brothers of the people you refer to as Banyoro; we should not differentiate ourselves. But because of struggle for power everybody wants to lead; you know the culture of the current Bunyoro that if you are born and you are likely to become a King you simply have got to run very far if you want to survive. 

Therefore, the children who ran to Buganda are the ones who again attacked their grandfathers. So the Kingdom has never been extinguished, it still exists; these are their children and because they are their children they have been struggling for power.  

Now, do you expect, Mr Speaker, power to be handed to you on a silver plate?  It is a struggle and the struggle continues. You can’t start demanding that the Government should hand back the power to you on a silver plate.  It has been a struggle between the different sons of the same soil.  

Therefore, we can’t start disowning ourselves saying that these are foreigners; they are your real brothers and they are only struggling for power amongst themselves.  

As a matter of fact this Buganda on which you are sitting is actually part of what you call Bunyoro and Bunyoro is part of Buganda.  I beg to clarify the honourable Member of Parliament.

DR KASIRIVU:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Gagawala those are his opinions and he is entitled to them and I hope he does not – he still wants my support for his district.  

The issue of suing as hon. Ekanya says, that is another matter and it is being contemplated on what to do next.  But as I said, Mr Speaker, I have put the case, the issue of rights of the people must be respected and must be restored.  

On the issue of traditional or cultural institution, I want to thank the committee, and this is not my first time I have said the issue of cultural institutions has been delayed- the law has been delayed.  Government must enact a law to provide for cultural institutions. 

Mr Speaker, Government must treat cultural institutions equally.  This preferential treatment must stop and I imagine it is because of this preferential treatment that we are having unnecessary demands from here and there.  

If we had law, which is providing on how these institutions should handled, we would not be into these type of demands that we want a, b, c, as against this.  So a law must be enacted and then we see how cultural institutions should be catered for.

Mr Speaker, a lot of time was taken by hon. Gagawala and he finished his contribution.  

There is the issue of independent candidates for Parliamentary elections and I think other offices and the people of Bugagainzi are not comfortable with independent candidates. 

 They are asking if we go into parties, is it possible that we can have a good number of Ugandans who do not have an inclination to any of the parties; and if possible how genuine would they be; how can they be trusted?  

So, if we decide to go into pluralism then they expect people to be in political groupings representing various ideologies of their parties. So, they are not supporting independent candidates.

The issue of parties versus the Movement: I was at pains to explain because the people of Bugangaizi still do not want parties. They still want the movement and they said if we decide to go into parties, then Government must organise an exhaustive civic education programme and they want to see how parties relate to each other in the field.  That way, they will get chance to decide and know that party x should be handled like this.  Otherwise for them they are still sceptical of parties.

Mr Speaker, the people of Bugangaizi are accepting lifting of Article 105(2), but for them it is for President Museveni only and they were very genuine.  Then I said, “What next?”  They said, “After that then we shall decide” and if we are to report what we heard, this is what I am reporting.  Otherwise, on dissolving Parliament by the President, they said no, because there was a scenario in one of the sub-counties and they asked me, “Is it true that Parliament can impeach the President?”  I said, “Yes, it is contained in the Constitution”; and they said, “Suppose you are in the process of impeaching the President, can he not dissolve Parliament before you have impeached him?”  I said, “Of course he can do it.”  They said, “Then he should never dissolve Parliament”  

As for the appointment of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), Mr Speaker, it was not unanimous –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, it is time please, you have been giving yourself more time than necessary -(Interjection)- yes, but you agreed to him; okay, one minute.

DR KASIRIVU: As for the appointment of Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), they were not unanimous, but they believe that if the appointment of the CAO is left or returned to the Central Government it could undermine the decentralization.  What they were suggesting is to have a mechanism; they appoint the CAO, but if there is a problem with the CAO misappropriating some of the funds, which are from the centre, then the centre should have a means of apprehending the CAO and imprisoning him.  But they are also waiting for the graduated tax to be abolished so that they do not pay graduated tax.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.29
MR HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me the opportunity. I did consult for the record, though minus the ugshs5 million, and the people of Jinja Municipality West appreciated.  The people of Jinja Municipality West did appreciate the process and it is still on-going, for your information. 

The issues that they raised, I will Table them at an appropriate time when we are discussing the bill.  I would want to joint Colleagues in thanking the Committee for doing a good job.  Mr Speaker, the other day you reminded this House that this venture is a very sensitive one and therefore deserves utmost patience, courtesy and humility.  What does this mean to me?  It means that we are looking into a potentially volatile situation, that is, if we do the wrong things.  

On that note, Mr Speaker, the people of Jinja asked me to request this House to exclude the honour that was bestowed upon us in 2001 when we swore to uphold the Constitution and protect this country. Mr Speaker, going by the Committee Report, there are several pointers to the effect that reason and honour will prevail unless if we choose otherwise.  

To quote, Mr Speaker, on page 1, this is what the Committee says in the third paragraph, “Given Uganda’s geopolitical influence in both the Great Lakes and the Horn of African regions, a successful political transition could significantly spread the zones of democratic peace, to catalyse regional integration, deepen democracy and consolidate regional peace and security.”  

On page 2, Mr Speaker, the Committee says, “A White Paper is not an end in itself.”  The Committee further says, “We should expect further that when the bill for amendment of this Constitution is eventually drafted, it would incorporate views, which are expressed during public debates.”  

Having said that, Mr Speaker, there is no doubt that we have the mandate to amend the Constitution.  However, one of my constituents reminded me of a book and this book really makes good reading for everybody, and despots world over have mastered the book, and the book is called “The Prince” by Machiavelli. When I read the report, it is good that the Committee as part of its literature consulted The Prince.  

To quote, Mr Speaker, this is what Machiavelli had to say, this is on page 6. “Sovereignty belonged in the early stages of the State’s existence to the creator of the State, the Prince. Once the State was on the secure footing it could survive if people were admitted to a share in Government, and if the sovereign conducted the ordinary business of the State in accordance with the Law.”  Mr Speaker, I would want Parliament and my colleagues to internalise what Machiavelli talked about in The Prince. 

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way; thank you, Mr Speaker.  There are two schools of thoughts about The Prince, the book by Machiavelli; one school thinks that was a satire. So, when we are analysing it we should know whether it was a satire or we should believe in what Machiavelli wrote.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you for that information, colleague, but you are entitled to your own opinion. I do not know whether Machiavelli was basically interested in fun, but what I am trying to say is that, Mr Speaker, I want us to internalise what Machiavelli said.  He did say Constitutions are made by people in power by using the masses to retain themselves in power, and this is precisely what we are seeing; precisely this is what we are going through, and I would like to implore Colleagues to understand the dynamics of power as we discuss this question of Constitutional amendment.  As leaders, what is your role?  Are you part of the power or are we being used in the power dynamics of the Constitutional amendment?  

Mr Speaker, my colleague, hon. Mugambe, says Machiavelli was basically a satirist –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, but you see, why don’t you ask yourself whether you are being used or you have the power to do it, you as an individual?

MR KASIGWA:  Mr Speaker, that is why I am saying that let us understand the nitty gritty involved.  We could easily entrench a dangerous situation.  We could easily have a difficult situation for this country and we shall live to regret it.  

Mr Speaker, having read the White Paper, I have come down to note that what is core in this process is Article 105(2), which in turn is driven by the desire to retain power, wealth and greed.  Otherwise, how do you explain the position in the white Paper of Government wanting to acquire land for investors and then the position of petroleum, Mr Speaker?  If you looked at the White Paper, on page – my colleagues have talked about it, but let us look at this thing as a serious matter.  

On page 120 they talk of minerals being vested in Government.  But petroleum will not be vested in Government.  Now if on one side you have got the power to acquire land for investors, what will stop you who is in power from owning petroleum world over.  Concessions are given and petroleum is owned by the State on behalf of the people.  But you can see here it is regarded as some other issue.  Look at the definition; it is not a mineral.  

I want to talk about petroleum, it is strange, Mr Speaker and we should stand up to the cause and realize what are we into.  That is why I did say a process is being driven by a desire to have wealth, power and greed.

I want to appeal to my Colleagues, if you look at the structure of our Parliament here; this was what they told me that a generation succeeds a generation naturally.  

And they asked me, “Hon. Kasigwa let us assume you lifted the term limits, but you can do it if you so wish.  Shall we not be looking at an Ivorian situation happening in Uganda whereby – because power means wealth to be honest?  For whole 40 years Ivory Coast was stable because it had one generation and there was no opportunity for the other people to succeed.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, in my considered opinion I would want to say for the record that what we are bound to experience is one of the biggest political fraud that this country has seen.  Thank you.

11.29
MS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua):  I thank you very much hon. Speaker for giving me room to contribute on this contentious issue.  

Hon. Speaker, with due respect, I would like to say that it is a very turning point to the Ugandans at this very moment and I would like to sober myself up and contribute very sincerely to the people who sent me to this House.

I went round and consulted my people and the were various issues which were raised and I will zero myself down to the most interesting parts in which we had contributions with the people of Arua. 

 I did not rate myself into percentages but I listened to the people and personally came up with my personal view.  So, as I am going to talk here I will bring in the view of the people and my personal view as the leader of the people since they gave me the mandate to come and represent them in this august House.

Honourable Speaker –(Interjection)- yes, they are mine.  I would like to start with Article 105, the issue of lifting Presidential term limit.  

I interacted with the youth, I interacted with the elderly people, I even happen to sit down with some teachers and ex-soldiers to find out their view.  The point in Arua is that this Parliament is going to determine the future of this country and this is the time we either allow it to go into bloodshed or we make it continue into a peaceful arena so that out generation will live to enjoy this country.  

My people said lifting of Presidential term limit was very, very dangerous to hungry Ugandans particularly the Africans- (Applause)- and they went ahead and said this would be the time build the institutions.  As we are talking now, institutions like the police, army and prison are not yet built. 

As we were discussing they brought a very interesting issue, I failed to analyse it because I am not a soldier myself.  They told me, ”Look here honourable, the guns are still outside the armoury.  This country will be comfortable if all the guns are brought down and put in the armoury and then we shall start playing about with lifting the presidential term limit”.  

The issue there was the President who is currently on Chair is good, we can amend the Constitution, but assuming we get a very hungry President who is going to play about with that article and ruin the already developed features we have in this country leading to the destruction of the total Ugandans citizens, what are we going to do?  

The Committee I believe they were a little bit very technical.  I have gone through the Committee report, they have been recommending but when it reached to Article 105, they said the matter should be referred to the Parliament.  Why did they jump that, why couldn’t the Committee recommend on that issue?  It means it is a very touching issue. 

So, I am really crying and pledging to this Parliament that we are going to make the rightful decision which will support this country and which will make us enjoy the peace we are having today in this House and outside the Parliament. 

So, according to the people of Arua, we can amend other provisions but let us stay calm and maintain Article 105.  

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my neighbour for giving way.  I am made to understand that even during the Constitutional Assembly, this article was actually a smuggled in the Constitution; it just came in as a by the way and people put it in, and this –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have listened very attentively to this information that is being provided by hon. Tom Kayongo, actually to the effect that we have a Constitution with a smuggled article, that the Constitutional Assembly did not own it up; and, Mr Speaker, you were there and many members of this House were there.  Is he in order to allege that we have a Constitution with smuggled articles?

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I can say, the Constitution should be considered as it is, that it was properly made.

MS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling.  Honourable Minister, with due respect, I would have asked for clarification from you.  I am here expressing the views of the people and my personal views, so I do not take that clarification.  You will get your time, I am talking as the leader of the people of Arua; you will get your time and represent your people.  Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, we are in this House to understand the process of governing Uganda, and if members of the frontbench are supposed to be shut up, that one I think is unfair.  I wanted a clarification from the honourable member how the presence of guns can be removed by not changing that particular clause, and I thought this was a reasonable thing to demand of a member.  Is it in order for an honourable member to refuse a clarification from a member of this House?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think we considered this matter yesterday or the other day because when you raise a point of order, it must be something that has been done contrary to the Rules of Procedure. I we said the other day that when you stand for a point of information or clarification, you are entirely in the hands of the member holding the Floor.  So, it is the right of the person holding the Floor to accept or not to accept.  But we said maybe we may have to revisit our rules and address this issue, but as of now the rule is that the person holding the Floor can give you the chance to seek clarification or to give information.

MS ANGUPALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My people and myself were in exile for over 15 years, and it was as a result of a dictatorship leader who came from my personal district; and when you move throughout this country, the reference is “Idi Amin did something.”  Why do people refer to Idi Amin being a dictator, because there was no clear Constitution?  Every Constitution, which was set, people were coerced to accept it and then it was not respected; the country was led into a chaotic era, and the people of West Nile, Arua District, suffered as result of the of the late Idi Amin behaviours. 

I am now coerced, Mr Speaker, I do not want history to repeat itself.  Why don’t I want history to repeat itself –(Interjection)- I have limited time – Mr Speaker, I beg to be protected from the hon. Minister of Local Government.  You have the chance to go to the people of Arua and consult them. 

My personal view, for the sake of the peaceful environment of this country, for the sake of us enjoying our Nation, the people of Arua pleaded that we should not tamper with Article 10; and the hon. Member of the Committee stated that it was smuggled in, I do not know when it was smuggled in.  You can even hear, now it was smuggled in.  Why did you debate about it, and why are we tampering with it if it were smuggled in?  So my stand is, for the safety of this Nation, Article 105 should not be tampered with.

On the election of the Women Members of Parliament, the people agreed that we should go in for adult suffrage and everybody should elect us because the entire district will wish to vote us in.

On the issue of federalism, since yesterday I have been demanding to get clarification from the Member of Parliament from Lubaga.  I will have the support to support federalism, but me as Ms Angupale, I just wanted to understand when Ugandans are talking about federalism, which type of federalism are we calling for?  Is it State?  Is it the smaller tribes we have within the country to link up and start to push Government for some developmental programmes?  

I was not given the chance to get the clarification.  But if I read the history of this country, in 1962, when we were advancing towards the independence of this country, I do remember and I stand to be corrected, the British Protectorate Government decided to depot the Kabaka because the Kabaka was demanding for a federal State; and the point was, it was very dangerous to have a state within a state.  So, if we have a state within a state, it will easily lead to a state of anarchy where there is no leader because the National Leader will need to push on his own issue and the smaller governing systems will also push in their policies, which will in turn confuse the whole system and confuse this smaller Nation to go back to the histories we had before.  So, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, could you clarify so that you get my support on that issue?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Just briefly, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Briefly –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think her question is at what level, because she was asking, “Is it district, what level are you advocating?  That is all.

MR LUKYAMUZI: What we are advocating is a regional level of federalism where constitutionally State powers are shared between the centre and the regions to enable the regions carry out certain functions and responsibilities to empower the regions to even carry out some minimal taxation so that you reduce the workload embodied by the centre, and reduce duplication of work; and in the end enable West Nile function and share the resources from tobacco.  Otherwise, tobacco resources are all enjoyed by the centre for the last 20 years.  When will you develop?  The time is now to develop.

MS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much for that clarification.  On the issue of dissolving Parliament, the Presidential powers to dissolve Parliament, I think that issue; I did not consult my people on it.  I felt I would make the decision myself.  According to me now, I feel if the President is given powers to dissolve Parliament, then we cannot talk freely like this because if I stand to justify myself, I will fear that the next day I will be sanctioned.  So, I feel the powers to dissolve Parliament should not lie in the hands of the President, but should line in the hands of the people who elect us here.  

I would like to talk about the CAOs, the Chief Administrative Officers.  I happen to be in the Committee of Local Government, and as we consulted the District CAOs and the Financial Officers, what we found was the CAOs are mostly coerced; they do not act in any impartial way because they are subject to the districts.  

According to me it would be good if the Public Service Commission appointed them and the district is left with the mandate to monitor their activities, the way the committee really recommended. I support that. 

I would like to round up my points by saying that land belongs to the people and should not be tampered with, because it is the most dangerous area. In Arua when you go and plant a spear on somebody’s land, it means you are calling for war. Instead of opening up many fronts of war with Ugandans, I think that Article should be left the way it is so that the people of this country enjoy their rights through the meager land they have. After all they say that is the only resource they have to build them economically. So, if it is taken away, they will not have a chance to decide on the only resource they have. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I thank the House for listening to me. For God and my country.

11.54
MR BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Before I comment on the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I wish to extend my appreciation to the Army, Uganda People’s Defence Forces, and the Commander-in-Chief who is the President of the Republic of Uganda, for having allowed me to serve this country for 18 years in the Army. After that when I submitted my application to retire it was favourably considered. I want to put it on record that actually in the history of the Parliament of Uganda I am the first serving soldier of the other ranks’ category to have ever made it to Parliament, and I think I might be the last one. (Laughter).

Coming back to the report of the committee, I appreciate the observation that what we are undertaking is a major landmark in the political history of this country. I also appreciate that given our geo-political position, if well handled this process is bound to positively influence political developments in the region. I also want to agree with them that actually this constitutional review exercise was necessary. I am happy that the committee indicates that it was guided by logic, reason and national interest.  

However, I wish to observe that while national interest may be communally agreed on by the stakeholders, instances are bound to emerge between groups and individuals as to how that national interest should be taken care of. Since we are at the dawn of multi-party politics and given that we already have registered parties, these political groups and how they look at national interest is bound to influence how this political process and the transition is going to take place. Looking at how they look at national interest may not be the same. While one group may look at a certain national interest as vital, another group may look at it as being secondary. 

Honourable members, I want to assure you that as Parliamentarians what we are involved in is politics and what differentiates politics from other sciences, whether national or social aspects of life, is that it is about political power. Political power is not something you cross over but it something that you endeavor to acquire, secure it and retain it until circumstances dictate otherwise.  

Therefore, the way these political groups look at this matter is going to be very important and it might depend on who has the numbers. What I forgot while I was thanking his Excellency the President and Commander-in-Chief is that now I can comfortably join the National Resistance Movement. Now I can go out and consult on specific issues.

On the appointment of the chief administrative officers and district accounting officers, my people say that the appointments should be done by the Public Service Commission and the central government should carry out the supervisory role. They say that it should not be designated in the Constitution as to who should be the accounting officer.  

On the matter of holding presidential, parliamentary and LC V elections on the same day, the people of Kyaka County say they have no problem with all those three elections being held on the same day.  

The other matter is on the power of the people. My people say that should they ever participate in a referendum, their decision should be binding to all the arms of government.  

Then from change to Movement to multi-party politics; my people say they have no problem with moving from the Movement system to multi-party.  

Then on the establishment of regional governments, the people of Kyaka County say they are not interested in falling under any regional government. However, other districts that may want to corporate and form regional governments are free and they have no problem with that.  

On removal of presidential term limits, the people of Kyaka County say they have no problem with amending Article 105(2) to remove term limits. 

On another matter, they say that nobody is supposed to be above the Constitution and, therefore, if traditional and cultural leaders breach the Constitution, they should be prosecutable and should be able to attract sanctions.  

The other matter is the dissolution of Parliament. There were dissenting views. Some people said the matter should be referred to them to be decided by a referendum if there is a stalemate between the President and Parliament. However, the majority of the people of Kyaka County say the President should have powers to dissolve Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.02
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to say something about this important motion. I will go straight to what the people of Kawempe North constituency told me during my consultations. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to add my voice to those who spoke before me, in thanking the committee for the good work. If you can remember we had a lot of reservations and given the fact that we have not seen any minority report from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, then they deserve a token of thanks.

I have about seven issues to address but given the limited time that we have I will just marathon through them so that I am not caught by time. On the issue of the federo system of governance, the people of Kawempe North Constituency informed me that areas where the federo system of government is treasured, it should be given to them. 

When it came to whether we should have one or two councils in our different regions, in this case here in Buganda they agreed that they want to see one council, Lukiiko, at Mengo.

When it came to Kampala District, they asked various questions as to why Kampala was taken out of Buganda. Mr Speaker, in the 1995 Constitution Kampala is not part of Buganda but geographically it remains in Buganda. The reasons members have been advancing as to why Kampala should not be part of Buganda is because it is the capital city and that it is a cosmopolitan city. We all know that we have our attachments in as far as the city is concerned. But my people gave me various examples. They told me that we have the Owen Falls Dam, which is in Jinja; it is in the Busoga region and it serves each and everybody in Uganda. Can we say that since –(Interruption)

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the member holding the Floor that the former Owen Falls Dam is now called Nalubaale Falls Dam, and it is in Njeru Town Council of Buganda.  

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, is the hon. Balemezi Lydia of Mukono in order to say that the dam is in Buganda when clearly all the waters that surround Busoga are in Busoga? In fact the Busoga boundary is on the west bank of the Nile?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall have to look at the map and see the boundaries.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling but as far as I know, it is in Busoga.

My people told me that indeed Kampala District should remain part of Buganda.

On the deadlock between Parliament and the Executive, the people of Kawempe North constituency were in agreement that it would be a waste of time that whenever there is a deadlock we go for a referendum. They even gave me an example that for the last four years in some areas we have not been in agreement with the Executive, like the UCB case and declaring parts of the Northern region a disaster area. So they told me that if you get that kind of conflict and every time you go to them, how much money are we going to spend in the referenda? So they request that please, let hon. Members of Parliament that they elected decide and let the President or the Executive accept what has been decided by Parliament, instead of going for a referendum.

Separation of powers was very important. The people of Kawempe North constituency are of the view that if you are elected as a Member of Parliament and then the President appoints you a minister, decide where to serve: whether to be a Member of Parliament or to take the ministerial post. That was from Kawempe North.

Reduction of Members of Parliament: we are too many, that is a fact. We are too many and their view was that we must reduce the size of Parliament. The methodology was left to this Parliament, but the principle is that the Parliament is too big and we must reduce it.  

When a minister is censured, the people of Kawempe North constituency do not see any reason why the minister should be re-appointed after censure. There are so many Ugandans who are capable.

When it comes to the term limit, they are in agreement that it should be two terms. The only reason they gave me for that is that we have really gone through turbulent times and the major cause of this has been the top most seat, the presidency. So, it would be better when the President serves two terms and he goes.

Finally, Mr Speaker, when it comes to the issue of Kadhi courts, as it was in the White Paper and also in the committee report, they told me that the Kadhi courts, which were established in 1995, should be operationized and there is no need of this Domestic Relations Bill. For them when the Kadhi courts are put in place, especially for the Muslim community, there would be no need for them to be governed by the so-called “Domestic Destructions Bill”; and that was what the people of Kawempe North –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to refer to a Bill, which was tabled before this House and went into a committee; its title is effectively known but he deliberately calls it the “destructions” Bill because he thinks it is not in favour of what his interests are; is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: This is a question of valuation. In as far as he is concerned it has no value and, therefore, he does not support it.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. In as far as the Muslim community is concerned, the Bill is not the Domestic Relations Bill but the “Domestic Destruction Bill”. Thank you.

12.14
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr  Speaker. Like the previous speaker I would like to thank the committee for the job well done, and for the fundamentals that guided them; in addition to what was added on by hon. Omara Atubo. 

I want to us to bear in mind, as we handle this subject, that Uganda is paramount. Uganda has been there, Uganda will always be there and our role is that of players to determine the destiny of this nation. We should bear in mind that we are not the first ones and not the last ones, and history will judge us.  

I also request that we be guided by the principle of reason. We should determine what is good for us and avoid a situation like we had in those days when a country became independent and all of a sudden it said, “For us we are pro-East or pro-West”, without reason. I would want us to determine what is ours as per the pertaining situation and as history has already proved. Fr example we have operated a unique system, which we designed to fit our situation. Whatever the shortcomings we must admit that the Movement system, which I think has only operated here, has worked.  

I did consult my people and will articulate all the views but because of time I will pick some now and deal with the rest when it comes to the Bill. 
 
On regional government, my people do not like it and they have their reasons. They say it will be another form of centralization and yet we are under the decentralization system, we have tested it and it is okay. It will be duplication of work of what is being done by others and it is not good to create another power center when we already have very many power centers. It will create another power center and during the elections we shall get more polarization.  

On promotion of public awareness of the Constitution my people say it is very important. Actually they recommend that it should be taught from primary school so that people know - normally when their leaders are being sworn in, what they swear to protect and defend, they just hear them say that.

Mr Speaker, on representation of Parliament, the people are saying the status quo is okay but the concern is this issue of creating one county districts. When you create on county districts that attracts a Member of Parliament from that county and then you have got a woman Member of Parliament for that one county district those are two. That is increasing the number so that should be looked into; and all this is done in the name of taking services nearer to the people. 

The people are saying that the principle of taking services to the people should not guide us this era particularly of communication and information technology. You do not need to sub-divide; you can use the technology and even the allocation of resources, which are also the major factor, should take into consideration the size of the district. If you are budgeting for road equipment and it is one district and it is given road equipment, it will do all its roads in one month and most of the time the road equipment will not be there but bigger districts will not have that chance.

On the change from Movement system to multi-party, for sure if the issue were put to a referendum, these people would say, “We would want Movement only”. But in view of the NEC conference, they say, “Fine, we can go multi-party but it should be done in such a way that there is a good legislation, which will ensure that we do not go back to what used to happen, and the parties should be properly regulated”.

On the removal of the presidential term limit, the minority said no. That was with the reason that that is going to breed dictatorship. But the majority said there is no problem. Actually out of four sub-counties only one said no. The rest said it is okay as long as there is a law to ensure that all the institutions involved in the electioneering process are strengthened and there is no room for manipulation by anybody, be it the President. 

On the elections of the president and Members of Parliament on the same day, they concur with that. They even say the women Members of Parliament should also be elected on that day because that would reduce costs, it will not give room for manipulation, it will be time saving and it will reduce on election fatigue, which we must have experienced especially with the low turn up as elections increase.

On the appointment of the chief administrative officers, they do not even consider only the chief administrative officers but also that we should look at the decentralization of the human resources. That is because at present the fact is that with decentralization most of the recruitment at the district level is very local. Here we are talking of building a spirit of nationalism because they are looking at a situation where someone is born say in Buhweju or Bushenyi District, he studies from primary to university from there, and he is posted to work in Mbarara. He works there and after 30 years also he elected as Member of Parliament. He will not have the feel of the nation. So, they are recommending that the decentralization of the human resources should be looked into. 

They also looked at a situation where someone is a district education officer for 20 years, district agricultural officer for 30 years for people who have done management; that one breeds inefficiency. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. As I said, I will not finish everything but those are some of the views of my people. 

12.24
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern Region): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all I would like to thank the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for a well-balanced report. I know it was very tedious work because you had to balance very many views. I would like to inform the committee that the persons with disabilities that I represent are very happy with what has been put in the White Paper and the report except for some few things, which I will mention as time goes on.  

The persons with disabilities are very happy with the retention of affirmative action. During the Constitutional Review Commission consultations there were a lot of people saying that affirmative action should be done away with, but our people worked very hard and we are very happy that it was retained. Affirmative action is very important. It addresses the imbalances, which have been created by history. 

I would like to inform Members of Parliament and the whole of Uganda that the marginalization, the negative attitude towards persons with disabilities is still there. If affirmative action is removed, definitely we shall not compete favorably with able-bodied persons because of the negative attitude. (Applause)

In the Constitutional Review Commission report it was stated that the special interest groups should have only two terms. I think the women saw it, and the workers saw it. Surely, how can you say the Members of Parliament should be treated differently? We are Members of Parliament first; the fact that we were elected through electoral colleges does not make us different. All over the world there are no Members of Parliament who have got a time limit. Why should you marginalise those people already marginalised and limit their term of office in Parliament? So, I thank the committee for their report, and the Government’s position that we should be treated equally with other Members of Parliament. 

The people I represent are very happy with the electoral colleges because we know our constituencies are very large, we cannot manage the adult suffrage. However, the problem came when we asked at what level persons with disabilities should be elected. I would like to tell you frankly that there are different views. Some persons with disabilities want to elect their Members of Parliament through regions, while the others would like to be elected through the national colleges. But all of them have got very valid reasons. 

For example, especially where I consulted in Gulu, Lira and the whole of Acholi and Lango region, they came out very clearly that they want regions because they want their Member of Parliament to concentrate, to work within their region. That way the person will be more available than when he is supposed to meet the other people who elected him or her at the national level. 

They also feel that it is cheaper; instead of coming all the way to the headquarters, they could organise elections locally. But those who support the national college feel that we are people with disabilities and we are electing people who are representing people with disabilities, not regions. Therefore, we need to have the national elections so that we make sure that there is disability balance. 

After weighing all the reports, the committee was wise because they saw the number of reports brought from different organisations, from different regions and they tried to balance the position. They have come up saying, “Let us have the national college but the nominations should be done at the regional level”. To me as a person who has experienced the stress of elections, I think it is double work. 

We must decide on either regions or the national college. If you are elected at regional level you will have to get your supporters to go there to elect you, and this is a time when you are presenting your manifesto. At this time you are representing the manifesto to only one quarter of people who are going to vote for you. So, you will have wasted resources by being nominated at the regional level, then coming up for elections at the national level. So, I feel that the report of the committee should decide on either national or regional. However, from my experience the national one would be a better option than the regional one.  

About Article 32 of the Constitution, that is the merger of the Equal Opportunities Commission with the Human Rights Commission, Mr Speaker, you are aware of the petition that has been handed to you by the civil society organizations and persons with disabilities. In it we are protesting against the merger of the Equal Opportunities Commission with the Human Rights Commission. Persons with disabilities are saying that the Human Rights Commission has been in existence but has never addressed issues of persons with disabilities yet they were meant to address the rights of people, including people with disabilities. If we merged these commissions today, will they do anything to us or shall we also be marginalised? 

I also took the opportunity to go through the Equal Opportunities Commission draft from the Ministry of Gender and when I looked at it, the two commissions are quite different. There are issues, which definitely the Human Rights Commission will not address. Therefore the people I represent are saying, “We want our Equal Opportunities Commission. You cannot kill a baby that is not yet born. Let us have it here first and we try it before we can merge”.  

Regarding Article 105, the persons with disabilities who I represent have come out very clearly to say that we lift the term limit. Let His Excellency the President continue to rule for as long as we like him to. Persons with disabilities say they have are in the limelight because of His Excellency the President. It is his goodwill, which has made the Government consider persons with disabilities. They are not very sure of the next one. 

I know people are talking about individuals. I would like to inform you that we are here because of one individual who went to the bush and waged a war against dictatorship. (Applause). That is one person we are fond of and this is the very person who can still steer us. We are not sure of the next person who will come; he may not consider us persons with disabilities. That is the view of people with disabilities.  

About the regional tiers, persons with disabilities are worried. There is surely another level, the district council is there, now we have regional councils and we have the national one. Is it not duplication of work? Are we not spending a lot of resources? However, they say since these regional councils will kind of unify the people of the North, let us have it, but people with disability must be represented there. So we support the regional tier as long as people with disabilities are included.

Regarding the appointment of the CAO, persons with disabilities, especially the councilors in Gulu, Pader, Kitgum and Lira, say they should be appointed by the district. That is because quite often you will find that this is a person you are working with everyday and he has his boss over here. When you want him he says, “I am still going to consult”, and he is nowhere to be seen. If he misbehaves it takes long to apprehend him. So they feel that the CAO should be retained and be employed by the district. That is the view of the people with disabilities that I consulted.

In conclusion I would like to say that persons with disabilities would like to see that affirmative action goes - they have actually given me a difficult request, which I am not willing to disclose but they said, “Please, you represent us; go and talk”. They are asking for persons with disabilities to be increased from five to eight only –(Laughter)- so that we have two persons for each region, a man and a woman, to reduce the work of Members of Parliament. 

Then for the composition of Parliament, they say the UPDF is the army and should be neutral. I think it is the only special interest group, which should quit the Parliament. (Laughter). Thank you very much. 

12.35
MR WANJUSI WASIEBA (Mbale Municipality, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Even next week we shall cover this because I see the kind of interest you have in the matter. We will even continue next week.

MR WASIEBA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all I want to thank you for having given us the opportunity to go and consult our constituencies. On such important matters we as Members of Parliament cannot resolve them without the mandate of our constituents. I want to thank the committee, which made this report, which has enabled us to pick some points in relation to the White Paper, and be able to agree on them.  

Since independence we have had three types of governance. We had multi-partism during the time of independence; we had dictatorships somewhere in the middle, and we also have the Movement system of governance. My people of Mbale Municipality are very happy with the Movement system but they said since it is the national conference, which decided that we go multi-party, they accept it. They are willing to adjust and be able to move forward with others.  

As a person I feel that it is good for the Government to have allowed to open up because some people thought they were locked out. Now that the door is open, it is good for everybody now to participate in the politics of our country, without hate. Previously, whenever there was a change of government by coup, especially the one in 1971 and the other one in 1985, politicians used to run out of this country. But we hope that with this opening up everybody will participate freely and accept the result of the public during the voting period.

We are almost 304 Members of Parliament; my constituents feel that this is a very big number, the Government is spending a lot of money here, instead of putting up health centers or schools for children to learn. They feel that the numbers of Members of Parliament should be reduced. I remember when we were in the Constituent Assembly we agreed at a quota of about 70,000 people per Member of Parliament but now that we have got the opportunity to revise that Constitution, we should revise and be able to accommodate at least a lesser number than 300. They felt that if we had 240 Members of Parliament that would be adequate. That is roughly three people per constituency. And also the women representatives, I hope during the time when we are debating colleagues will accept that this number is quite big.  

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. I do not know whether I heard you right or wrongly when you said that we need to have three Members of Parliament for a constituency? How possible could that be?

MR WASIEBA: I think it is per district. 

On the term limit, during the period when we made the Constitution in 1994/95, we agreed on the term limit. However, my voters said that if the Members of Parliament want to tag a period for the President, they must also tag a period for themselves. They, therefore, resolved that since the term for Members of Parliament is open, they prefer that the President’s term is also left open. They should be able to decide on that kind of voting.

On the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), Mr Speaker, I do agree with the report that the CAO comes from the centre. The problem, if they come from the district, is that while the chairman comes from the same district and the CAO comes from the same district and yet he is the chairman through the public service commission that elected that CAO, they would normally conspire for one reason or the other especially, during the elections, if they did not want a certain candidate to come to Parliament, they can conspire to be able to support somebody else. But when a CAO comes from the centre, the chairman cannot dictate to him what could happen, but it can be his independent mind.

DR NKUUHE: Currently, the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) are appointed from the centre, but really you have to agree with me that even in your own case the RDC took sides and in many cases for Members of Parliament, RDCs appointed from the centre have taken sides. So really, that argument is neither here nor there.

MR WASIEBA: Thank you very much, for your information. It is true the RDCs took sides, but when he takes sides he knows very well that if you happen to win, definitely he has to mend fences as quickly as possible; if he does not, then he will be at loggerheads with the voters.

Mr Speaker, my people did not end at the area of the chief administrative officer, but they also suggested that if they had the heads of departments also to come from the centre, it will be better to run a district than coming from the same district.

On the dual citizenship, Mr Speaker, they do concur with the report and the White Paper. I feel that if we had dual citizenship, it would help this country because so far when they relaxed on the foreign exchange kind of dealings, the foreign exchange increased because Ugandans outside this country have been bringing in money and also investing in property. So, if they open up even the citizenship, it will encourage them not only to send money, but also to come and keep checking on their property. Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity you have given me.

12.44
MR CHARLES KOLUO (Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for the good work they have done, and I wish to maintain that let the House uphold the report and where necessary adjust. However, these are the views of the people of Serere County that I consulted wholeheartedly and fairly.

Regarding the issue of separation of powers, they do believe in the separation of powers, the legislature, the judiciary and the Executive. But they pray that the separation of powers should not be something just said in the papers, it should be seen to work. And for that reason, they do not see any reason for granting the President any legislative powers because he is not a legislator.  

Regarding the power to dissolve Parliament, they said Parliament is appointed by them, the electorate. It is a common principle in management that the appointing authority is the firing authority and for that matter, they retain that belief and they pray we should maintain that.

According to the White Paper, the issue of remuneration of Parliament, the commission which is being recommended by the White Paper, is a baby of the President. Therefore, they still assert that if we grant the commission to determine the salary of Members of Parliament, the separation of powers will be greatly impaired and for that reason, they say to avoid the carrot and stick game, we should not allow the President to determine the emolument of Parliament.

As for the Prime Minister’s job, they said it is proper that we adopt that position because we need coordination, we need to streamline the operations and we need to monitor.

We go to the issue of land. Sincerely speaking, I shared with them and they clearly stated that land is a prime factor of production and, therefore, it should be left to be in the hands of the people.  If an investor needs land, he is free to acquire it using the normal process of bargaining. Therefore, the issue of compulsory acquiring of land should be rubbed off.

Cultural leaders: They are saying that all cultural leaders should be granted some money for recurrent expenditure. But regarding the issue of Parliament removing a cultural leader, it is improper.  Parliament’s role is to legislate, while judiciary is to make sure that laws are not broken.  Therefore, should a cultural leader break any law, it is not the duty of Parliament, but the duty of the judiciary to handle.

Death penalty: They accept that death penalty be maintained for murder, kidnap and aggravated robbery. But on defilement, they state that they have seen in the villages cases where girls and boys of above 13 enter into sex relationship through consent. And for that reason, they say that they should not be entitled to death penalty rather they should both be punished according to the law, without discrimination because both are guilty. 

Regarding Members of Parliament becoming ministers, they say it is okay but in event that the Member of Parliament opts to become a minister, he should vacate the seat and he should be given chance to get a person who will serve the people as one person cannot serve two masters.

Size of Parliament: Parliament, as far as they see, should remain as it is. There is no reason for reducing Parliament. If you reduce, the area of a Member of Parliament will be so large that he cannot easily and effectively and efficiently handle it. So, for that matter, the current size is okay.

Power to dissolve: The President in no way should be granted the power to dissolve Parliament as I stated earlier.  

On the chief administrative officer, they assert that the current system is okay in that, districts are able to monitor the services of a CAO and therefore can get rid of him when they want and not the centre because the centre will end up bringing people most likely of say 112, for example. They say, the current system allows them to give their children employment.

On the issue of dual citizenship, they are pro the idea, the Constitution should be amended to allow a person to have more than one citizenship. If he is a Ugandan, let him be allowed to achieve say a foreign citizenship so that in the event of getting money from there, he can bring the proceeds of his labour back home.

Regarding the most controversial issue of Kisanja, they told me that power belongs to the people. Therefore, they can reject a bad leader and just like in other countries say Britain, they are in favour of opening presidential term limits.

On multiparty, they say that multiparties are long overdue. They concurrently agreed that multiparties should come into operation because they aid in research, checking corruption, they aid in competition.

1.00
DR YEKKO ARAPKISSA (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will also want to thank the committee for the good report. I did consult the people of Kween in Kapchorwa District and because of the limited time, I will just go to some of the specifics.  

On the change of the political system to multiparty political system, the majority of my people in Kween County were not comfortable with the change to multiparty. However, they were only able to accept after getting convinced that NRM-O party had been formed and it was going to compete with other parties.

Secondly, it is also when they learnt that the Chairperson of NRM-O is Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni that is when they said, “Okay, we can go to multi-party politics.” 

On lifting of the presidential term limits, there was no problem they support it.  Their reason was that, if it was going to allow the current President to stand as presidential candidate in 2006. However, they expressed fears of a dictator coming in and exploiting the opening of the term limits.

On the issue of the chief administrative officer being recruited by Public Service, the people were divided. There were those supporting the Government position and those who were against it. Those who were against the Government position were saying, if this is done Kapchorwa District may continue being marginalized as it is now. 

The reasons were that: At the moment, Kapchorwa stopped getting ministerial positions, they have stopped getting ambassadorial positions, there has never been a permanent secretary, there has never been a director in government institutions, we used to have resident district commissioners they have now been dropped to one, and no Sabiny army officer has even been promoted beyond the rank of Major since Uganda was created and yet there are people who qualify and are hard working. 

So, in view of this, I said taking the appointment of the CAO to the centre, they may never appoint a Sabiny to be CAO. However, currently we have the problem of appointing chief administrative officer since July last year. In fact, we do not have a substantive CAO. So, thereafter, they said okay, we can now allow the CAO to be elected from the centre.

On top of that, they also said this issue of centralizing appointments of chief administrative officers should not only be limited to CAOs but also they propose that other heads of departments should be equally centralized, to be recruited from the centre because as of now, we are actually going to create tribal civil servants, as the honourable member from Bushenyi said. 
You study in the sub-county you come from, you end up going to the TTC which is in our sub-county, and you teach in the sub-county where you come from forever and ever.  So, if human resource development is centralized, that will allow civil servants to be transferable everywhere in Uganda.

On the issue of the size of Parliament, the people of Kapchorwa are happy with the current position, that is, one Member of Parliament per County.

On the compulsory acquisition of land, people of Kapchorwa are strongly opposed to it. I will tell you, the people of Kapchorwa, if you expect to be murdered there are three things they are very serious about; tamper with a man’s wife, tamper with the man’s land and tamper with a man’s cow, then you expect murder. So, they said the status quo as it is in the Constitution should remain otherwise, no compulsory acquisition of land.

On the President to dissolve Parliament, they argued that the Members of Parliament are elected by the same people who elect the President so, why should the President have power to dissolve the other? If there is any deadlock then it should go back to the people, but not to be left to the Office of the President to do it.

On holding presidential, parliamentary and the LC5 Chairpersons’ elections on the same day, there was no problem with that one. The reason was that, it will stop influencing on the lower elections as people have been doing. So, they said that they have no problem in holding them together. 

I have been hearing arguments, people saying it may be too difficult for people to do it; it is being done in Kenya. In Kenya they hold presidential election, Members of Parliament election and councillors’ election on the same day. We even did it in the last lower council election. We held the Chairman LC5 election, the sub-county councillors and even the women councillors’ elections on the same day. So, there will be no problem of confusion on holding all these elections on the same day.

Lastly, it is on the human rights, which did not appear in the White Paper or in the Report, and that is compensating people who are victims of cattle rustling. It may look funny, but let me say it. Those of us who neighbour people who rustle, especially Karamoja region, suffer a lot of insecurity; death, animals and property are destroyed and yet these people who perpetuate cattle rustling are never prosecuted. Or if they are prosecuted at all, they will never be convicted because most of these criminal activities are done in the night. 

So, people were arguing that there used to be a system, what they the called “blood compensation” during the colonial days. If these rustlers came and killed someone, then animals would be randomly confiscated from those who have rustled and then compensated to the victims who have suffered. So, they are saying it may be better to put such a thing in the Constitution. That cattle rustlers, since they can never be prosecuted and convicted, they should suffer that compensation by confiscating, especially their animals to compensate the people who have suffered because it appears this cattle rustling may never end, it has now gone on for over 50 years. The issue of disarmament seems to be just an academic exercise. So, with those remarks, I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

1.08
MR OTHMAN ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for a job well done. I also commend the committee’s method and methodology of work. They agreed on the principles that will guide them on how they will move. They mentioned some few facing the facts, reason and logic, tolerance, harmony; they also invited us to borrow a leaf from them. I hope this House will borrow a leaf from them so that we have fruitful deliberations. I also consulted widely on various issues, and I would want to share them with the committee and the august House.  

Change of the political system: My people thought that this is inevitable and they did not want to discuss it. They said, whatever method you use either by amending Article 74(2) or whatever, we know we are moving towards that. Therefore, it was not a very big issue.

On a very contentious issue of the presidential term limit, I agree with the committee that intellectual debate on the merits and demerits of this issue was somehow pre-empted by the decision of the NEC and NC, when people started diverting the issue to third term instead of opening term limits.  Therefore, my people are saying they are not in for third term, but they are in for open term. I do not know, but that is what they told me that they are in for open term and not for third term.

I think the problem with this term is the timing; I assume the linkage between the incumbent President and the process of trying to amend. Therefore, I think it would be different if the issue was debated in 1999 or 2007, I do not think it would raise much. I am not saying this is what my people said, but I am saying that for purposes of argument, that it would not have raised much dust if it were in a different time. But the views of my people are that the term should be opened.

I am quite sure that we shall have a fruitful debate and we shall agree on principles, what the committee called fundamentals, so that we can move together to achieve national interests rather than partisan and individual interests.  

I want to share some few issues here with my colleagues. On the Vice President being elected as a running mate, my people are saying they do not accept this one, let the status quo continue. However, they are saying that at least we must have very clear and fair electoral rules that must be adhered to. But the problem here is not whether the President should have a running mate or not.

On the size of Parliament, my people are saying that the current size is okay so that Members of Parliament can reach down to the grassroots to consult people. They are even saying that they would wish to add more Members because the issue is that we must reach people and take their views although this will also require an amendment.

On appointments of the ministers from the pool of the Members of Parliament, they are saying this is okay. I am using the words used by the committee that the pool of Members of Parliament is good and that will bring in harmony between the Executive and legislature. So, they do not oppose it.

On the CAOs, they are saying that let the district service commission appoint the CAOs and the reason that there is alarming embezzlement or corruption in the districts is not convincing because the centre could be more corrupt than the districts. Therefore, they are saying, let us maintain the status quo to appoint the CAOs by the district. 

National language: They support Kiswahili and that concurs with the views of the committee and that one of the Constitutional Review Commission. But on promoting and investing in teaching French besides English, my people are saying since we are also bordering countries like Sudan which speak Arabic that we could as well encourage teaching of Arabic – it is already being taught in our schools – in our school syllabus because it is one of the major languages of African Union and, therefore, that will also help us to communicate freely with others. 

On whether parliamentary elections should be on the same day with presidential and local government elections, my people are saying that for them they want the elections to be on different days because the level of understanding down there is still very low, since UPE has just started, it has not taken more years people will confuse these issues. Now with the advent of parties there will be so many presidential, parliamentary and local government candidates of so many parties, therefore, they will confusion. So, let us separate these ones and hold elections on different days.  

I also read the back of their minds that they also had some economic reasons. That sometimes we gain by organizing these elections on different days, that we are also talking of fighting poverty and so on that we can also get something. So, these are some of the views of my people. I tried to detach the whole consultation from the incumbent President but people were saying, let Museveni stand I said, “No, we are not talking about Museveni, we are talking of a president that will come to lead this country” but this was not entirely accepted, they are saying let Museveni stand.  

Now, I was wondering why this drastic change? My constituency voted twice against the incumbent President, they were together with Arua and the rest of the West Nile areas and they were consistent, of course, wrongly but now why this turning point? So, they are saying- they are differing actually from Arua that the term limit should be opened, and these are the views I have presented as they are and may be when the time comes for us to debate and to discuss it, as a leader, I will also have some views. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

1.15
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the speakers who have thanked the committee for the job well done, and also I thank you for giving me this opportunity to air the views of the people I consulted from Ndorwa East Constituency, Kabale District. 
 
On the issue of returning power to the people, the people of Ndorwa County East were very happy and they welcomed this idea, and they were very happy to learn that Article 1 in the Constitution is entrenched.

On the question of change from Movement to multiparty system, the people of Ndorwa East are actually true movementists and when they were informed that the Sempebwa report reported that 78 per cent of the people consulted did not want to change from Movement to multi-party, they endorsed Sempebwa report. But, of course, they were told that 30 per cent of the people who voted in the 2001 election did not support the Movement, they reluctantly accepted the move from Movement to multiparty. 

But, Mr Speaker, the question, which was asked was, what if when the referendum comes we vote for Movement instead of multiparty? I think the Executive when it is preparing the Constitutional Amendment Bill should put that into consideration because we are likely to get a higher percentage wanting no change.

On establishment of regional governments, Mr Speaker, the people of Ndorwa County East did not have any objection because they thought this will bring the services closer to the people and the communities.  

Sanctions against traditional and cultural leaders: Mr Speaker, you know very well the Bakiga are republicans, they did not have much to comment on this but they said where the communities which are concerned with kings and traditional leaders are, the law must be upheld.  

Removal of presidential term limit -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I am at bit at a loss.  We are talking about federal system of government but other people are talking about monarchy. From the honourable Member holding the Floor it is not clear as to whether republicans in Kabale have clearly understood the issues because you can be a republican and have a federal state arrangement. I thought this is what we are talking about, I do not think we are talking – I am not sure I am sorry, Sir, I want to get clarification from you.    
 
MR TIBARIMBASA: They refer to both; they are neither federalists nor traditionalists so they refer to both.

Removal of presidential term limit: Term limits contradict Article 1(4) of the Constitution which says, I can quote: “The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they shall be governed, through regular, free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.” If it is free and regular, I do not see why you should include again in the Constitution the term limit. (Mr Mbalibulha rose_)

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Tibarimbasa for giving way. In our Constitution, the limit to a president is not only the term limit but also the age. The republicans of Kabale, as you have read the constitutional provision, are they also considering to remove the limit on the age of a president?

MR OTTO: This same Constitution you are quoting in Article 24, I would guess, says everyone has a right to life and it is the same Constitution, which is also saying that some people can be sentenced to death. So, can you compromise these two positions in line with the Constitution providing for rights for people to determine their leaders, and the rights to limit the term of presidency?

THE SPEAKER: What I am seeing is that people have different opinions on this, it should not be a point for clarification; you stand with your position, another one stands with his. But people are just expressing their views as clarifications.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for protecting me. The clarifications raised were totally irrelevant from the views as considered by my people, so I am not going to comment on them.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to make another quotation, which came from the deliberations of the Americans when they were considering their Constitution in 1787, and they were considering the term limits, which was debated but was rejected then: “Elections are for getting rid of politicians who do not perform, term limits on the other hand are for eliminating politicians who are performing.” Now, which do we prefer, to remove politicians who are performing? That should not be our view.  

Secondly, I would like to ask, when does manipulation come? Does it come after serving two terms, when the leader comes to serve the third term? Or when you are a dictator, you will be a dictator in your first year of service? So, my people said let us open up, and since the power is given to us we shall change our leaders as time comes.  

Mr Speaker, holding presidential, parliamentary and local government elections, they welcomed the idea because that will make a saving for the Government.

Dissolution of Parliament: As a matter of confidence, my people said, if the power is to be given to the President to dissolve Parliament, his office also should be dissolved; if they are dissolved at the same time and there is a caretaker body to conduct elections to replace both of them, no problem. That is the thinking of the people from Ndorwa East.

Appointment of Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and District Accounting Officers: They welcomed the idea because we have read from papers some CAOs have even been killed. Some CAOs have been interfered with in their day-to-day operations in districts, so appointment of CAOs should be conducted from the centre. But they need clarification, does it mean only appointing the CAO as a head of department or other officers under his department? I think the Executive has to clarify that, whether all the officers under the CAO’s office have to be elected from the centre.

As far as the size of Parliament is concerned, they said the peace Uganda has enjoyed during the period the Movement has been governing this country has been partly attributed to the size of the Parliament. The size of Parliament has enabled the representatives of the people to reach them and explain to them about Government policies and that has enhanced the stability in most parts of our country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, it appears Members are interested in making contributions; hon. Mulindwa, hon. Amuriat, hon. Kiwalabye, hon. Nkuuhe, hon. Patrick Mwondha, hon. Zirabamuzale, hon. Katuramu, hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, hon. Sauda Mugerwa, hon. Sebalu, hon. Wakikona, hon. Odit, hon. Yiga, hon. Kiwagama, hon. Member for Kanungu, hon. Member for Nakifuma and hon. Sebuliba Mutumba. Please capture those names. 

So, I think we shall definitely start in this order next Tuesday when we come back; we shall continue with the debate. [Honourable Members: Monday.] Oh, should we come back on Monday?

MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, good. Okay, we come back on Monday afternoon. Honourable members, I thank you very much for this sacrifice you are exhibiting; it means we will be able to create more time to deal with this matter so that we are within time, because it is important that we are within time. So, I really thank you and I think it is the convenient time to adjourn to Monday afternoon.

(The House rose at 1.27 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 7 February 2005 afternoon)




