Tuesday, 6 February 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISION) BILL, 1995

(General debate continued.)

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise in support of the Bill.  Before I give my contribution, I want to make an observation on this Entandiikwa money.  In Arua Entandiikwa money has run into trouble. Therefore, I am requesting the Minister for Finance to perhaps call to Arua and rectify the situation.  Two things have happened. One; the amount was received but not paid which took almost three months.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that I have just returned from Arua, the money is now released totally.  So that complication is not there. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, although this hon. Member has given me information, but he seem not to have got the information in full.  Because there is a condition that, the beneficiaries must open an account; and this money now is lying with the Intermediary Agency.  But how can somebody who borrowed UShs 20,000 from Kayi come to open an account at Arua. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please. You have already been informed that the money is already there. You go to another please.

AN HON. MEMBER: Recently my Colleague raised an issue concerning the transfer of voters. Me, I did not see any problem, but recently I discovered that there are some people who want to aspire and these people have come with credits schemes. So as a result a lot of people flocking to the municipality so that they benefit from these trading schemes.  But if people were transferring with their old cards, that is exactly what I said before, I would not mind.  But what surprises me is that; people are coming and register newly.  Which means that, one person will have two cards; and when it comes to voting those who are near Arua Municipality, particularly those who are around Arua Municipality Ayivu county, will have chance to vote twice.  Because in the morning he will rush to municipality vote, in the afternoon may be he will go to his county.  So, Mr Chairman this is one of my fears.  Because at the end of the day you will find the voters will out number the population of Arua.  So, the Minister should try to look into this.

MR KAVUMA: I thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I know this is a very sensitive area but I want once again to assure the House and the population at large, that we have taken very stringent measures to ensure that the ink we are using this time is far-in fact it is supposed to last on the nail until the nail outgrows the body and falls off. So, I am saying that, it will be a matter of months before this ink gets washed off from the finger that a voter used.  So, there is no possibility of this kind of repetition of that mistake.

AN HON. MEMBER Point of information. What the Member is actually bringing forward is very important.  Recently I was in Soroti and I found out that, some of the aspiring candidates in the municipality were actually ferrying voters to come and register after they had registered in the villages. So, if we talk of rigging, rigging actually begins from the time of registration. So, the Minister must actually look into it so that voters are not registered twice.

AN HON. MEMBER: I think the Minister should not rely on one option.  It is better to prevent the problem at the source rather than to treat it.  So, yet I stick that, he should really look into this.  

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of clarification. It will seem the hon. Member holding the floor implies that the municipality is a constituency. But the confusion does not indicate that the municipality is a constituency, this Bill does not indicate so, and if he thinks that municipalities are going to cause problems, the sooner we do away with them, the better. (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, even if the municipality will not be a constituency, but yet this problem will happen with other counties.  Because those who are registering in the municipality will perhaps be demarcated to Ayivu county which is the nearest.  But these people are coming from all over the counties.

 I refer to Schedule-I think that is Schedule 1 this election of women representatives.  Mr Chairman, One thing that is not clear to me is that, the election of women will done by LCs.  I would like the Minister to clarify since the NRM period is coming to an end, and LC being one of the organs, how will the LCs continue to live when the NRM period has come to an end? Because my fear is that, if these women are elected by LCs, there will be a bit of problem because the working relationship-the women will work with somebody who did not elect them.  Because after electing, the LCs will be dissolved. 

So, I am suggesting that, the election of women should be after local council elections so that these ladies are elected by people with whom they will work.  The system must go throughout the same.  I am not saying that they should be universally elected, but I accept the idea of Electoral College. But must be done at the final stage so that nobody is associated that, these were elected during the period of NRM.  So this is my view.

I want to refer to section 40 this issue of UShs 2 million.  My view is that, this amount be reduced to 50,000.Shs. These are representatives of poor people.  If you put a high fee, it will be paid by those who are already in- may be urban people. Because people will flock and register in rural areas when they are elected, they come and stay in the town. So let the amount be low so that the teacher, the retrenched, the youth participate in this election. Mr Chairman, with these few remarks, I support the Bill. Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you, Mr Chairman for allowing me to stand in support of the Bill. In my support of the Bill, I do not support the woman representative to Parliament-district woman representative elected by universal suffrage. The reasons why I have many reasons but one of those is this.  We should consider the expense that will be involved. That is one, because we know money has been a problem in this country, whether it is an individual pocket or in the home or in the school, or in the Hospital, even here in Parliament. So, we should seek an area which will not be financially over burdening.  That is why I support Electoral Colleges. When I look back in 1989, my female colleagues here will agree with me that we were elected by a cream of leaders of the district.  I do not think there is a lady here who can look back and say, my mandate was dilute as one of us seemed to say - one gentle man here.  In fact our mandate at that time was high value mandate.  We were elected by a cream of men and women who had been sieved out of the system of election from the grass root.  I remember the council which elected me for example, it was done in broad day light with thousands of people standing by, watching in approval.  I think we should enjoy and embrace gratefully the affirmative action which has brought us this much far as women.  

We know that in African culture, it will take time for women to enjoy every position of leadership at equal footing with the men.  I mean in the number.  Because even here in Parliament, if that position was not there, I do not know how many female Members of Parliament would be here today.  I even wonder whether me myself would be here or hon. Njuba there my Sister. The fact that women took part in the struggle, could have been one of that challenging thing which brought us here many of us. I do not think there is even a woman now who has proposed to a man please marry me. They may be there, but I do not think it can be in light. I do not even think that there is a boy who will be married by a woman and be taken to the woman’s home as it is done now up to now.  Uganda is a civilized community. The fears of an electoral college are well founded but, I do not think we should fear so much because I believe the Minister will broaden the electoral college so that there are many more -I think this House will broaden the electoral college so that the mandate of the woman representative is much wider than it is now.  

Mr Chairman, when I compare a whole district, electoral college for the woman, and compare it with a county where men are going to stand -men and women are going to stand, I think I will enjoy a much bigger percentage of mandate than that one candidate who will stand in a county. (Applause) 

My mandate will be broad it will be very spread all over the district, and there is no area which will be left behind without a representative to elect a woman to this House. The fears that Electoral College people can very easily be manipulated are unfounded for one reason. I do not think those men and women who will stand to elect the woman will not be rational, I do not think they will those human beings who are not civilized enough to enjoy their right to choose so that they can be manipulated to vote for so and so even against their will. 

So, I must respect, we must learn to respect those adults who will form that Electoral College to elect a woman representative of the district here.  Let us not look down upon them, they will be rational men and women, and I believe those women who will come to this House the next Parliament will have a high value mandate of men and women of high quality who have been sieved out of a good system, well formed rightly from the grass root. So, I support the Electoral College for the woman representative of the district.  For those women who want universal suffrage of the district, let us not be too bothersome, let us go and contest on a universal suffrage ticket for the leadership of the district leader.  The chairman of the district or a chairwoman. (Applause)

Let us go and prove our worth and seek universal mandate at our district and also be chairmen of these districts.  How many women in Uganda now are chairing district councils. Let us also go and contest on the county.  But I do not believe a county, electorate really balances well with a district electoral college.  I still feel the woman stands to have a much better high value mandate. Mr Chairman, thank you so much for my support woman electoral college, I hope all women here will also support me and the gentlemen. Thank you.

Now looking at the Bill, I am bothered by Clause 48 sub-section 12.  Rallies and any form of public demonstration in support of or against any candidate shall not be permitted at any candidate’s etcetera, etcetera. I do not know why this provision was included here, unless we are assured that, it will not be violated.  If a candidate goes for registration for example, we have seen them being escorted by a host of people in style riding donkeys, decorated buses and whatever, TV cameras songs and chanting and everything.  So, why should this be there? Because it will definitely be violated. Does it mean if I am a candidate and my supporters should not come with me, we should go quietly, as if we are going to attend a funeral? This is part of the jubilation and excitement which really make up the support of a person.  It is part of the system. So, I think to stop demonstrations in support, I do not know what they mean by this kind of demonstration.  Because I know if I go to stand people will come with me accompanying me and so forth, in full colours and songs and everything. A person without support will definitely go quietly with those few who will go to sign his nomination forms 

Mr Chairman, also sub-section 15, the restriction of candidates only to hold agents’ meetings, I do not know how this will work because, if I hold my agents’ meeting I know the law prohibits more than 10 people to a meeting.  But my agents may come with opinion leaders for consultations.  So, I think this also should be changed a bit, be relaxed so that if I call my agents’ meeting my supporters, a few opinion leaders also are allowed in that meeting. I may call them in my own house and definitely that will not be a public rally. 

Soliciting votes have got many methods, and these methods vary with individuals. So I think there must be some relaxation on how people should talk to the populace in soliciting for votes.  These candidates’ meetings I am mindful of their being there, but it will all depend on what time, how many times they are given a chance to speak.  Me, I feel there is a lot of restriction on this, and I think it is not fair. Provided a candidate notifies the authorities I think be doing things as long as they are in the light, and in good faith.

Lastly, I want to appeal to Ugandans, especially those who are aspiring to stand, from what we experienced during last CA elections, people behaved in un  be -seeming manner.  There was a lot of slander, mad slinging, lies, all sorts of bad things. A civilized society should not be showing up.  So I want to make one plea.  We should advise our people who support us to speak the language we would speak.  You would find someone supporting a candidate using a language I cannot even repeat here, which you cannot even imagine that particular candidate talking. So I want to appeal to Ugandans to enter these elections with renewed spirits, with clean hearts, with love so that we leave a good mark to our young people who are following us tomorrow. (Applause) 

The idea of saying that, politics is a dirty game should be done away with for once and for all. (Applause)

 We are looking forward to a clean society, we want our young stars to get good example from us. We do not want people who go and display their money by  making people drunk and therefore, misbehaving all over the place in the streets in the villages and every where. That is not what we expect our young people to come up with.  So I hope God will guide those who are going to stand to make sure that those supporters of theirs are counselled well enough to use adult pure and clear languages.  If it is difficult for anybody to use clear words, to play clear politics, those people I advise, to go to gender resource centre for counseling. (Applause) There are many counseling agents, people who do not know that politics can be very clean and played very well, should go for counseling.  That is my last advice. With those few words, Mr Chairman. I support.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman for giving this opportunity to support this Bill. I will make a number of observations on a few issues concerning the Bill. I want to start by talking about the procedure of these elections.  I have been consulting in my constituency, and people there are very eagerly waiting to elect the President. They want it first. They are very eagerly waiting, they are saying, we have never cast a vote for a President for a long time, we have been denied this opportunity and it now coming, we want to do that first quickly and then we go to other things which we have always dealt with here. (Applause) Therefore, I would like -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  I thought in Uganda we never voted for a President. I have not seen where we voted for a President for Uganda.  So -(interjections)- no, but she said for a long time meaning that sometime we did.  I was being misled. (Laughter)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, I wish to thank the hon. Member for the information.  Because it is strengthening my point that these people have never elected a President for all this long. You know, English you can twist it in any way you want, but that is what mine meant. For all this long they have lived, they have never had an opportunity to elect a President, but they always elected Members of Parliament.  Now they want to do this and get on with the rest, Mr Chairman. Therefore, Mr Chairman, that is why I stand here to tell this House -(Interruption)-

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank my Sister for giving way.  I would like her to clarify to me as to whether it would make a lot of a difference if the President and Members of Parliament are elected on the same day as they do in countries with a lot of money like the United States and it saves a lot of money.  Mr Chairman, some people are saying this is Uganda. Does it mean that Ugandans are not human beings and are not of the same brains?

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I thank hon. Wanendeya for his brief contribution; I hope the hon. Chairman will give him an opportunity to make his contribution elaborate.  But in the meantime, I proceed to talk on this issue.  My constituency gives me reasons for favouring to elect the President first. The first one of course, is that eagerness waiting to do that important job and then relax and then do the rest.  

Secondly, they are saying that the election of the President actually has got quite a number of hurdles, and in view of time constraint, it is better to handle that, and then settle and do the other job.  They are talking about for instance the petitions.  You remember once there is a need for petition, then that means you need time the whole procedure laid down in the constitution, and yet time is against us; and you cannot do any thing until you get along with the that one. Also, in the event of death certainly there is re-nomination, the whole thing is actually rather complicated and it needs to be handled quickly and then we relax, settle down and do the rest of the job. 

Now, therefore, I am saying that should be done first. We must elect the President first, and then the legislature.  It is better to dispose of these harder things and then you do the rest, Mr Chairman; and even besides, in most of the Presidential systems to which ours is more leaned, do that job first and then they do the rest.  I would advise hon. Wanendeya to read a bit more widely.

Now, I would like also to make a comment on the issue of the constituencies.  Recently actually I was reading in the paper about-the Minister about to demarcate the constituencies.  I would like to say, and this is also my people’s view that, the constituencies of Constituent Assembly were quite fine. They were made on the basis of recommendations of the Uganda constitutional commission.  They took into account all our historical problems and constraints. We came out with those constituencies; and they are saying, it would be very good to keep those constituencies. In the first place, it will not involve us in more costs of demarcation, it will not lead us into gerrymandering and you know at this stage -(Interjections)- and temptations; and you know at this stage when there is this gossip and talk rumour about already rigging having taken place, now to start making new things that will misunderstood by the opponents of good things.  so I am saying, it would good if the constituencies  remain the way they were  for the CA.  

I would like also to make some brief comments about the interim electoral commission.  We talk about this interim electoral commission. But I think we left a gap somewhere.  I think we should have talked about the way the decisions of the interim electoral commission are reached; and I would like us to see them reached by either consensus, try as much as possible to get consensus failure of which the majority vote should prevail; and since our commission has got 7 members, I think the chairman can always vote an original vote. He does not need casting.  Because once they are there, and they are even numbers then they can vote; and I would suggest the quorum to be 5 people. Those are the comments I want to talk about the electoral commission, I would like to have it clearly out here in this Bill, otherwise we have a gap left and we may find a problem in the methods of operation in that electoral commission. 

Mr Chairman, on the issue of qualifications. I would like us as much as possible, to make it very liberal.  In this country we do not give free education, and it is very difficult to attain highest levels of education however much we may need them; and on this issue when it comes to women, they are worse off.  The higher the qualifications, the less the women can come in; and of course the less the usual ordinary people can come in; and yet these people may have intelligence brains and as long as they can speak the language which is required in this Parliament, they could be useful people.  

Therefore, I would like to have these qualifications as liberal as possible to accommodate as many people as possible, especially, those people nearest to my heart; the women. Of course, I am not saying that we should go contrary to the constitution, because there is a provision in the constitution of talking about having done A’ Level or its equivalent; and as far as I remember, the constitution does not say you must have got triple As, you must have done all this.  So what I mean is, once the fellow has got that qualification or equivalent, as we have seen in Schedule, I certainly endorse the Schedule, and in fact would like to have it broadened to encourage as many people as possible.  This is democracy. The people will choose according to their interests instead of barring people from tendering themselves as candidates when we have not done much to make them attain that level of education, we would rather leave them go and the electorate will be wise enough to choose whom they want.  Now, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. When we met UNEB the question of A’ Level or its equivalent came up and we wanted guidance from the UNEB chairman who was kind enough and gave us a wide range of the equivalence which I think this hon. House will take into consideration when passing the Schedule which talks about the qualification.  Thank you very much.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman, for permitting me to inform the hon. Member on the floor that that Schedule which was drawn up, is not comprehensive and it is going to create more problems than it were not there. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I found an aspiring candidate registering to sit in A’ Level in March this year.  Now where will he fall? Because his results will be out in June.  So I seek clarification.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, hon. Members, when this question came up the Minister for Constitutional Affairs approached our Ministry and our Ministry approached people who had the ability to try and inform us what the equivalent part of the advanced level was; and we received information from various sources.  One of the sources was Makerere University itself through the Vice Chancellor.  The other one was UNEB and the other one was ITEK at Kyambogo. We have now got one more information which we should be able to give you in the near future and that one was to do with experience which we could not get here.  In some countries in the World experience is taken as a credit and it can be a quantify**. 

So, Mr Chairman -(interjections)- I know my task was to get all information concerning the bit of equivalent and it is up to this House and its committee to decide after we have given you the information, what you feel is the right information you would like to remain with. But my task was done, and the information given to the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, and most of it I realize has been included in the Schedule.  Thank you very much Sir.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman so much for qualifications. Lastly I would like to make comments on the issue of election for woman representative. At this time, more than ever before, I need this House to support.  As I have always relied on it.  We have for a long time now enjoyed the support of both men and women on the issues concerning women; and as we come to the last stages of this House, I appeal to you to support men in the issue of affirmative action; and the way it operates on the ground. Affirmative action which has been entrenched in our constitution, the fundamental law of this land is a procedure that has been internationally accepted because of a reason.  Mr Chairman, affirmative action is applied to remove the imbalances and the gaps that have been created by history.  In other words, it is just an exception to the general rule.  In its very nature it is an exception to a general rule.  Therefore, it must be applied as an exception to the general rule. Never is it subjected to the general rule again. So, affirmative action was introduced in Uganda with the coming into existence of NRM government, but World wide it was already taking place. 

Now, the purpose of the affirmative action that was introduced here in Uganda by way of involving women in the politics of this nation through the portfolio for secretary for women’s affairs up to the Parliamentary seat was too fold.  It had two objectives, Mr Chairman. One; it was realized that women whose voice is very important and crucial, women who form more than 50 per cent of the population have been denied to contribute to the running of this country.  Their voice has been left out and yet it is an invaluable voice that can penetrate the hard hearts and ease them to do the right job. Who knows may be it is because of the women’s participation that we have had enjoyment all this time, that we have had -(Laughter)- yes, Mr Chairman. That we have had a pro-people government, that we have had pro-people structures.  Because the mothers of human kind have been involved in these affairs. They have talked, however small the voice may be, but they have talked, and the voice has been heard.  Therefore, the voice of the women, to break through all these board rooms, to participate in decision making has been one of main objectives of the affirmative action here; and Members will agree with me that it has yielded results, and that is why it was embedded, entrenched in the constitution of this land, more than constitutions progressive nations do that. 

The second reason was, that women who are affected by woman issues know how they feel.  We have a proverb where I come from that you know when you have pain it is this finger which touches the pain that knows how the pain hurts. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman and hon. Members it was realized that those very women who feel the pains, the problems they are going through are the better - are better suited to really talk about them; and articulate them here in these foras. So, that is the two reasons why the affirmative action by way of political participation was introduced. 

There were barriers which continue to exist right now, which prevent women from participating through the general rule as usual. Those barriers are still there.  One of the barriers is of course cultural and customary, that is one barrier which we are struggling through, which through participation, it has been proved that can be loosened step by step. Because by hon. Colleague here Faith Mwondha now passing through the Butembe county which was originally belonging to hon. Ssekitoleko shows that well, the people of Butembe know that a woman is also somebody who can make it. But on the other hand, the people where hon. Kadaga comes from, I believe and I know that hon. Kadaga is very effective, brain, intelligence, everything. We missed her in CA because where she comes from the people there had not known the value of a woman. Yes, there were still barriers. Mr Chairman, these are real truth -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, the same applies to hon. Mpanga who does not know hon. Mpanga one of the first women Parliamentarians former Minister, all these.  But when she goes there, those people, their cultures and customs are still stringent and they were asking hon. Mpanga, hon. Mpanga why do-there is your place why are you disturbing the man? You go back to your place of the woman. (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, you know I am articulating this point, I am appealing to people to understand, with pains I am really trying and that is now cultural.  There is also ignorance.  When it comes to who is educated, when it comes to who goes out to associate in clubs, in bars, it is the men. The women are enclosed in their domestic role, they lack information, they lack - many majority. They lack information; they lack all these skills that would enable them to participate effectively in these matters, Mr Chairman.  As you are already warning me about time, I would like to proceed and finish this point.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no take information.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much and I would like to thank my Sister for giving way. I would like to inform her that recently when we went in for CA elections, some ladies chose to stand in their constituencies without going in for electoral college and that lady was Cecilia Ogwar. She stood in Lira and she came out through universal adult suffrage, and we want ladies here in Uganda to come out in that manner.

MR MARWAS: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification.  I do agree with the Member to the effect that, since the NRM came to power it has empowered the woman, it now belongs to - it is no longer an outsider. I am asking, if a lady like hon. Matembe who has been in the arm pit of this affirmative action for the last 7 or so years, I would like to find out from her after all that long if she goes to the district of Mbarara, and decides to stand under universal adult suffrage after all these years, does she think she can make it or unless she goes through an electoral college after all these years. (Laughter)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, you know I was talking about barriers and constraints.  Those are some of the barriers we have got to deal with. (Laughter) Because here-and of course they are demonstrated through human beings. Mr Chairman, the point they are raising is, affirmative action was to enable society see that women are there, and can do a job.  As a result, more women came up for CA elections, it was not hon. Cecilia Ogwal alone, they were many actually they were about 28,and 9 of them won, and it was that now shows it is breaking those barriers and as long as the affirmative action remains, to enable the barriers to be broken, once we have removed the gaps and the imbalances, it will be no more even the constitution says that; and Mr Chairman, as to whether hon. Matembe would win elections through a county in Mbarara, for me I am not God he is the one who knows these things.  All you do is you go to contest and the results may be not what you wanted them to be.  But I want to tell you that I had emphasized the case of hon. Kadaga and hon. Mpanga who was competent as hon. Matembe; and what happened?  Okay, Mr Chairman, the other -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of clarification. I think this question of affirmative action is being misdirected. I do agree with the hon. speaker on the Floor that this country is not the first to introduce affirmative action. From my experience elsewhere, affirmative action is not made to create special class of people.  It is made to create equality of opportunity. (Applause) So that people can play on the level ground.  I have heard people here talk about bringing special class and so on.  That is not affirmative action at all.  It is like you are; probably if they are looking for emergency treatment, that it, but it is not affirmative action at all.  Affirmative action revolves around creating equal opportunity so that the woman can compete as equally as any other person. That is affirmative action, you can refer to anywhere else, that it is what it is.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give is in regard to what hon. Rwakakooko has talked about.  The creation of level ground is long term in affirmative action. But in the immediate and medium term, it is not. That is why in other countries affirmative action creates quarters.  I will give you an example. In Education, you have the same grades in United States and you want both of to enter medical college.  Situations have occurred when a black man has been admitted to a college with lesser grades than a White man; and it has even gone to the Supreme Court of the United States as a constitutional issue.  But I think it was upheld, therefore it is not correct to say that affirmative action only creates level ground.  It creates, -you give greater opportunities in the medium and short term to the disadvantaged, Mr Chairman.

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I would like to thank hon. Kagonyera because as you know he is very well read and very well-informed, and in these matters -(Laughter)- Mr Chairman many more of such Members to hasten the implementation of the affirmative action.

Now the other point which I want to conclude with and relate to my very point I am on, is the lack of economic independence.  Lack of finances for women is a very very big constraint in their participation in politics and management of public life. 

Mr Chairman, with those three constraints, barriers which still continue to exist, that is why I say, how can we have this special position which was created specially subjected to stringent procedures the riggers of one person one vote per district. This means, the affirmative action is negated; and its principle is essentially eroded.  It is like giving one person with one hand and taking away with another.  You may put a basket of fruit there and say go and eat that fruit I have given it to you but do not use a ladder you jump up and get the fruit.  The person will look at the fruit and will not take it. Therefore, the use of the affirmative action will be eroded. 

When we say that the constituencies, assuming we take the usual constituency of say about 70,000 people, the elect hon. Kayonde here and you tell Matembe to be elected by something like 0.8 people in Mbarara District, it is like you are saying you two go and cross a river, but you Kayonde because you are a man you do not have many problems, you carry a goat to cross the river, but you Matembe, with all the constraints that women face, you carry an elephant and cross that river.  Honestly, the two can be compared in that style.  I will conclude by giving an example of my district, and I want hon. Members really to see the serious matter of this issue.  I wonder, Mr Chairman, how many men, hon. Members have traversed their districts?  What I know is that they in their one constituency and they move around it, at times they have not even finished all the villages, they have not tried to traverse the district, and yet they are here; we have a proverb in Runyankore that when two people are wrestling you who is standing - by you are saying but what is this man doing, why does he not throw him down and we walk!  You do not know the weight and tightness with which the other man is holding your friend.  So, when hon. men Members are talking ‘I prefer this’ it is because really they are talking like the other man.  They do not have a practical experience of traversing a district like Mbarara with 220 parishes looking for votes, Mr Chairman.

If I give you an example on how I went through CA election, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  But try to wind up please.

MRS MATEMBE:  I am winding up, this is the conclusion, Mr Chairman.  You remember I had very many interruptions in the process, but it was good they wanted to get the point clearer and support me.  Now, in Mbarara we were given 14 days of campaign by then Mbarara was 40 sub counties bordering Uganda here in Lyantonde, bordering Kibale, bordering Rwanda and Tanzania, that is Mbarara District, beyond 140 kilometres all around; and we were going on a sub county everyday - two sub counties, one in the morning, one in the afternoon, no Sunday, no sickness, no Saturday, no nothing; and we finished the candidate’s meetings on the 7 0’clock and tomorrow we were voting.  Therefore, when it comes to management of these votes, it is completely amorphous, I can assure you, you will never go back to monitor anything, even for 40 sub counties; in Mbarara it is now 43, then if you say we go to 220 parishes, for goodness sake, the whole thing is amorphous, it cannot be managed, it will be meaningless and I can assure you, we cannot return the right competent person in this House.  

Therefore, Mr Chairman, me I am appealing to you, having explained these issues the way I have, I am appealing to you that you accept the provision which is in here, which has extended the electoral college to the committee of one.  The committee of one really, those are just too many enough; and I would like to appeal to hon. Women in this House, it seems they have changed their attitude, and I want to tell them that -(Interjections)- yes, this is the last sentence.  

Mr Chairman, many women - a number of women in this House who has changed to support adult suffrage, I am sorry to say they are bound by the spirit of selfishness - yes, Mr Chairman, -(Interjections)- yes, these hon. Members in this House - we women since we came here, Mr Chairman, we have -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  Is the speaker on the Floor in order to say that the lady Members here who have changed their attitude towards the electoral colleges are overtaken by the spirit of selfishness, when actually, they have been consulting their people and the women out there they have been consulting with are in for adult suffrage?

THE CHAIRMAN:  She is not in order; proceed please.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, my personal opinion to which I am entitled -

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, it is in order for hon. Matembe, to say that those people who are supporting adult suffrage are selfish when, in fact, if we passed adult suffrage a woman would consider a district too big and, therefore, she would opt for the county.  So, is it in order –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That one I have already rules; she out of order please.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, maybe, in my language I used a bad word, but I want to say that they are really intending to exclude other women with less means.  Because, Mr Chairman, since we came to this House we have changed tremendously, I always speak the truth.  We came here, but now we are -(Interjections)- yes, Mr Chairman, we have become much better off than we came.  We got vehicles, we can move around the district; we get allowances, you know we are able, we can pay many agents, and we can do all this.  

Therefore, we are looking at ourselves and looking at the constraints in the whole district, then we are in a better position to traverse the district, to compete better than our colleagues who now have nothing.  We should have these elections fairly so that even people who have not been here to be bigger than they came should be able to compete and manage to compete with them, Mr Chairman.  We should in the spirit of support for woman; in the spirit of my struggle for women emancipation, I support the Bill.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ABU MAYANJA (Busujju County):  Mr Chairman, I stand here to support the Bill (Applause)  This Bill is primarily intended to provide the procedures to be followed during the parliamentary elections.  It should not deal with matters which have been already settled by the CA and are enshrined in the Constitution.  It should not, for instance, prescribe qualifications of member, or lay down conditions which are inconsistent or at variance with those in the constitution.  Unfortunately, quite a number of provisions do just that, and I will give examples.  

Mr Chairman, Article 62 of the Constitution provides for the independence of the Electoral Commission, and with your permission I shall read it, it says, Mr Chairman:  “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Commission shall be independent and shall in the performance of its functions not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.”  That is what the Constitution of 1995 says; and also Article 65 empowers the Electoral Commission to appoint its staff, and Article 66 provides that the Commission shall have financial independence.  Now, by contrast when you look at the clauses which have been done in the Bill, you will find that they go against those provisions.  Mr Chairman, clause 10 sub-clause 2, paragraph (k) on page 14 says that one of the functions or duties or powers of the Commission is to (k) pay such allowances as the Minister may approve to election officers and other person assisting the commission in carrying out the purposes of this Statute.  

Now, the Constitution does not allow the Minister to approve the allowances paid out to the members of staff.  The Constitution is clear.  I see, my hon. Learned Friend, the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs shaking his head, maybe, I shall read out the actual provisions of the Constitution.  Mr Chairman, Article 66 says; “1. Parliament shall ensure that adequate resources and facilities are provided in the Commission to enable it to perform its functions effectively; 2. The Commission shall be a self-accounting institution and shall deal directly with the ministry responsible for Finance on matters relating to its finances.  3.  The administration expenses of the Commission include charge of...” 

Now, on the appointment in 65, it says:  “The appointment of officers and employees of the Electoral Commission shall be made by the Commission acting in consultation with the Public Service Commission.”  When you come to look at this Bill, Mr Chairman, -(Interjections)- now, Mr Chairman, I have just read a provision which say that the Electoral Commission shall have power to appoint its staff in consultation with the Public Service Commission; that is what Article 65 says.  Now, here clause 10 sub clause 2(l) reads that it has power to employ with the prior approval of the Minister, and upon such terms as the Minister may determine.  

Now, this is outrageous; we have created an independent Electoral Commission, of course, it does consist of people who were former eminent politicians, but that is neither here nor there, it has approved by this House as the independent Electoral Commission envisaged by the Constitution.  It is not right that the Minister should attempt to go and influence or undermine the manner of its activities, and one of this it is its financial independence; people should be given allowances according to the decision of the Commission.  There are seven commissioners, obviously with very good brains; then why should the Minister go and interfere with their decision and it is not, Mr Chairman, the Minister responsible for Finance, it is not the question of trying to protect the money not being adequate, it is the Minister responsible for election, it is Minister of Constitutional Affairs, in our terminology today, not the Minister of Finance.  That, Mr Chairman, in my submission is not right, it is unconstitutional, that section and could be challenged -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I want to give further information. Clause 5.1 on page 11, it is the same problem like the hon. Abu Mayanja has been pointing out regarding the appointment of the Secretary to the Commission.  There again it is on advice of Cabinet, while the provision in the Constitution on Article 65 gives contrary instructions.  

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I am very grateful to the hon. Member for Kajara for that information.  Mr Chairman, I now wish to deal with question of delegation as provided in clause 13.1 of the Bill.  It says;  “The Commission may by revolution either generally or otherwise provided by the resolution, delegate to an election officer, a public officer, or any member of the staff of the commission, any of its powers under this Statute other than the power of delegation”.  Mr Chairman, that is the commission can divest itself of its responsibility and give it to subordinates, and this is not what was intended by the Constitution or even this House.  

I am worried, and there is no limitation as to the rank or seniority of the staff, they can delegate it to their driver; they can delegate it to their cleaner, because he is a member of staff of the Commission; there is no limitation in the wording in this Act.  Frankly, I do not like it.  I also wish to concur with hon. Matembe when she said that the procedures of the Electoral Commission have not been spelt out anywhere.  Now in this one it says that the Commission may by resolution, how do they make that resolution, how do they resolve?  Do they do it unanimously, do they do it by consensus, do they do it by majority?  They are seven men and women, very eminent obviously, but nevertheless we must provide a procedure for them, otherwise, we are going to have problems  

I now wish to deal with the unrestricted power to transfer voters from one’s polling division to another polling division as provided by clause 19 of the Bill. Mr Chairman, clause 19 sub-clause 3, on  page 20 says that if a registered voter wishes to vote in a polling division other than the one in which he or she is registered, the voter shall apply to transfer his or her registration to the polling division where the voter wishes to vote.  Mr Chairman, if we are not careful, the effect of this would be to disenfranchise whole constituencies, especially, small ones as I shall demonstrate.  It will be bring gerrymandering - because put it this way; the small constituency I know of well is that of Buvuma Islands, at one time it did not have more than 2000 voters; now that it may be that the voters of Buvuma 90 per cent of them want to vote for candidate A, but they are 2,000; now, it is possible import from the main land 1900 to transfer their vote to Buvuma islands and by that it means a candidate who is disliked by the people of Buvuma will be elected by the mere exercise of transferring votes from Kyaggwe to Buvuma islands. (Interruption)

MR NTIMBA:  Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that when they talk about polling division, they are talking about polling division within the same parliamentary constituency.

HON. MEMBERS:  No, no. no.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Hon. Ntimba who an eminent educationist has not read the provision.  I thought today, Mr Chairman, I came prepared -(Laughter)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member on the Floor is raising a point, actually, which in my interpretation, negates sub-clause 1, because in sub-clause 1, of that Article 19, on page 20, you are saying the person who registered in that division must state where he origins from, resides or works in gainful employment.  When it comes to transfer there is no reference to those three conditions, which means that even when you register in any division there is no reason why should either be originating from there or you reside there or you work in gainful employment there.  So, that is a total wiping out of the sub-clause 1, of that Article.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, I just want to give information through you to the hon. Members that he is making a very valid point and it should not only go small constituencies; he should have even talked about bigger constituencies, because what is apparently has been happening and we are now beginning to find it out -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, I am sorry, I would like to apologise to hon. Members, I am just learning to speak on this one.  I wanted to say that I would like to give the information to the hon. Member that actually this is beginning to surface, that it is not only the small constituencies; if you do not like a particular candidate in a particular constituency, you could actually transfer people there; and now it is becoming apparently that the people are doing double registration, where they are registering in our area and then registering in another area under another name.  So, I just wanted to confirm to the hon. Member.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I thank hon. Mayanja for giving way.  Mr Chairman, if we leave this clause in the law, it is one of the most dangerous clauses that the Statute has employed and I must thank hon. Mayanja for pointing it out, yes and I must also thank him for coming prepared today. (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, first of all the provision does not say when the vote can transfer, this is any time as it stand, whether the registration has stopped or not, a citizen will be entitled to change -(Interjections)- the thing is that once the voter is capable, in this clause, of changing his voting place to any other place in Uganda - yes, at any one time in Uganda.  This will mean it negates the whole month we are going to put up registers for inspection by the local people, to know whether the people coming to vote actually come this area, or reside in this area or were born in this area.  The whole month is going to be spent checking this and counseling some names out of the register, because they are unknown to stop double voting.  Now, you have this clause, a person comes in the last week, makes an application and comes to vote; that is number one.  Two, the dangers which I have noted –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Be very brief, just give information; you will get time to debate about it.

MR KARUHANGA:  So, briefly, Mr Chairman, this clause I think should be deleted.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I proceed to comment very briefly on clause 18.2 and 3 on page 19; these are badly drafted but it must be by inexperienced draftsman, because it says that the commission shall also maintain; you do not use also in legal language, because every clause stands on its own; you cannot say this must be depending on sub-clause 1, they do not make it so.  So, these two words there should be removed, I just wanted to point it out.  But I wanted now to ask the Minister to help me on clause 26.  Clause 26 sub-clause 2 on page 22, it says;  “No voter shall without lawful authority hold more than one valid voters’ card in the voters own name.”  How can anyone lawfully hold more than one voters card in his own name.  I want the Minister to help me.  

Now, I turn to clause 30 which provides for the appoint Returning Officers it says, “the Commission shall by notice in gazette appoint a Returning Officer for each electoral district”, and it does not say, any qualification it does not say, a person to be appointed Returning Officers shall for example; be Public Officers.  Mr Chairman, I am worried that if we leave it like that, the Commission may appoint ordinary people who are not senior government civil servants to the position of Returning Officers and this would be dangerous.

Secondly, with regard to having pointed that one out, I also need to point out, incidentally it says that they are going to remove people from being Returning Officers and 3(e) is very interesting because there is somebody who has been proved to be politically partisan in the performance of his or her duties.  That really brings out that they are contemplating the commission appointed non Public Officers.  Because if people are Senior Public Officers they ought not to be politically partisan, they some times are - that is material Uganda has, we assume that people of the rank of Senior Administrative Officers grade one should be above acting partially even if they support somebody else.  But nevertheless, Mr Chairman, I want to talk about gazetting and I am suggesting to the Minister and the House that in addition to publication in the gazette there should be a legal requirement to publish in the Mass Media i.e. on the radio, TV, and Commercial News Papers.  

Mr Chairman, I have just found that even lawyers do not read the gazette, I do not know who reads the gazette, so to put something in the gazette is a pure legal function, it does not inform anybody and yet the purpose of making this publication is to make it clear who has been appointed and also people to know who has been appointed, especially with the Assistant Returning Officers.  So, I proposing that they should be gazetted as a matter of law because that is the official organ, but there should also be a requirement that in addition to gazetting there should be publication in the News paper circulating in the constituency.

Mr Chairman, clause 31; talks about taking and subscribing the oath in the prescribing manner.  The Returning Officer and the Assistant Returning Officer shall each before assuming his or her duties as Returning Officers or Assistant Returning Officers take and subscribe the prescribed oath.  Mr Chairman I have searched through this Bill I have not see the form of oath prescribed to be subscribed by Returning Officers and Assistant Returning Officers, this might be an omission which ought to be corrected.  

Mr Chairman, may I now draw attention of the House to clause 33; sub-clause 1; on the same page.  It says, each Returning Officer may with the approval of the commission create in each constituency within his or her district as many polling division and so on.  This should be a mandatory requirement for them otherwise if you take the whole constituency to be one polling division life will be impossible, and as I am proceeding it is a - but I should go back to clause 31; and there I note in sub-clause one that Assistant Returning Officers may be, removed from office by the Returning Officer. I think because of the - there is nothing wrong, but you know we are now working and we have experience, I think it would be safer to give that duty to the Commission, let the Commission do the removing let the Returning Officer report to the Commission that the Assistant Returning Officer is not acting properly, but the power of removing should be done by the Commission.  I know that is approval of the Commission, but it should be really done the other way round because the Assistant Returning Officer would feel safer if they are not entirely at the mercy of their bosses.  

Mr Chairman, I turn slightly to some controversial provisions, may be, clause 35. 1(b); and 35.2; if I may read; “whenever it is considered necessary and immediately after the date of an election is appointed the commission shall transmit to every returning Officer”. Now (b); “sufficient funds to cover all the expenses to be incurred by the Returning Officer in carrying our electoral process”.  Mr Chairman, that is funding and it is very good, but in order to create transparency and to remove any suspicion that money intended to facilitate the administrative process of election can be given out for other purposes the information should be given to candidates or their agents that, so much money is being put in that and the same should be with regard to the ballot papers.  Ballot papers have a habit in this country and indeed in other countries of growing out of nothing, therefore, it can decide to ovulate this if from the very beginning the candidates would know that in my constituency they have put there 20,000 ballot papers.  So, if they then turn out to be 25,000 then you know that something has been done. 

Mr Chairman, I now proceed to article 38; very briefly this is a constitutional provision and there is nothing we can do about it here I have checked that it is within the constitution.  This is the provision whereby people serving sentences in prisons for more than 9 months or more are not allowed to vote.  I think this is unfortunate because in the first place, they may be, serving sentences for politically related offenses.  

Two, these people remains citizens of this country and for us Africans who knows our history, if there had been a provision like this in Gold Cost in 1947, the history of Ghana would have been different because it would have meant that Nkrumah would not have been voted for since he was in prison at that time.  So, it is an unfortunate provision, but Mr Chairman, it is in the Constitution and until a Parliament according to the interpretation by the Front Bench, until a new parliament is elected there is nothing we can do about it. 

I also wish to suggest, Mr Chairman, in Clause 46; that the names of the presiding officers should be displayed at the constituency headquarters and not at the district headquarters only which is very far away.  In clause 48; I was concerned to read to find that we have - it is proposed, 48.1 it says, “Subject to the provisions of the constitution and this statute the Commission may determine the manner and the period during which campaigns shall take place and shall publish the information in the gazette”.  

Now, the manner in which the election - that is what we are doing here, the purpose of this Bill is to provide for the procedure for conducting the elections and it should be spelt out here the manner of conducting the campaign, they are important it should be done here even the period.  The Commission should have as discretion to extend the period if it is not enough, but to leave it to them as they are to determine the manner and duration of campaigns in my submission is not appropriate, I am grateful.

MR KAVUMA: Point of information.  I thank you very much, Sir, and I thank the hon. Member for Busujju for giving away, but surely I think a number of things have been over stretched, but I will come on with this one because really the provision he is referring to is talking about subject to this constitution we have provision which deal with some aspect of the manner these campaigns are going to made.  So, this provision is intended to leave room for details which we cannot include here, but those are going to be subjected to the provisions of the constitution and the Statute.  So, it is not really correct to say, that we are leaving the door open to these gentlemen to do whatever they want it is within limits to accommodate details we may not put in the law and that is the very usual.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I would like in sort of, to reply to what the Minister has just mentioned the hon. Member on the Floor to read Article 76 of the constitution and read out loud -(Laughter).

MR ABU MAYANJA: No, I shall read it at home.  Now I can proceed, Mr Chairman -(Laughter)- it appears that it is in the interest of the House.  Parliament may subject to the provision of this constitution enact such laws as may be, necessary for the purpose of this chapter including laws for the registration of voters, the conduct of public election and referendum and where necessary making provisions for voting by proxy. Thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, this was understood that we are making - I said it in my opening remarks that a procedural legislation by virtue of the power given to this House by the constitution and it is a matter of opinion, in my opinion it is not safe to leave the manner and duration to the commission it should be provided in the House.

I want now to talk about sub-section 2; about candidate’s meeting many people have talked about this.  Now, my contribution is this, a joint candidate’s meeting may have been appropriate for the CA campaigns because during that time there was one draft constitution and every candidate was expected to contribute his views on that one draft constitution. (Applause)  Mr Chairman, during a general election every candidate especially when there no party manifesto every candidate is expected to have his own agenda -(Applause)- therefore, this bringing that thing from the C.A Statute and bring it into the Parliamentary election statute is to do something which is really not intelligent -(Applause)

MRS MATEMBE: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  In fact, the hon. Member is right to say that candidates will be bringing their different agenda’s and when they are there, before the electorates together the electorates will be in a better position to compare the agenda and relate it to their interest and then vote much better. (Applause)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, there some prospective candidates of course they are not yet candidates who are not prepared to draw crowds for unpopular candidates and this thing is creating just problems There even criminal offenses being created in connection with candidate’s meetings we do not want candidates’ meetings - and because they say you have a joint candidate’s meeting then you cannot hold your own and when you hold a separate individual Abu Mayanja candidate you are breaking the law and you are punished.  This is wrong and I think it is contrary to the earlier provisions of the constitution guarantee the fundamental freedoms and liberty of the individual. (Applause) 

Let us proceed rationally and examine each provision and see what purpose it’s supposed to give, indeed, they have even brought - because of this joint meetings they have brought a terrible provision which says, that no candidate shall use insulting language, but this is governed by the ordinary law of deformation and there would be no point to bringing it here.  But they feared that if you do not bring it and you have a joint candidate’s meetings and then candidates start abusing each other, may be, there can be a fight.  We do not want a fight let every man have his own meetings and let hon. Kiyonga ensure that there is law at whatever meeting if the special branch wants to listen in let them go and listen in.  (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. There politicians who have been in the field for a long time, there have been holding Ministerial posts for a long time and they have held so many businesses they are well to do, but here is  a prospective candidate who wants to stand he will find that this politicians who have money will draw the voters.  They will use money to draw the voters and their meetings will be much attended than the other candidate.  So, I would suggest the idea of candidate’s meeting be held because if I want to contest with hon. Abu Mayanja in his constituency, you will find that hon. Abu Mayanja will out power me because he has been Attorney General and what have you.  This will be very unfair, that is the information I wanted to give.

MR ABU MAYANJA: I am grateful to hon. Member for his contribution and I am really running very fast to finish.  Mr Chairman, I will not labour with that point, it has been what it is.  Mr Chairman, Article 48.14 “which says that, no candidate shall hold any rally or other public meetings intending to solicit votes other than at the candidate’s meeting”, that should be removed.  Mr Chairman, we came to 49 which already I have brought the attention of the House, it says, “No person shall while campaign use any language which is insulting or which constitutes incitement to public order hatred, violence, which threaten war”.   Mr Chairman, this is already provided for adequately by the law of the land and we should not re-enact it here.  

This is clause 49.3; on page 42; Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I have sat down so much, I will be very fast.  Mr Chairman, I am pleading with the hon. Minister that clause 50; be put positively, it says, “No candidate in an election shall be denied reasonable assess to and use of State owned communication Media”, we should say, “every candidate shall be allowed to use”, we put it definitely so that they know what they are doing.  That is putting it positively.

Let me go to clause 69; I have left out quite a number, but 69 is important because it requires an employer to give leave to a person who wants to go and vote.  Mr Chairman, we vote once in five years and it is very important, is it really to much to ask the Minister responsible for Public Service that polling day should be declared a public holiday then this question of saying if an employ who is a registered voter notified and so on and so forth and then creating an offence that if the employer does not give him leave then he creates an offence, this is going to create un necessarily bitterness.  Let us say that, if a polling day falls on a working day it shall be declared a public holiday so that everybody is free to go and vote. (Applause)

Now, the last point -(Interjection)- you are at my neck I do not know what to do, but I am concerned about these voting procedures. I think that the experience has shown the stealing of votes they are stolen when they are being transferred for instance from the polling station to the counting and so on and so forth.  

Now, I am suggesting to my hon. and learned Friend the mover of the Motion, there uses to be a provision years ago in the colonial law I have not checked it which gave power to candidates or their agents to seal the ballot box with their own seal if the so wished.  Now, it is not provided so I am saying that, when the voting has been done and all the ballot papers have been tied in different bundles and put back into the ballot boxes and it is locked or sealed, let the candidate or his agent also seal it if he has got a capacity of doing so or at least sign on the seal provided by the presiding officer so that there is no possibility of claiming that the thing was tampered with at any one time.  

Mr Chairman, I have tried to get some I hope useful suggestions, I am appealing to the House, I was rather unhappy that in the earlier Bill which may now be a Statute we overlooked, the fact that we are providing a procedural law and we over step into matters which had been dealt with the constituent Assembly.  The provision, for instance, that a presidential candidate must pay a none refundable fee of 8 million is, in my anxiously considered opinion unconstitutional.  So, let us not fall into this trap once again.  So, I support the Bill I hope these observation I have made will be considered.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated Member): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like, like all those who have spoke before me to support the Bill.  I will have three general observations arising out of what Colleagues have said and I will also be particular on some of the clauses. 

The first general remark relates to the question of election of women representatives in Parliament.  I would like whole heartedly to support the ideas presented by hon. Matembe -(Applause)- because, Mr Chairman, it is not a favour to women that they must participate or that they should be encouraged to participate in national affairs, it is a necessity it is a condition for development.  

Mr Chairman, I would like not to take that information for the time being before I have finished  - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed please.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, the condition for development is that the population is mobilized and everybody makes a contribution to his or her own ability.  What has been happening in our country and for a long time is that, a big section of the population has not been involved as fully as they should and, therefore, the country has ben the poorer.  So, the fact that now there is effort to make everybody involved we should all be appreciative of the effort.  (Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The information I want to give the hon. Member holding the Floor, Mr Chairman, is that we seem to be confusing the affirmative action aspect of the women standing in the District, in that the affirmative action entail the women stand alone they are not tampered with and, therefore, whoever comes out is a lady in the district.  The issue, therefore, is not how they are going to be elected to be affirmative in that even if it was not added to the suffrage it was the college, the lady will have to go to all the parishes and to use hon. Matembe’s idea 220 of them she will have to go there because the voters are RC executives of those areas.  So, whether you are looking for the adult suffrage or the colleges you must travel the whole district, the issue, therefore, is that we are only allowing the ladies to stand alone on that ticket. (Applause)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Mr Chairman, anybody who has followed the last speaker closely that was an argument not information and I can present an alternative argument and I am doing so.  So, if he has a chance let him do so, because, in the Constitution we have already allowed for affirmative action at the district level and at the sub-county level where we have guaranteed a third of the member of the council to be women and we shall sit here or those who will come will sit here and decide how these will be elected, we have done that.  Now, that is clear affirmative action and let us not see the Parliamentary election of a woman district representative independent of the whole effort it is all part and parcel of the effort.  They should not be seen even independent of the 1.5 points given to the girls as they go to university. So, I am giving the background I am, therefore, not unaware of the differences that may be, there in the implementation.  But, if we agree like we have that a district should have a woman representative and then we say, the woman should solicit for every vote in the district, I think we are giving a lady candidate too much task to ever achieve the goal and let me tell you, Mr Chairman, -(Interjection)- allow me not to be informed.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you, very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, can I inform hon. Kabwegyere that what is actually meant is that, as time goes on women must be prepared to start competing equally with men and, therefore, the starting point was Electoral colleges, next we have to practice campaigning like anybody else, but when we are only women campaigning, after which this affirmative action may even be scraped and we go equally with everybody else.  So, I feel that there is affirmative action when it is only women competing against themselves so that at the end of the day we may even go for the presidentship which we cannot go for now.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, allow me at least to develop my point.  Because the last contribution -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please, okay proceed.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Because the last contribution I am sure is judged in it’s own right.  It is in the constitution that the affirmative action will continuously be reviewed, because there is going to be a time when it is not going to be necessary this is all assumed and is understood.  But we are talking now about the Electoral College and we are talking about the up lift of the women participation in national affairs.  So, those who think that democracy is being flaunted by not having a direct vote for a woman are not certainly not democratic in their thinking.  Because, democracy -(Interruption)

 MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I seeking clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor, if he assumes that these ladies hon. Members who will be elected will be go around the district and servicing it to represent fully the interest of these ladies, how does he expect them to do that if they cannot even start by going through the whole area?

MR LUBEGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am wondering whether Prof. Kabwegyere is aware of the constitutional provision relating to the election of the Chairperson of a district.  A Chairperson of a district if I may recall from the Constitutional provisions is elected by universal adult suffrage and I am sure we are going to have many women standing for such a position.  Why should these particular ones not be shielded? There is no provision to the extent that the Chairperson - if a candidate for a Chairpersonship of the district and if she is a woman then that woman will be elected by colleges why should we want to shield one group of Parliament?

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. In spite of hon. Babu’s objection, Mr Chairman, I would like clarification from hon. Kabwegyere whether in fact, it is not more affirmative for women to be voted for by all the population qualified rather than section of it, which is more affirmative, is it the population giving them the mandate than just a few colleges?  Given the fact that they are only women going to compete against themselves.

MR KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to answer hon. Kanyomozi by referring to the election of 1989 which produced him to be a Member of this Parliament, it was an electoral college, the conditions at the time allowed it and we have done a good job here and I believe he did not only talk to these who elected he traveled and talked to everybody in the constituency.  I would expect, therefore, a woman who is elected by the electoral college to represent a voice of a woman from the district to cover the district anyway, but not in the sense of going to every village for every vote as hon. Kanyomozi would propose.

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I would like to remind hon. Lubega that he knows that the Chairperson of the district has executive authority; he or she is going to be very powerful and responsible to so many decisions to be made in the district with day-to-day affairs. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: A Member of Parliament is certainly a different - and lastly, hon. Ongom, I think surely what we have been talking about earlier on, let those of us who are saying democracy is numbers, please democracy is not numbers.  (Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, the information I want to give hon. Kabwegyere and the House is this, it is arithmetical one.  Candidates are going to go for candidates’ meetings in every parish, now in a small district like Rukungiri we have about 120 Parishes, therefore, we must provide for 120 days for these candidates meetings.  I would like those who are versed in arithmetic to let us know how these women are going to achieve that within the period we are giving, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, I think that is factual question and I think also as hon. Matembe pointed out the resources involved the physical presence and all that must be considered.  So, in my opinion and think in the opinion of many the Electoral College can answer this problem.  Now there is misperception that the women whose names are already known would find it easy when they go back and they will be voted in, therefore, they would prefer that.  I think it is deception that if you are already known you will be automatically elected, if they have more money now and if really it is understood properly by the population that this is the advantage you are trying to ride upon it may turn against you.

Now, the second general remark which I hope will not allow as many points of information and orders as this, is this question which were brought out the other day by hon. Sserunjogi and hon. Mayanja has brought it in another form.  Of exodus of people coming from outside - of Uganda by people from outside to come here and be voters.  I think really as we enter the election period, we must avoid over excitement and over exaggeration, because as it was said here the other day Government should have stood up and say, look one million has not come from a neighbouring country or they are not being harboured in barracks.  

Surely, any politician wanting votes have to use words for concept that convince anybody.  I think there is an assumption that our people are so stupid that they can be deceived easily like we were told that at one stadium a million people turned up to meet one president in the past.  I think we must avoid those open lies, you know, and in this case if people can move from the main land and go to the Island surely with the islanders will they take these to be normal, are we really assuming that our population can be swung like grass in the wind or do we believe that we have such powers as to do that to the population?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, proceed please.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: So, it seems to me, therefore, we must respect our people if in a given voting area at a polling station 20,50,100,300 people from other place become, and they are on the voters register surely this should cause some problems and if there candidates who are going to do this and we anticipate that he exists then surely we are still in the old days we are not yet on door of democracy.  Now, at least one thing that is very clear is that this is not going to be done by any other authority other than possibly the candidates.  Because if the Electoral Commission is independent as we say it is, how will they allow such a large numbers as influenced by candidates or influenced by anybody to be moved to such and such a polling stations as the claim is?  So, Mr Chairman, I think we must trust our people, we must also trust the Electoral Commission and trust ourselves and our own morals otherwise we are empty.

MR LUBEGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the concern regarding people from outside this country could be a real one, because I have heard on radio that one of the candidate Minister I think hon. Moses Ali was also making observations about people from a neighbouring countries.  So, it is important that the commissioner and all of us take serious note of that concern to be a serious one it should not be watered down.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think the point is well taken, but we also do know that on the border with Moyo there is some problems and people are overflowing the boundaries.  But, if that is supposed to be the same with the Kenya border, with the Zaire border, with the Rwanda border, with the Tanzania border then it must not be seen as an affair of one particular border overflowing into Uganda and incidentally one Member here made a remark and it is known psychologically to be very true that the people who intend to be hard on foreign usually have some foreign blood in them. (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, let me move on page 18; and this is representative of many sub-clauses 15.5; any person who contravene subsection 4 commits and offence.  This reappears in many places, but the offence is not countrified I do not know what kind of offence is it, who is supposed to decide on the punishment for this offence and there many places like that.  I think the hon. Minister should look into that.  The other case is that  (Interruption)-

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member that, clause 102; take care of the shares he has and I read; “ any person who commits and illegal practice under this statute commits an that person is reliable to a fine not exceeding shilling 30,000 or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both”.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Okay, that may generally cover it, but then when you look at those cases where the offence is clearly defined in terms of fine or imprisonment, I have found numerous places where you have a case of two years or shillings 300,000, one year or shillings 300,000.  Now, can we not synchronise on the figure so that 2,000 and three years are really equivalent and wherever this occurs it is consistent, because I think if once commits this offence and the equivalent is, let me give an example, page 41; -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up please.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: My Friend here is saying Professor is lost, Professors also can get lost there is nothing wrong -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s sitting. We adjourn until tomorrow.

(The Council rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 February 1996.)



