Tuesday, 05 February 2008

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

2.37
ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to: 
1. Florence Adong Omwony 
2. Sarah Wasike Mwebaza

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, present here we have distinguished guests, including Members of the East African Legislative Assembly who are members of the Public Accounts Committee. They include: hon. Christopher Nakuleu, Chairperson; Margaret Nantongo Zziwa; hon. Catherine Kimura; hon. Benard Mulengani; hon. Dora Kanabahita Byamukama; hon. Otieno Karan; hon. Said Bilal and Dr Julius Rotich who is the Deputy Secretary-General. You are most welcome. 

Also present here – I see hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and many others. We have many visitors from the two constituencies where the two Members who have just been sworn in have come from, that is, Busia and Labwor. You are most welcome. 

I take this opportunity to welcome the new Members that have just been sworn in, one representing Labwor County in Abim District and another representing Samia-Bugwe North constituency in Busia District. You are most welcome. You are now fully fledged Members of this Eighth Parliament and now that elections are over you are representing everybody in your respective constituencies. You should serve to the best of your ability. The one from Labwor, you are succeeding the late Omwony Ojwok, a nationalist who served this country diligently and we expect you to do the same. Honourable member from Samia-Bugwe, you are replacing your husband, so please continue with his good works and serve your constituency and the country at large.

Honourable members, I welcome you to this first sitting after the Christmas recess and I hope you utilised the recess to develop your constituencies. 

On a happy note, I wish to inform you that the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker who was hospitalised in London has fully recovered and is due to be discharged any moment from now. (Applause) I have been constantly in touch with her and she will soon be back in the country. She conveys her heartfelt thanks to you for your prayers.

Yesterday afternoon, Parliament hosted the President of the Federal Republic of Germany, His Excellency Horst Koehler, who is in the country on a three-day state visit. He requested to meet and interact with a small, cross-section of Members of Parliament, which was constituted of party whips. Also present were the Leader of the Opposition, the Third Deputy Prime Minister and many other Members, including the Independents. The discussion went on well and it gave us a new way in which we could perhaps interact with heads of state that visit us in future so that we have an interaction rather than leaving the Speaker to make a speech and that is the end of it. So, it was good.

Earlier yesterday, I had received a delegation of Southern Sudan’s Members of Parliament who called on me to express their gratitude to the government of Uganda in general and Parliament of Uganda in particular for the support and solidarity as they strive to implement their comprehensive peace agreement with the Khartoum Government. They conveyed their good wishes for stability and continued good relations between the two countries. 

While Parliament was on recess, some of the Members had blessings of children and added to our population. I wish to congratulate them and pray for the wellbeing of their babies. In the same vein, I extend my sincere condolences to those who during the same period lost their beloved ones. May the departed rest in eternal peace and I pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved families!

On the international scene, we are still witnessing the tragic situation in our neighbourhood, Kenya, where so many lives have been lost, so much property lost and so many people have been displaced as a result of the disputed presidential elections of 27 December 2007. We hail all those who have attempted to bring the two sides to negotiate settlement of the conflict and I pray that the current diplomatic efforts spearheaded by the former Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, end successfully and quickly so that the situation in Kenya can once again normalize. 

The suffering of the brotherly people of Kenya affects us all in the Great Lakes region; the sooner the conflict is resolved the better. I appeal to you all to give the mediation talks chance and to refrain from any utterance or action that may derail the negotiation for peace in our neighbourhood. 

I wish to convey my gratitude to the people of Tororo, Busia and other neighbouring districts and the International Red Cross for receiving and looking after these displaced people from the Republic of Kenya. 

Honourable Members, the Business Committee met a fortnight ago and examined all the work available and is being processed. It was established that there is big backlog and we need to work hard to dispose of it as much as possible before the end of the current session, which is planned to end in mid May. In this regard, I appeal to the Members to attend the committee meetings which generate work for the plenary, and to attend plenary meetings regularly so that we can handle the work expeditiously. 

Once again, I welcome the new Members and wish you all fruitful deliberations in the remaining period of the second session of the Eighth Parliament. Thank you, very much.

2.57
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I would like to welcome all of you back from the Christmas recess and to the beginning of a new year. Your communication has covered quite a range of things, which I believe are important for us to make brief comments on. 

I would like to start, as has been the tradition of this Parliament, by warmly welcoming our two colleagues: the hon. Member for Labwor County and the hon. Member for Samia-Bugwe County North, who have joined us in the Eighth Parliament today. Mr Speaker, elections are contests. I would like to put it on record that considering the circumstances that led to the calling of a by-election in Labwor County, my party, the Forum for Democratic Change and the entire Opposition chose not to field a candidate and, therefore, we did not field a candidate in Labwor County. (Applause)

We fielded a candidate in Samia-Bugwe North. The basis for that fielding was very clear; that until hon. Awori announced that he had crossed to the Movement, Samia-Bugwe North was Opposition turf -(Laughter)- and, therefore, even when hon. Wasike was holding fort, we knew that sooner or later we would claim what was rightly ours. We contested very vigorously in those elections but we were challenged by many circumstances. But as good democrats, we accepted the outcome of the elections and that is why we welcome you. (Applause) We can only wish the two Members success in representing their constituencies, but we also want to put it on record that at the next elections, they will definitely contend with us. (Laughter) 

There is something that came out in the media yesterday, which probably was not drawn to your attention, Mr Speaker, and which to us in the Opposition felt like an infringement upon the rights and the sanctity of Parliament. The issue is about the very many announcements purportedly issued by the Police telling the public not to come to Parliament. I do not know whether that announcement was brought to your attention, and I do not know if the Public Relations Department of Parliament or any relevant body of Parliament had authorised the Police to speak on behalf of Parliament! 

Secondly, I do not know if there was anybody with legal knowledge to remind the Police that they have no right to stop Ugandans from coming to Parliament when it is their right to do so! If that was not made by the Police –(Interjection)- please, I am talking about an announcement that was made. It is very important that this matter is addressed because it would be very wrong for Parliament to accept that individuals who have no business with Parliament begin to tell the public what Parliament should be doing; and that was the effect of that announcement.

Mr Speaker, you did make reference to the Business Committee meeting and also to the fact that we have a lot of business that is pending, but I think it would be important because on the Order Paper and in the notice of business to follow, there is one matter that is of grave importance to Ugandans. This is the matter of buying a new presidential jet for the country. The committee that handled that matter made it clear that their report was ready, and I believe that since the process of purchasing this jet has probably already begun, we do not want to enter into a situation where when the committee report comes, we are told that deposits have already been made for the jet and cancelling the order would cost the country too much. I think the issue of the presidential jet is a matter of national importance and, therefore, we ask that the report of that committee be brought forward before any other business so that the matter of buying a presidential jet is resolved by this Parliament - so that the country knows the reasons why we need another one or not and so that they know that the country is not being short-changed by technocrats.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, you did make mention of the tragic situation that has befallen our brothers and sisters in Kenya. It is indeed a tragedy for East Africa since Kenya is a country that was held up as an example for us. In the elections previous to the last one, a sitting President led a party in Government into an electoral defeat and handed over the reigns of the state to the party that won, peacefully. We had, therefore, looked to Kenya and thought that in these last elections that example would be reinforced and that Kenya would enjoy peace because Kenya provides to our country opportunities for trade and also opportunities for doing business. Unfortunately, this was not to be. 

As a person who stayed in Kenya for seven years - I did my masters and PhD in Kenya - when the announcement first came, I did go on record –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we should refrain ourselves from assessing.

PROF. LATIGO: So we would like to support the concern you have expressed, but we also thought that it is important to register the fact that since the elections, two Members of Parliament, which is a matter of direct concern to us, have been killed and we in the Opposition and I believe the entire Parliament, support your appeal that this matter be handled with utmost sensitivity and that means be found to restore peace to that country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Sorry, I forgot to mention that our colleague, Mr Odonga Otto, was operated on two days ago and I have got a report that he has been discharged today from Kampala International Hospital. This is the information I have just received. 

MR OKUPA: I am just concerned about our Members who are standing, Mr Speaker. We have always had a provision of a sitting arrangement in the middle here but I am only wondering what could have happened today because it is unfortunate that they keep standing. If they can provide those seats - and I can see the Attorney-General there, who is very key towards some of the issues which are going to come, standing. Can we avoid that -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think you made a point but we are really assessing the situation to see how we are going to adjust our sitting arrangement so that they are accommodated -(Laughter)- please, bear with us.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mention has been made of the tragedy in Kenya and I acknowledge your restraint to Members when commenting about Kenya. But in circumstances where two honourable members have been killed in such a dirty manner and in circumstances that many thousands of people - hundreds I should say - have perished, I would really say that as usual, it is our procedure that we observe a moment of silence for the departed. 

THE SPEAKER: In view of what the honourable member has said about our colleagues, the Members of Parliament from Kenya, and actually many Ugandans - you heard about the people at Naalya and you also heard about the people who died on Mubende road - let us stand in memory of them all.

(The Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

3.10
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, may I, on behalf of Government and on behalf of the Executive, welcome you, Rt Hon. Speaker and the hon. Members of Parliament, back from recess. We know you used that time beneficially for the people you lead and we look forward to very positive and constructive contributions in these sittings. 

May I add my voice to that of my dear colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, in welcoming and congratulating the new Members of Parliament that have just been sworn in: the hon. Florence Adong Omwony and the hon. Sarah Wasike -(Interruptions)- I know that hon. Katuntu was sworn in before this Parliament went on recess -(Laughter)- and since I had not the opportunity to welcome him, I do so, very warmly. (Laughter) I know the hon. Adong Omwony and the hon. Sarah Wasike worked very hard. I do not know about hon. Katuntu but I know he also worked hard -(Interruption)- hon. Katuntu worked hard - not as hard as Wasike and Omwony but he nevertheless worked quite hard and I do congratulate him. I think they deserved the victory. 

I just want to say that Government, through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, will be presenting a full statement on the situation in Kenya. I know that they have not been able to present a statement today because of some circumstances, but I hope they will be able to present this statement tomorrow so that this Parliament is fully informed of what has been happening –(Interruption)- is the microphone off? I do not control the volume -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, I need technical assistance here -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: We shall correct it. 

MR MBABAZI: Does it have volume? No, the idea of having a public address system - a microphone - is that you do not have to shout at all. So someone should control that. 

I was making the point that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will be presenting a full statement on the situation in Kenya so that honourable colleagues in this Parliament will have the opportunity to fully debate that situation while they are fully informed about what has been happening and what our assessment as a Government is on the situation there. But of course I would like to say that the government of Uganda, as we have said publicly, regrets the situation in Kenya. We regret the loss of life, the displacement of people and the disruption of ordinary life of the people in Kenya and in Uganda as well. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rukutana, it is out of order to sit the way you have sat. (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the government of Uganda does hope that the situation in Kenya will soon be managed in a manner that will introduce afresh the peace that the people of Kenya have always enjoyed so that even we that have been affected, who are neighbours of Kenya, can live at peace with ourselves and with our neighbours in Kenya. 

I do –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable minister for giving way. Given the magnitude of the problem that is in Kenya and given that there are very many Ugandans whose lives and property are at stake, would it not be prudent that the Minister for Foreign Affairs comes here to Parliament and gives a ministerial statement to tell us exactly what is being done and what he intends to do so that as Parliament, we pronounce ourselves instead of hearing some stories here and there? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, maybe you did not follow because of the system here but the minister said that there will be a statement on that situation tomorrow. But we should be courteous to each other. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, hon. Amama Mbabazi is assuring us that we shall have a statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs tomorrow. I really want him to clarify and assure me that the statement will contain serious allegations that Ugandan –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. No. Be fair hon. Ekanya. He is not the Minister of Foreign Affairs. The Minister of Foreign Affairs will bring his statement and if you are not satisfied, then you will seek clarification. Please bear with that. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My third point was to regret to hear that our colleague and brother, the hon. Odonga Otto, is sick and I can only say that we wish him quick recovery. We wish him very well; we need him and his active positive contribution in Parliament.

Finally, responding to the Leader of the Opposition on the point he made about the Police, I just wanted to say that what the Police is doing is within their full constitutional and statutory power because as you know, the Police are mandated by the Constitution to preserve law and order in the whole of Uganda. There is no exception in any place that the Police do not have the power to preserve law and order. So, whatever they are doing, they are doing it strictly within those powers that the Constitution confers on them.

MR KATUNTU: I had sought clarification and I saw the minister sit. I do not know whether he was yielding the Floor or he had ended. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Amama Mbabazi for yielding the Floor. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. Under what constitutional provision do the Police stop members of the public from accessing Parliament? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: The only problem I have is that, nobody has approached me to say that he cannot access Parliament because of the Police’s announcement, which you said was made and that is why, I think, these people have been able to come here. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: I do not know whether I can make myself clear on this one. The announcements have been running on radio and it has stopped the public. We are even wondering how these people accessed Parliament – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, the Leader of the Opposition has raised this matter. I am going to get in touch today with the Commissioner of Police to get the details and see how we sort this out.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. He asked me what law and I am going to raise it. The functions of the Police force as stipulated in the Constitution in Article 212 are: - 
“(b) to preserve law and order; 
(c) to prevent and detect crime.” 
In whatever they have been doing, they have been acting strictly in accordance with this power. And, Mr Speaker, what the Police have been talking about is preventing people from carrying out demonstrations around Parliament and nothing more than that. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said that I am going to get in touch with the Inspector General of Police.

3.23
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Members on the other side should give me the opportunity. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I rise on a matter of great national importance that is urgent in nature. 

In your opening remarks, Mr Speaker, you welcomed us back from the recess and in your own statement you did say that we have been interacting with the electorate. However, allow me report to you that some of us have not had the opportunity of interacting with the people we represent.

Mr Speaker, allow me register on record my disappointment with the way I was treated by the Uganda Police force to the extent that I would not access the people I represent; I would not consult them on these key national issues unless they permitted me. It went to the extent of being imprisoned for two nights in a police cell at CPS and the crime committed was to use the recess appropriately by interacting with the people I represent. 

Allow me to further inform the House that up to now, I am still facing the charges of attempting to reach out to the people I represent in Kampala Central Constituency, in court. That is the predicament I suffered and up to now I have not been in position to reach out to those people. 

Anyway, the matter at play and which is of significance, Mr Speaker, is this statutory instrument, which I invite this honourable House to look at, internalise, scrutinise and I pray that, if possible, this House pronounces itself on it.

This is a statutory instrument which, in my opinion, is repressive, oppressive and obnoxious. It offends the Constitution and directly affects us as Members of Parliament in the execution of our duties. It is Statutory Instrument No.53 and the long title reads thus: “The Police Declaration of Gazetted Areas Instrument of 2007.” It was gazetted on the 2nd day of November 2007 and issued by the Minister of Internal Affairs, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. In brief –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Member, it is not a fault to reveal that you came and talked to me about this particular instrument and I remember I asked for a copy so that I could look at it. What I am suggesting now is that, if you are complaining about it, let us have a copy given to the clerk to make copies for all Members. When all the Members have copies, you will be able to move what you want to move. I think it will be better to do it that way because Members will have the time to fully internalise it.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. And for that matter, allow me lay this on Table for that particular purpose, because I do not have the resources to make copies -(Laughter)- and I hope that by the time I move it tomorrow, we will have the copies ready. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, let us see. Yes, hon. Okot Ogong.

3.27
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I stand here under Rule 46(b) of our Rules of Procedure to move a motion without notice on a matter of national importance. I stand here protected, one, by our Rules of Procedure; two, by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; and three, by the general Constitution - the Bible. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I consulted my people and I am standing here fully blessed by the people of Dokolo Constituency and Lango in general. I stand on the matter of the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007. This amendment has generated a lot of debate; a lot of confusion and I have here a motion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, sorry for me to reveal what we discussed in my office. But certainly we discussed this matter in my office today and I advised that you can make remarks after the Bill has been presented. I told you this and we agreed. I was going to give you an opportunity, once the Bill is presented, to express your reservations. 

I am saying this because I have seen the text of your motion and realised that it is in conflict with our Rule 67 in that you are anticipating a Bill, which has not been presented. Therefore, let the Bill be presented and I will definitely give you an opportunity to express your reservations thereafter. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I have already informed you that I am standing here protected by the Bible and I want to say the truth and nothing but the truth.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, whereas I respect the Bible, I am controlled by the Constitution and Rules of Procedure made under that Constitution. Because of Rule 67, I am disallowing this motion at this juncture.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not seeking clarification in respect to your ruling, but allow me say that in making your ruling, you did mention that you met hon. Okot Ogong and advised that you would give him the opportunity to make his comments after the Bill has been presented. The clarification I would like to seek is whether that comment will be made before the Bill is committed by you to the committee as would be part of the procedure of first reading. I am saying this because once it is committed, then whatever contributions hon. Okot Ogong would make would be redundant and serve no purpose. So, we would like –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to go into details of what I discussed with him because he knows exactly what we agreed on. Can we proceed on another business?

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Peter Nyombi): Mr Speaker, I have the honour to lay on Table the Uganda Law Reform Commission Annual Report, 2006. I hereby lay.

THE SPEAKER: Now, let the committee concerned examine and then give us a report. Thank you very much.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2007

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Mr Werikhe Kafabusa):  Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007” be read for the first time. 

Accompanying this Bill is a certificate of financial implications clearance from the Ministry of Finance in accordance with Section 10 of the Budget Act. I beg to move.

MR OKOT OGONG:  I do not know whether there are some bad spirits here affecting my microphone. Mr Speaker, I stand here on a matter that is very important especially to my people and the people of Uganda. I have seen on our Order Paper a Bill, which has already been read for land amendment, 2007. And there are provisions that are in the Bill that directly affect my people. So, I would like to be guided on how to proceed because my people in Dokolo have data that the Bill –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, why don’t you leave him?

MR OKOT OGONG:  Mr Speaker, before I seek for guidance, maybe I give the background so that you can guide me properly because I have been directed by my people that I move the motion under Rule 46 and the motion reads as follows:
 “An adjournment motion for a resolution of Parliament that the tabling of the Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 be stayed to allow adequate consultation between Government and - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, please let me explain. Fortunately, you gave me a copy of your written intended motion and the gist of the motion now therefore, “This Parliament resolves as follows: That the tabling of the Bill be stayed until adequate consultations have been done so that the people are brought on board to avoid polarization and confusion in the country.” 

Now the Bill has been tabled and when we had a discussion with you, I told you that it is not possible for you to bring a motion preventing the tabling of the Bill because of Rule 67. But I said that I would give you an opportunity to express your reservations without emotions and you agreed. This is what I expected you to do. Now bringing your motion is a defeat already. You are asking for staying; the question of staying does not arise. The Bill is with us but I had something to say after you have expressed your reservations. 

MR OKOT OGONG: I cannot begin directly discussing this matter with you. But, Mr Speaker, if I can really bring out what we directly discussed with you - if you allow me.

THE SPEAKER: I now expect you to just express your reservation. I told you it is not possible to say, “Do not bring the Bill.” The Bill has to be brought. 

First of all, let us go to the functions of this institution, Article 79: “Functions of Parliament. (1) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament shall have the power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of  Uganda “  There is no other body that can make laws other than Parliament. So, when somebody brings a motion or a Bill, it is up to you to accept the Bill he has brought or to reject it. 

Very soon I will be committing this Bill to the appropriate committee where everybody will be able to go including yourself. And I am not going to say within one day do return. It will be the function of this committee, after hearing views from various people including Members of Parliament and the public, that may come to the conclusion that this Bill should not have been presented; it should be returned. And you will be within your powers when you consider that vote to return the Bill. So, why do you deny receiving material that you will use to decide on this? 

Article 91: “Subject to provisions of this Constitution, the power of Parliament to make laws shall be exercised through Bills passed by Parliament....”  So, you can carry out your function by considering Bills. You may refuse to make the law by considering the Bill. Now the Bill has been presented to you; I am not saying you are going to pass it; no. You will be free to reject it; you will be free to reject 90 percent and put what you want there. So, what is the worry? 

Therefore, the question of staying the Bill does not arise. The Bill is committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament and I would advise that committee to work together on this Bill with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. (Applause) 

3.44
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division, North): Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, let us be honest with our electorate. It is our duty to explain to the public how the process of making the law goes. If the Cabinet is “cooking” a Bill, we cannot intervene in the “cooking” and ask if they have done all the consultations; that is up to them. If they did not consult, we will reject it. But let us do our work and let Cabinet do its work too. And I want to assure you that you will be given the time to make the consultations. Now that the document has become official, you will take it to the public and sensitise them about the good and bad things about it. 

I also want to advise the committee that in carrying out its functions, it should also consider going to places outside Parliament to get the views of the people about this Bill. So, I request this committee not to hurry up with this Bill; it has caused tension especially through the newspapers. Let all the people who want to give their views be given an opportunity so that you can use their contributions to make us a report.

MS BETI KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The protocols have been made by the Leader of the Opposition on behalf of the Opposition, so I will go straight to my comment. 

While I appreciate your guidance and the position that the Bill has been tabled, this is a very unusual situation. This situation is manifested in the unprecedented number of people that have come to the House today. We are here as servants of the people; we cannot pretend that it is not an unusual situation; we cannot pretend that there are no views outside there that we have got to listen to. The people of Buganda, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja, Teso, Busoga and all the others are saying, “Stay this Bill!” Mr Speaker, we must listen to the voice of the people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill having been read, and committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament, the best place to express your reservations would be the committee to which the Bill has been presented. And I would ask that committee to publish in the newspapers the venue and time when they are going to consider this Bill, and to appeal to whomever has a comment to make on this Bill to come to Parliament and present it in writing or orally. That is the only way – we must follow our Rules of Procedure. Our mandate is not to pass this Bill, but to consider it and make amendments that we think should be made in it.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I was about to complete – (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, you have clearly guided this House that those who have issues to raise about the Land (Amendment) Bill that has just been tabled should go to the committee to which it has been committed. So, is it in order for the honourable member to try to open up debate on the same Bill when you have already ruled?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I advise you to make a programme to meet people in your constituencies to explain the Bill to them and get their views; record your people’s views and bring them to the committee. 

But let us be honest and tell our constituents the procedure of handling the Bills. Parliament cannot handle a Bill before it is presented. We can only handle a Bill after it has been formerly presented. We cannot start consulting on Cabinet papers about a Bill that is not yet gazetted and given a number. That is not the proper way!

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I take in good spirit the advice you have advanced that some of us with strong reservations against this proposed amendment Bill should be following. However, I stand here to express further reservations in what I have seen in recent history. On the 15 of January this year, we had the honour, the privilege and opportunity to meet three distinguished Ugandans, alongside others who are equally important in the Buganda caucus. Among these were the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and the Attorney-General of the republic of Uganda. 

We consulted with them calmly as a caucus of the region and we all agreed in unison that there were loopholes in this amendment Bill. We also agreed that it was important to have strict preliminary consultations with: The President of the Republic of Uganda, the Kabaka’s Government at Mengo and several other stakeholders before Parliament reconvenes; all those consultations have not taken place. The result, Mr Speaker, of that action is an erosion of the faith of consultation with big people.  

I have discovered today, along with many Ugandans, that it is either useless or risky to deliberate with the Vice President or the Prime Minister or the Attorney-General, because it has manifested itself that they regarded this matter as having loopholes. They did not respect their word; they have brought the Bill here in bad spirit simply to defeat the sounds and voices of those who detest this law.  

Mr Speaker, we established a committee -(Interruption)

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, there was a caucus of Buganda, whatever they deliberated we are not in the know but the honourable member has made a very serious statement –(Ms Mugerwa rose_) (Laughter) 

MS SAUDA MUGERWA:  Mr Speaker, first of all, let me apologise to my Chief Whip and my party. When I rose she was facing the other side, she did not see me but I had already asked for a point of order, Madam Chief Whip. 

I stand on a point of order arising from what hon. Kyanjo and hon. Beti Kamya said.  It is true- first of all, let me declare that I am from Buganda. I also wish to inform you that for sometime in Buganda there has been mobilisation of the public about the anticipated Land (Amendment) Bill, 2007 which has been presented today.  It is true that the Buganda caucus met with the Vice President who is a Muganda and the Prime Minister who is a Muganda to discuss the anticipated Bill. This is because a copy of this anticipated Bill had leaked and the Buganda caucus had got a copy and we had looked at it. Most of the parts in this Bill are pertinent to Buganda.  

So, the Buganda caucus was very concerned about what we say in the House and we sat down as a family and discussed this anticipated Bill. We were advised by legal counsels that nobody can oppose any document, which is not gazetted, or submitted to Parliament; so, we had to wait for this submission. We were advised to wait for this Bill to be presented and then we tear it into pieces. This is the position we have reached. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it should be appreciated that this is a national Parliament and I am conscious of the fact that you have many caucuses depending on where you come from.  But, here I am not interested to hear what you discuss in your caucus –(Applause)- that is an internal matter.  Therefore, if somebody has offended the expected norm of a caucus you can go back in your caucus and handle that matter. I have no mandate to discipline people simply because they have not followed what was agreed on in the local caucus.  So, please, I am not interested to hear what is discussed in these caucuses.  

As I have said, the Bill has been presented and it has been sent to the appropriate Committee of Parliament. Please go to your constituencies, gather the views and bring them back to the committee. I do not expect this committee to bring a report in a week’s time. I do not even expect it to bring a report in a month’s time because what is involved is a serious matter, which they should consider and give it time so that you reach a just conclusion.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ATOMIC ENERGY BILL, 2007

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENERGY (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Atomic Energy Bill, 2007” be read for a first time.  Accompanying this Bill is a certificate of financial implications made under Section 10 of the Budget Act.  

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO CAPITALISE NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE CORPORATION LONG-TERM DEBT INTO EQUITY

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to capitalise National Water and Sewerage Corporation long term debts into equity. Government of Uganda has lent a number of unsecured loans to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation amounting to Shs 85 billion from various development partners. The accumulated interest on these loans as of June 2006 is 68.6 billion. The National Water and Sewerage Corporation – (Interruption)

MR KAWANGA:  Mr Speaker, the Minister is presenting a motion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a copy of the motion?

MR KAWANGA: Is he moving a motion or what? I do not have a copy of the motion.  Is he making a statement or what?

THE SPEAKER: What is the position? Do you have copies of the motion?

HON.MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: He might have distributed the motion sometime back– (Interruption)

HON.MEMBERS: No.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, all these documents and draft motion were distributed to all Members of this august House –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When?

MR OMACH: Last year in December. Mr Speaker, there is a report of the committee on the National Economy which will be given to support this motion.

PROF LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What the Minister said was right. The documents pertaining to this particular motion that he proposes to move were circulated and included a draft motion. What we are asking for is not the draft motion. Now that you have drafted, reviewed and you want to move the motion, where is it? This is because what you circulated, in your words, was a draft motion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To begin with, National Water and Sewerage Corporation is a company owned 100 percent by Government of Uganda and it is a company making profit. When you say you want to help the Minister of Finance and give him technical knowledge and you talk about long-term debt becoming equity, that means that there must be a resolution from the company saying, “We need money to capitalize the company from 1000 to whatever it is”. So, what we need here is not the draft motion that you are talking about but a resolution from the company or corporation and the one that you want to present so that you capitalize instead of just speaking.

THE SPEAKER: I think that from what has transpired it is necessary to give the owner of the motion time to organise all the necessary papers so that members get copies before dealing with this motion. So, I suggest we should stand it over.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA TOURISM BILL, 2007

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007 be read a second time. 

Mr Speaker, the object of the Bill is to reform, consolidate and streamline roles relating to tourism and in particular to set standards for service within the tourism sector; to provide for licensing, regulating and controlling of the tourism sector; to give effect to the implementation of the tourism policy for Uganda; to recommend to Uganda Tourism Board that it be private sector driven; to establish a tourism development levy and to establish a tourism development fund. The Bill designates the board as the Uganda Tourism Board.

Mr Speaker, this Bill was sent to the committee and together we have looked at each of the clauses. The chairman of the committee will present the report for me.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the chairman of the committee? Have the reports been distributed?

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the issue that I wanted to raise. Yes, it is true that we received copies of the Bill but since we have been on recess, we didn’t get adequate time and notice that this matter would come. This is the first sitting and we don’t have these copies. I pray that we be given adequate time to carry copies of our Bills and go through the report so that we can make meaningful contribution to this Bill, which is very important. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You are put on notice that these two subjects will be dealt with tomorrow. This will give you sufficient time to go to your offices, get the reports and read them so that we can handle the two issues tomorrow. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have no intention of reopening what this House has already discussed but I would like to ask, if it is possible, to consider a period where Parliament will not sit for about one week to allow us undertake the consultation you have advised. That is my request.

THE SPEAKER: Give me time, maybe after this week I will consider this so that you can go and consult your people. I cannot say when exactly. But give me time so that we can look into this as the Business Committee so that there is no excuse for any of you to say you did not have time to make consultations. 

Apparently, it appears that there are many items, which will face the same problems as these two. So, I appeal to you to examine the Order Paper, see the kind of business that has been lined up, collect your documents and study them so that when time comes to consider the business, you are ready to make meaningful contributions.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. You directed that the Land (Amendment) Bill 2007 is referred to the relevant committee and that it should be handled together with the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. I thought that you would give clear directions as to whether the Bill is going to be jointly handled or in consultation. What did you mean? We did not get this clearly.

THE SPEAKER: The head of this committee will be the chairman of the committee. But I think that in view of the importance of this Bill and the heat that has been generated, I think that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee should jointly handle it. However, the usual committee will do the reporting. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I request that since it is going to be handled jointly, let us make a joint report. I sit on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and I wouldn’t want to sit in the proceedings when I am not even going to append my signature on the report. I pray that we make a joint report, that is, the ordinary committee and the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.

THE SPEAKER: What I suggest is that the two committees sit and make the recommendations; Parliament will definitely accept them. What we are interested in is a well-researched report. This is an important law according to the feelings that have been generated and what we need is a good report at the end of the day. As a committee, have the first meeting, discuss the modalities and how to proceed.

MR OKUPA: Just to avoid us having the same problem like we have just got into now, I request you to direct these committees to avail Members these reports because this business of bringing the reports when they are just going to be read from here is not helpful to us. It does not give us time to analyse these reports. If these reports can be availed to us either early in the morning on the day they are going to be discussed or during lunchtime such that by the time we get in here we have read them. But to bring a report when it is going to be read here is quite difficult. If you could direct that – because there are about four reports that we have decided to push to tomorrow – if these can be availed now or tomorrow morning; up to now we do not have them.

THE SPEAKER: No, the reaction I received was that the reports were given but that was last year and because of recess, maybe you were not able to trace them today. You try to trace the reports; tomorrow we shall see what to do. There is also business on National Economy on a certain loan. Hon. Kadunabbi, what is this loan?

MR KADUNABBI: The loan for National Water and Sewerage Corporation, the resolution was given to each Member and my committee last year in December got copies. We moved ahead and we have the report ready –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Distribute it if you have not and then we shall be able to accommodate you on the Order Paper soonest.

MR KADUNABBI: The Clerk has it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: At least I am not in the queue. Mr Speaker, we want to know how the Committee of National Economy went ahead to discuss a motion which has not been presented to Parliament. If it is true it was presented to Parliament, then what is the Minister talking about the draft? There will be no need of a draft; if you got the original, which is final, then why don’t we have it?

MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker, the request was brought to Parliament – I am not the Minister – but I think he called it a draft because before Parliament pronounces itself on any motion, it is still a draft. Parliament can decide to change some of the wordings in the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe it was a problem of language but then he has explained. With this, we come to the end of today’s business. Please go and check in your records for these reports and motions so that tomorrow we can continue with the business. Business is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)
