Thursday, 4 February 2010

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. In the gallery are students from the International School of Uganda. They are here to observe proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda has negotiated two financing instruments of US $12.7 million and US $22.95 million from the Saudi Fund for Development and OPEC Fund for International Development respectively for financing the construction of 14 technical institutes in the Technical, Vocational Education and Training Programme. 

I hereby wish to lay on the Table a proposal requesting Parliament to secure US $12.7 million and another US $22.95 million from the Saudi Fund for Development and the OPEC Fund for International Development respectively for financing the construction and equipping of the 14 technical institutes in the Technical, Vocational Education and Training Programme. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the appropriate committee handle the two requests and subsequently report to the House for necessary action. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING BILL, 2008

Clause 1
MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I want to make amendments to clause 1 by adding the words, “within 90 days after gazetting” after the word “force”, and deleting the words “on a date appointed by the minister”. Justification: to avoid unnecessary delay. 

MR KAWANGA: I have looked at this amendment and I do not think it is an improvement on the Bill. It is even unrealistic. I think the original draft is much more realistic. This is a Bill, which is going to be implemented in the whole country where facilities are not yet on the ground. So, the minister should be given leeway to bring it into force when he is ready. Otherwise, stampeding it within 90 days is unrealistic to me. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, the 90 days is for gazetting. If you continue reading on, I said you delete the words, “on the date appointed by the minister”. After that, there are provisions for the minister to give different days depending on the necessity.

THE CHAIRMAN: How would the provision read? 

MR BYANDALA: Mine would read: “This Act shall come into force within 90 days after gazetting by statutory instrument and different dates may be appointed for the commencement of different provisions.” 

MR TIBAMANYA: Mr Chairman, I would maintain the original draft. I am anxious to have it in force, but since many areas may have different dates, then I should be given leeway as to when this Act should come into force.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any further reconsiderations chairman?

MR BYANDALA: Since the minister has assured us that he is anxious to have this operationalised, I concede. 

MR WACHA: Thank you. I am very uneasy about the second part of the clause. The part which says, “… and different dates may be appointed for the commencement of different provisions.”

We have had provisions like these in other Acts of Parliament. A case in point is the Traffic and Road Safety Act, which we passed and it has become a subject of negotiations with the offenders of certain sections – the taxi drivers and taxi owners. They do not want certain parts implemented and they keep on blackmailing the minister and the minister keeps on accepting it. 

I think that when government comes with a law like this, it must know that it is going to be resisted. The less areas of resistance it gives to the offenders or the people who are going to be affected, the better for government. I would therefore move, Mr Chairman, that we delete any other word which appears after “statutory instrument” and leave the clause to read thus: “This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. What he is saying is that once you appoint the date, the Act becomes effective. For administrative enforcement, that could be different but as far as the Act is concerned, people should be aware that the Act is in force. 

MR TIBAMANYA: Mr Chairman, this Act is going to apply to a certain section of our population for the first time, in particular the people in the rural areas who have never heard of physical planning. We can be very quick to operationalise it in the urban areas but I think it would be wrong to equate the sub-county level with the urban authorities. That is why I say that I should be given leeway to first go and sensitise the sub-county communities before I can say this Act applies to them. So, I request my brother to consider that and withdraw the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, if you consider rural and urban areas, won’t you be accused of discrimination? You cannot say, “You are rural”. Why do you take that blame when you have actually made the law and the law is for everybody? All should be treated equally; different treatment may invite a legal challenge. So, how do we stand?

MR TIBAMANYA: With the chairman’s advice, I concede. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I suggest that I put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. Ben Wacha to delete part of the existing portion so that we stop at “instrument”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, on clause 5(2), I want to replace “four” with “five”. The justification is to increase public participation and also clause 5 - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us go slowly. We are on clause 5, on the establishment of the National Physical Planning Board.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I wanted to be systematic and start with 5(2), to replace the word “four” -

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 5(2)?

MR BYANDALA: Yes, clause 5(2).

THE CHAIRMAN: Where? We are dealing with clause 5 in the Bill. What do you propose to do with that formulation in the Bill? I am not concerned with your report. You can use your report to tell me what you want to do with the Bill.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, 5(2) should read as follows: “The board shall consist of nine members appointed by the minister of whom four - instead of ‘four’ put ‘five’ - shall be persons not employed in the public service.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Why do you say five instead of four?

MR BYANDALA: We want more participation by the public.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that clear? 

MR OLENY: Mr Chairman, the professionals that the minister is to appoint, in my view, needed to be specified because this board would basically be of a technical nature. It would be important in this law to be specific in order to help the minister particularly to cover some of the professional bodies, like we did for UNRA and the Road Fund. We needed to specify certain bodies which should constitute membership of the board at national level. (Ms Tubwita rose_)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, can’t you wait for clause 6? Maybe that would be the proper home for qualifications. Since they talk about gender, maybe you can talk about this and the other?

MS TUBWITA: Mr Chairman, actually my point was somehow connected to what hon. Oleny was saying. I do not think clause 6 will bring it out properly. Here we can even specify where we want the people to come from, even those from the private sector. I had tried to come up with a proposal and I was requesting that the amendment that -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us proceed this way: the committee has proposed that the number is increased from four to five. Is it agreed on? 

MS TUBWITA: Actually, Mr Speaker, I feel the number should remain as it is in the Bill because of the fact that it is going to be a technical committee. Also, appointing from the private sector might take time. I feel it is better for the public service to have at least a quorum of five people other than less than five, so that it allows the minister to appoint the members.

THE CHAIRMAN: The issue is that the original formulation was talking about four and because the committee wanted to widen it, it has increased it to five. Are you opposed to that? We can talk about the qualifications of the four but let us first of all deal with the issue of the number. Is there any harm in increasing the number to five? So, the figure of five is agreed on. Now, what else do you want?

MS TUBWITA: Mr Chairman, I still do not agree with the amendment. I feel the figure should remain four because when you look at the participation which I am -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: We are going to vote on it; if you want to say “four” and others say “five”, we shall vote.

MS TUBWITA: I want to justify. I think that we could have representatives from different ministries. I am proposing that we have a person from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, one from the Ministry of Works and Transport, one from the Ministry of Water and Environment and then we can have a person from the Economic Planning Authority. The other four from public service should then be from the following professionals –

THE CHAIRMAN: What are you saying, hon. Member? It seems you are suggesting a higher figure than four.

MS TUBWITA: No, they are five. They are supposed to be nine. The ones from the ministries are five plus the four from public service, which will take the figure to nine.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I stand to support my chairman. The committee thought that the minister should be in the know on where to source the kind of people competent enough to serve on the board. It was also appreciated that within the private sector, there are professionals and this meant that the numbers should be increased. These can be got from the private sector.

MR ODIT: Mr Chairman, during the debate there was a justification for introducing this new Bill; Government felt that the previous Bill, which is repealed, involves more civil servants in the centralised planning. Now we want to decentralise and open up to the public for participation. Therefore, I would go with five for those who are not employed in public service and then we scale the number of bureaucrats who are in government service down.

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I would accept that the various disciplines from which these people are going to come are identified in the Bill, the sort of things that hon. Tubwita was talking about. However, this one should be restricted to those people who are not employed in public service.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I think that can be clarified when we get to 5(6).

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we take it that the home should be in 5(6). I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee that five out of the nine should be people who are not employed in public service.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I propose that clause 5(6) is amended to read as follows: “In making appointments to the board, the minister shall take into consideration gender equity and relevant professional qualifications”. This is where we can cater for hon. Ben Wacha’s suggestion. 

THE CHAIRMAN: When you say “relevant”, what do you mean; what are the relevant professions? What you need to do is to be clear on the relevant professions which you think should serve in this authority.

MS TUBWITA: I would like to propose the professions that should be considered: physical planning, civil engineering, lands and surveying, architecture and maybe environmental management. I am proposing these professions because physical planning is a multi-disciplinary profession which works in relation with other professions. I feel that if these are included, they can help each other to make sure that they come out with substantive work.

MR OKUPA: I just want to add and say that because this is planning, we need to include the profession of land economics.

MR AMURIAT: I think we are really widening this provision. The list could be endless. I could add on the list social scientists and other members could come up with other proposals. It makes the provision extremely lengthy. Also, given the fact that we are limited by numbers, we may not be able to accommodate the professionals that we would wish to accommodate.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe what we can do is to say that appropriate professionals should be recruited.

MR ANGIRO: Mr Chairman that would leave an area that can be abused. If we are not careful, we shall find that this may be to the benefit of a particular party. Therefore, if we can mention which technical people are needed and it is adhered to, it would help a lot.

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem clearly came out when hon. Tubwita was trying to enumerate the professionals needed. There are so many who could qualify. So, leave it to the minister and let him be guided by the fact that the person he appoints has the appropriate knowledge and qualifications.

MR OKUPA: We have a problem here. In the Constitution we have specifications for RDCs but when it comes to this, some of them have problems. So, at least as a guide we can have those enumerated by hon. Tubwita here. There are other officials within the ministry who can be picked but at least for these ones coming from the private sector, let us go by those three or four professions that have been enumerated.

THE CHAIRMAN: What will happen if he leaves out another category?

MR OKUPA: We are leaving that to the ministry. At least we would have specified those they are going to pick from the private sector.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us decide on whether we should enumerate or leave it in general terms. Those who think in general terms, say aye and those to the contrary, nay.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Can I now propose the general terms? After “gender equity” we continue with, “…and appropriate technical qualifications of the appointees”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I want clause 6(3) amended to read as follows: “If he or she does not attend three or more consecutive meetings of the board without showing in writing to the chairperson good cause for his or her absence ….” In other words, I am removing “minister” and putting “chairperson”. 

This reads: “A member may be removed from office by the minister ….” The gist is on “informing” because when they are going to sit, they won’t be reporting to the minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: Agreed, but then there will be a report given that a particular member has not attended or is not attending and then the appointing authority, who is the minister, disappoints.

MR TIBAMANYA: Yes, Mr Chairman, that is so; he who appoints is the one who disappoints and this notice should be given to him.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I propose to amend clause 7(1)(i) to read as follows: “To cause physical development plans to be prepared at national and regional levels.” The justification is that local governments and not the board are responsible for causing these to be prepared at lower levels. The planning is under the jurisdiction of the district boards.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is really a matter of details. You will be able to traverse the entire region that you are planning for, taking into account sub-counties and parishes. Once you are given authority to plan for a region, what do you mean by that? 

MR KALIBA: Mr Chairman, these lower levels submit to the higher levels but the one who causes these ones to be prepared are found at local levels in the districts.

THE CHAIRMAN: I don’t know whether that brings any -

MR KALIBA: Mr Chairman, I do not think I agree with the chairman because one of the objectives of the Bill, as he read, states, “The Bill introduces different levels of planning with specific mandates of functions, linkages and approvals. This will lead to public participation in planning and implementation. The Bill establishes a National Planning Board and district and urban physical planning committees responsible for planning.” This means that we cannot stop at national and regional levels only when actually in the Bill somewhere we are establishing other boards at different levels.

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, we are talking of a National Physical Planning Board. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable, when you talk about “national”, it is responsible for the entire nation and is responsible to ensure that the small functionary committees do their work, and that is what the “causing” means. They may not physically go there, but they make sure that those small ones also carry out their work for purposes of planning.

MR TIBAMANYA: Mr Chairman, the board should be able to traverse the whole of Uganda at all levels and therefore this section should remain as it is.

MR KAWANGA: If he is to understand this better, he has to go back to the heading – “The functions of the boards are…” and then you mention them. Surely, that which has been mentioned is so nice and detailed that it should be kept as it is. It is itemising functions, so why should you change them?

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, I think it is the same as 6.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR BYANDALA: I would like to introduce a new sub-section called (a) in clause 13, and change the numbering of the subsequent sub-sections accordingly. 

    (i) (a) To cause to be prepared urban and local physical development plans and detailed plans.

(ii) 	Change all sub-sections to begin with “To” and change the tense. 

That is the format for the second part.

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, read it.

MR BYANDALA: I am saying that we are introducing a new sub-clause, which will read as follows: “To cause to be prepared, urban and local physical development plans and detailed plans.” The justification is that this is the primary function of the urban physical planning committees and therefore should come first.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are adding another function. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

MR BYANDALA: The second one is about just the drafting. Where it reads “recommending” in (a), it should be re-phrased to start with “to recommend” and then change the sentences thereafter. Instead of starting with recommending, start with “to recommend.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR BYANDALA: I would like clause 14 to be amended as follows. “A sub-county executive council shall constitute the local physical planning committee.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do you leave it to the executive and not the council? What harm is there? The executive can recommend to the council but why do you want to deprive the council a part to play? 

MR BYANDALA: We thought it was too big.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: We do not have anything known as executive council; we only have executive committee of the council, not executive council. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Normally, what is done is that the executive committee of the council recommends so that the whole thing is owned by the council. I think he has abandoned it. Is it okay?

MR BYANDALA: It is okay, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR BYANDALA: Clause 15 is also a question of drafting. We should replace “recommending” with “to recommend.” 

MR OKUPA: There is nothing to change because if you read the flow of the sentence, if you introduce “to,” it looks a bit vague. It should remain the way it is drafted because it flows.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to. 

Clause 17, agreed to. 

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to. 

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR BYANDALA: Clause 21 should read as follows: “The board may, after giving sufficient notice to the public, reduce the 90 days period for displaying of a physical development plan.” The justification is that it is expected that with more community participation in the planning process -  

THE CHAIRMAN: Which part of 21 are you dealing with?

MR BYANDALA: 21(4)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, read it.

MR BYANDALA: 21(4) should read as follows: “The board shall, after giving sufficient notice to the public, reduce the 90 days period for displaying of a physical development plan.” The justification is that it is expected that with more community participation in the planning process, it is going to be less necessary to have long display periods. Some planning exercises may be funded by resources from donors with clear time limits, which could be jeopardised by the long display periods. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The committee has proposed amendments, any comments?

MR KAWANGA: According to the experience we have with our people, it is better to have definite periods and keep it at that to avoid further arguments. We should not change the format as it is in the Bill. 

MR BYANDALA: When we met the ministry officials, they had a problem. There are many projects for which they had received money and the stipulated days were a problem.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the formulation under 21(4) is, “The board may….” “May” is permissive. They can dispense with or reduce the 90 days period for displaying of physical development plans. That is, the board can, in its wisdom, reduce.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR BYANDALA: I would like to introduce a new sub-section (1) and change the numbering of the sub section accordingly. The new sub-section should read: “A district urban and sub-county physical planning committee shall cause to be prepared a district urban physical development plan respectively.” The justification is that it is their primary responsibility to ensure that the plans are in place. The only request should be for the services of the secretary to the board when required. 

MR KAWANGA: The word “respectively,” which appears at the end of the sentence should have been somewhere in the middle rather than at the end of the sentence. “A district urban and sub-county physical planning committee shall cause to be prepared a district urban physical development plans respectively.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Perhaps what he is saying is that you should stop at “plan.” 

MR KAWANGA: That is right, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: “Respectively,” has been deleted. I now put the question to it.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

 Clause 51, agreed to.

 Clause 52, agreed to.

 Clause 53, agreed to.

 Clause 54, agreed to.

 Clause 55, agreed to.

 Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

The first schedule, agreed to.

The second schedule, agreed to.

The third schedule, agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule

MR BYANDALA: I would like to make an amendment to the fourth schedule under implementation No. 8: “The sector approach to development and measures for implementation and coordination in these sectors namely; industrial development, housing, transportation, health services, education, water supply, sewerage, electricity supply and environment.” The justification is that environment is a serious issue to be considered. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Fourth Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Fifth Schedule

MR BYANDALA: I would like to make an amendment to the fifth schedule No.9. I request that we insert, between the words, “telecommunications” and “water” the following, “as may be provided for in the national original physical development plans.” Therefore, it should read as follows; “Probable routes for railway and canals, probable sites for bridges, docks, harbours, piers, quarries, power lines, telecommunications” - and that is where we should insert the words that have been talked about - “as may be provided for in the national or regional physical development plans, water drainage and sewerage or any other work or undertaking of a public utility.” The justification is to ensure that the district urban and local planning is guided by national and regional planning frameworks. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I understand this is in your report. 

MR OLENY: Mr Chairman, I beg to differ with the chairman of the committee because this is already a specified responsibility. We have already said that these are matters to be dealt with in the district urban local and physical development plans. So, we recall that the physical planning has already been segmented and therefore to this extent, this is dealing with the districts. Therefore, I thought there would be no need again to say, “in accordance to” because they will have already made their own plans which would have already been approved. 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Chairman, this is a matter of emphasis. We want to ensure that these people are constantly reminded that the plans on which they are going to give these routes are in conformity with the plans at the higher level.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and negatived.)

The Fifth Schedule, agreed to.

The Sixth Schedule, agreed to.

The Seventh Schedule, agreed to.

The Eighth Schedule, agreed to.

The Ninth Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I would like to move that the House recommits clause 3 of the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: What for? Can you explain?

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, as you noticed, this is a very novel creation of an ultimate. First of all, what is the purpose of guiding principles in a Bill? Are the principles justifiable? What happens if one of these principles is not followed? What is the remedy? Under normal circumstances, this sort of thing would appear in the memorandum of the Bill as an explanation as to what will happen and what the reasoning of the Bill is but it is never provided for in the body of the Bill because the body of the Bill is supposed to cater for areas which are going to be applied and which have sanctions if not applied; but what are provisions which cannot have sanctions doing inside the body of the Bill? 

THE SPEAKER: You have made your case. First of all, let us allow him report and then you can make that application before we pronounce ourselves on the third reading, and then we can recommit. 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Speaker, the committee of the whole House has considered the Physical Planning Bill, 2008 and passed it with amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING BILL, 2008

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planning Bill, 2008” be read for the third time and do pass. 

3.45
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Oyam): Mr Speaker, I move that the House recommits clause 3 of the Bill. I am moving this for purposes of deleting the whole clause because it serves no purpose in the body of the Bill. It cannot be implemented and the best place it should have been is in the memorandum of the Bill. This one will just cause confusion because we do not know what will happen if one of these principles is not followed by the various entities. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING BILL, 2008

Clause 3
MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I move that clause 3 of the Bill be deleted. The provisions in this clause are misplaced because they are in the body of the Bill and yet there are guidelines which, to me, cannot be implemented and cannot be enforced but there seems to be a general assumption that there is a mandatory element that they should be enforced. But supposing they are not enforced or supposing they are not followed, what do we do? Are these principles justifiable? Can they be challenged in court that the board has not done this because they have not followed clause 3? The best place in which this provision should have been is the memorandum, which would have guided us as to the underlying feelings of the Bill but certainly not within the Bill. I beg to move that this clause be deleted. 

MR TIBAMANYA: Mr Chairman, I wish to agree with the mover of the motion and I wish to state that this section will be taken care of in the preamble to the enabling rules and regulations that I will make. So, I agree that this section be deleted. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, deleted.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE


3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Speaker, the committee of the whole House has reconsidered the Physical Planning Bill, 2008, and deleted clause 3. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING BILL, 2008

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planning Bill, 2008” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PHYSICAL PLANNING ACT, 2010.”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members, the Bill passed. 

3.54 
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, yesterday during the debate, there are issues which Members raised which I feel the minister should have captured and responded to. We have just passed this Bill and the matters which were raised relate to the implementation of this Bill. We have seen areas where there has been total abuse by people even in higher authorities, who are supposed to guide the public. 

I gave an example of the structure which is being put up by Mr Karugire on the Lugogo bypass. We were grateful when the Minister of Works stopped KCC from putting up a roundabout where it was not fit. We thought the Minister of Works would go ahead with the same spirit and stop irresponsible members of this country who abuse the laws with impunity. I raised that matter yesterday and I raised it before we broke off for Christmas. At least we should be able to hear from the minister, what he is going to do or what he has done or if he needs the assistance of the Committee on Local Government Accounts to summon KCC city engineers. Let them be summoned and we put them to task to explain other than lamenting all the time while nothing is being done. 

3.56 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, it is true that hon. Okupa raised this issue in this House and I took it up and I stopped the construction at that site pending the investigations on how he got approval from KCC. They have submitted documents to the Ministry of Works and we have found out that he went through all the steps and got all the approvals from KCC and we have instructed KCC to take action as we did on the road. They should take action and own their mistakes which they have committed, not only on that building but in many areas including even in communications. So, I will come and report to this House after we have gone through all that. I thank you. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I see that there is a problem with the response of the Minister of State for Works and Transport in that as we speak, construction is ongoing on this site and actually, it is tending towards roofing level and I think if activities have to continue this way, the interventions may become more expensive in the future. I do not know whether it is beyond the powers of the minister as the investigations are taking place to temporarily stop activities continuing on this site so that when conclusions are made, it is then possible to either terminate the construction altogether or ask them to carry out some remedies to what they are doing.

As it were now, the argument of the developer tomorrow will be that, “Well, you waited for me to complete my structure and now you want it demolished!” It becomes extremely difficult and also unrealistic to demolish that structure, which should really be the recommendation in this case. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, this is private property and the developer went through all the normal stages of getting approval. By stopping him, I wanted to know whether the structures were approved or not, who approved them and why they were approved in such a manner. But when it went to KCC, this developer pinned KCC that they had approved his structure and that if they stopped him, they must pay him because it is within the powers of KCC. Mine was to intervene and find out whether it was done legally or illegally and I think that is why KCC has gone ahead to allow this person to continue constructing and this is the same story with Nakumatt. You remember the story of Nakumatt - and usually these people hide under -(Mr Birekeraawo rose_) let me first finish. They hide under pressure from above, which is not true at all, because they are using it as a cover.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister for being so open and sincere to us, but it now makes all the efforts that we made in this House, yesterday and today, futile, if we are going to be here and we enact laws and they are being trampled upon with impunity.

Assuming that building which is on Lugogo Bypass was being constructed by hon. Wadri, do you really think the status quo would have been the same? The other time the Chairman, Kampala Central Division, was here stuck with his construction. Later on his construction in the wetland was demolished and yet everyday we see structures coming up in wetlands. 

When you go to Kawanda, that wetland is no longer there. Truckloads of sand, soil and murram are being brought and the wetland filled yet here we are saying we have suspended that. Yesterday evening when I passed that route -(Interjections)- you do not have to go to engineering school to know that constructing a building which touches on the tarmac is illegal. 

Honestly, let us be frank and fair to this country. With what we have seen there, it will be very unjustified if anybody loses property because he is adjudged to have constructed a building which is not in conformity with the law, when we have got examples.

I am sure this issue of saying that we should not rely on pressure from above, I think that is the truth. Mr Karugire is not an ordinary Ugandan; he is the son-in-law of the first family and I think that is the reason why that construction was allowed. If it was Wadri, it would have been demolished or charged at the foundation level and would not have reached the level at which it is. I think let us be serious, let us be exemplary. This is a litmus test for government as to whether these laws that we have just passed are going to be implemented. If we are not going to do so, and we are just going to toss things around, we are in for a big show in this country. Please, assist us.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister has just informed this House that he halted the construction pending his investigations. Can the honourable minister inform this House whether he was satisfied after seeing the reports? 

As a minister in charge, were you satisfied by the reports and if not -(Interjection)- you cannot just tell us that because KCC did something wrong, therefore, you are going by what they did. You as a minister in this House and in charge, were you satisfied and are you happy?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I feel very worried having heard what the minister has just told us. For a minister to come to this Parliament and say that as long as you go through the right procedure, even if you are building in the middle of the road you are right; it is very worrying. 

It is a fact that in this country, if you have money, you will go through the right procedure in one day and you will get all the stamps in one day. If we are to go by that method, then let us forget this country. This city is zoned; there are residential areas, there are commercial areas and industrial areas. But as I speak now, you find a ten-storied building coming up next to your residence in Nakasero, in Kololo and everywhere. What is happening? Is there anybody in charge of this country? I think it is very unfortunate.

Once the law is breached, we should make sure that whoever has breached the law is punished. The last time I was in London, I read something in the papers about six high-rise buildings, taller than Crested Towers in a place called Dockland Yard. They failed a smoke test which we do not have here. They release smoke on one flow and if it smells on the other side, the machine on the other side moves. All the six buildings were pulled down. That is where law and order exists. Can it happen in this country? 

If you follow the road by the Police barracks going to Ntinda, somebody extended his plot into the road reserve, built a fence day and night within two days; the fence is now in the road reserve; the only one shooting out there. The man is here at his home; the law is here; the city council is here; the minister is here and everybody is here; what is happening in this country? It is very unfortunate. I think we should start sticking to the law. The laws we pass here should be followed. Otherwise, we are wasting taxpayers’ money passing the law in this Parliament. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, as a Minister of Works and Transport in waiting, I feel very worried about the safety of the motoring public along Lugogo Bypass. This particular construction poses a threat to the safety of road users and I think it should be in the best interests of the line minister to take action. That road is no longer secure so long as that building continues to stand next to it.

I would like to pose a question to the minister: has that road ever had anything called a road reserve? The purpose of a road reserve is precisely to help with possible expansion of our road infrastructure and also to guarantee safety of road users. In this case, there is a danger to road users. 

I would also like to ask the minister if there is insistence that construction progresses in this building. What is his ministry prepared to do to secure the lives of people who continue to use this road? 

4.09
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday when I was contributing to the Physical Planning Bill, I said that if the planners, in this case, if Kampala City Council approved the building plans of that building, I am certain that those plans did not include the road reserves; that must have happened during construction. 

Fortunately, hon. Byandala who was Kampala’s city engineer should help us since he is in this House. After approving the plans, who follows up during construction? Do you inspect as the construction goes on? If a builder on his own encroaches on the road reserve, or on the neighbour’s plot, like mine or hers, what do you do? So, where do we go? (Laughter) Do we again go to Kampala City Council? And in this case, the road reserve is a government or a KCC road reserve. So, is there an inspector who follows up during construction, or is it just total anarchy? 

Apparently, is that the duty of the Ministry of Works really? Isn’t that the duty of KCC or some inspectorate which should follow up as to whether the construction has adhered to the approved plans?  We are just roasting the honourable minister but may be these things happened because of laxity, total anarchy, lack of responsibility, failure of KCC et cetera. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.11
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, I think that the Bill we have just passed is meant to correct the anomalies in planning that we have had. There is no doubt that this country is in problems as far as planning is concerned. 

The problem that I envisage is that while the laws are being put in place, implementation is going to be difficult. And I think that the problem does not apply only when it comes to individuals, I think that it is the general rot within our society; it is nothing but corruption. Anybody with money in this country and knows how to bribe will go to Kampala City Council and get their plans approved; that we know. It does not matter whether you are coming from the first family or which family. That is a fact. If we carry out statistics on the buildings that are in Kampala alone, they cannot all belong to members of the first family alone. I think we need to deal with principles rather than attacking individuals. 

All the green of this country -(Interruption)- let me finish; you had your turn. All the greens in this town have been over time filled with buildings; do all these buildings belong to just one family? All the wetlands have been filled with buildings; do they belong to one family? We need to deal with issues on principle. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MRS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. If I listened very well, I heard the minister of state informing this House that he would carry out a thorough investigation and he would be able to present on the Floor of this House. 

Members are presenting very pertinent issues; but I am wondering whether we are not going to debate when the report comes because it is like we are debating another issue. I am just seeking guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Yeah, hon. Members. This came as a by-the-way from hon. Elijah Okupa after we had finished pronouncing ourselves on the passing of the Bill. He was just raising something that had been raised last time and the minister gave a report that he had seen it. But I think he claims that he is not happy to handle this matter because it is KCC which passes these drawings. 

So, what we can do is to ask the minister, having visited the area, to liaise with KCC, whether it actually authorised this construction or not. And if it is found to be in the road reserve, what is going to happen? I think we shall follow up the matter. Otherwise, it was not an item on our agenda. So, maybe hon. Minister, you will be in position to bring us a report from KCC about your findings.    

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, I rise to, first of all, thank hon. Ben Wacha for aiding this House to avoid making a blunder. But I would also take this opportunity to express my concern about the due process through which our drafts people go through in order to bring Bills to this House. Just imagine that hon. Wacha did not point this out and we went ahead, especially for me who is a lay legislator as far as legal aspects are concerned. 

I wanted to put on record -

THE SPEAKER: No, what has happened has happened. It did happen, even in the Constituent Assembly where I was a Member, and the draft committee had recommended a chapter on what we call, “National Objective and Directive Principles of State Policy.” I think we are copying the same thing; it is not new. What we did was to delete it and there was no problem; but in the Constitution somebody had attempted to make it a whole chapter.

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE PETITION OF THE BANNAKAZADDE WOMEN’S GROUP ON THE STATE OF THE SICKLE CELL UNIT OF MULAGO HOSPITAL

4.18
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Rosemary Seninde): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Social Services on the Petition of the Bannakazadde Women’s Group on the state of the Sickle Cell Unit of Mulago Hospital.

In accordance with rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, hon. Zirabamuzaale Magoola, the Iganga District Woman Representative, presented to this House a petition by Bannakazadde Women’s Group on the status of the Sickle Cell unit of Mulago Hospital on Thursday, 13 March 2008. 

The petition was referred to the Committee on Social Services for scrutiny and report back to Parliament. I would like to report that the committee scrutinised the petition by holding meetings with a number of stakeholders as indicated on page one.

The Sickle Cell disease is an inherited blood disorder that affects red blood cells. People with sickle cells have red blood cells that mostly contain haemoglobin - an abnormal type of haemoglobin. Sometimes these red blood cells become sickle shaped and have difficulty passing through small blood vessels.

Mr Speaker, I might not go into the details of describing how the sickle cell looks like because it is clearly indicated in Annex 1. 

The petitioners had a number of issues among which was about the sickle cell specialised facility that handles sickle cell patients in the whole nation. None of the referral hospitals in the country has the component of a specialised sickle cell unit. The unit has no wards for in-patients yet the situation of some of them demands that they keep near the facility for close medical attention. 

The available facilities are only for children, yet adults too suffer from this disease. Some adult sufferers of Sickle Cell are handled from the paediatrics ward, especially in the night.

There are no waiting rooms for the patients and so they are forced to wait outside under the scorching sun and rain bearing in mind that many of them may be under attacks. The clinic is also understaffed compared to the work the personnel handle.

Mr Speaker, the petitioners seek the indulgence of Parliament and pray that it resolves that:

    1. Government constructs a permanent sickle cell structure, furnishes and staffs it, and provides the necessary drugs for the patients;

    2. There should be a government policy that every regional and district referral hospital operates a sickle cell unit; and

    3. The Ministry of Health should create an in-patient sickle cell ward at Mulago Hospital and at all other referral hospitals for patients who may require close medical attention.

The committee made a number of observations and findings on the basis of which, we came up with some recommendations:

The committee noted that issues raised by the petitioners bordered closely with both policy and management. The overcrowding at Mulago Hospital compromises its capacity to offer specialised tertiary care. 

The sickle cell unit is very congested; it has got two small rooms, one of which accommodates the patients while the other serves as a kitchen, a small office and store at the same time. This leaves some patients lying on the floor.

Due to this limitation in space, some equipment donated to the unit by the rotary club had to be stored elsewhere without being put to use, while others are just kept under the tables.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the sickle cell unit of Mulago Hospital, being a national referral hospital, be expanded to ease congestion. 

As a medium-term strategy, Mulago Hospital Management committee embarked on the completion of a new structure currently under construction, by January 2010 using resources from the hospital capital budget.

Because of the intervention of the committee, I would like to inform the House that as we speak, this structure is being roofed and we appreciate that. 

In addition, Kampala City Council Clinics should be empowered to ease the pressure on Mulago Hospital.

In the long term, the Mulago Hospital master plan should effectively address the problem of inadequacy in terms of space.

Our other observation is that the unit is entirely an out-patient one operating from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. The manpower gap at Mulago Hospital has impeded the capacity of the unit to run beyond 5.00 p.m. In-patient admissions are catered for by the general ward.

Mulago Hospital should put in place, mechanisms for timely orders for drugs from the National Medical Stores and ensure essential drugs used in the management of sickle cell are added to that list.

We recommend that all public health facilities ensure that drugs are available to meet the needs of patients of sickle cell disease. 

The pneumococcal conjugate vaccine is not on the vaccine schedule yet it helps in mitigating the rates of invasion, and pneumococcal disease among children with the sickle cell disease.

Currently, Mr Speaker and honourable members, those in need of the vaccine have to access it from private clinics expensively. 

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health expedites the process of the inclusion of the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine on the schedule.

The other observation is that the diagnosis using the haemoglobin electrophoresis machine was not being conducted because of the unavailability of the requisite reagent, yet electrophoresis is crucial for the detection of abnormal haemoglobins such as Haemoglobin S, which is responsible for the condition of the sickle cell disease.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Mulago Hospital avails the requisite reagents and immediately commissions the haemoglobin electrophoresis machine, of course with the help of the ministry.

The estimation of the national sickle cell prevalence is based on a study conducted in the 1960s. The Ministry of Health should effectively utilise the existing national health management information systems framework to capture contemporary sickle cell disease trends. This is integral for informing policy and subsequent interventions. 

This House will agree with me that it is true we have so many patients of sickle cell disease who are not known. The phenomenon of better-funded areas like HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis has tilted concentration away from the less-funded areas like sickle cell disease.

There is need to have better management of resources by the Ministry of Health to bolster its capacity to handle diseases including sickle cell disease. Government should strive to achieve the Abuja target of devoting a minimum of at least 15 percent of the total national budget to the health sector in order to address the massive burden of ill-health in the country. Currently, Uganda spends only 10 percent of its national budget, which is only 784 billion on health.

Mr Speaker, the committee was further informed that the use of Chloroquine Prophylaxis and Fansidar as first line regimen is a policy issue considering that government had stopped their importation in favour of Coartem. However, given its need in some cases including the management of Sickle Cell disease, the Ministry of Health agreed that since they can be produced locally, an order for these drugs would be placed by Mulago Hospital to National Medical Stores who would in turn procure it locally.

However, research is underway to determine the best prophylaxis other than Chloroquine for the management of Sickle Cells, though more funds are needed to expedite this research. In the absence of Chloroquine, Fansidar can be used. 

A curious and misleading advert was running on one of the local FM stations by the herbalists association purporting to possess a cure for Sickle Cell disease. The Ministry of Health also pledged to intervene and halt such misinformation and at the same time embark on more accurate information dissemination. 

The committee recommends that as a policy, the Ministry of Health should ensure public sensitisation, diagnosis, routine screening of every new-born child, premarital screening and counselling for Sickle Cell disease. The Ministry of Health should develop requisite information, education, and communication tools and strategies for this purpose. 

Education on Sickle Cell should also be incorporated into the formal education syllabus. The committee was informed that upon reporting to their upcountry reporting units, some patients of Sickle Cell were immediately referred to Mulago Hospital. 

Mr Speaker, we recommend that all health workers should appropriately handle Sickle Cell patients and the Ministry of Health should issue a circular to this effect. 

Ministry of Health should also organise continuous medical education for all health workers to constantly update their knowledge and skills on contemporary health management practices. 

In conclusion, the committee is of the opinion that the betterment of the plight of Sickle Cell patients and their caregivers relays on the commitment of stakeholders to reform in line with the above recommendations. Such reforms should be grounded in participatory policy processes and efficient, effective and responsive institutions. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable chairperson, and the committee. But one thing which I have noted is that you have turned out to be a technical person; the way you have handled these medical terms gave the impression that you are becoming a doctor soon. Congratulations. (Applause) 

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for this report. My ministry did interact with the committee and we had a powerful delegation including Mulago Hospital. The Bannakazadde Group were also represented very effectively at the meeting and all these recommendations were agreed upon to be implemented. 

As you have already noted from the report, some of the recommendations like improving on accommodation in Mulago, are already being implemented. The rest that have not yet been implemented, we will make sure that we implement them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.31
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the chairperson for having brought here this report for which we have been waiting for almost two years. I thank you chairperson that it has finally come out with all the recommendations. 

Sickle Cell Anaemia disease is not known to many people. Many have their children suffering and dying of Sickle Cell, which is disguised as Malaria. Many people think that whoever has a high body temperature is suffering from Malaria. And these children are treated for Malaria and in many cases they die because Sickle Cell has got its own treatment. The treatment is not so expensive, but it is not available even in our main hospitals. Let us say, Aspirin, may not be there to serve all those who may want it. 

I thank the committee for having brought out all the issues that the Bannakazadde put down as requests to the ministry and government. Their appeal is for you to look at this group of people who are dying silently without being cared for properly. 

Mr Speaker, you will be surprised to learn how Sickle Cell kills people. A child may be well in the morning and playing; but he/she may get pain in the legs or any other parts of the body and he/she dies the same day. And our people in the villages say that the child has been bewitched. We want this to be erased; this is real ignorance because such people die for lack of blood. I know we would save a number of lives if our hospitals were well equipped to handle Sickle Cell patients. 

The Bannakazadde did ask for a policy to introduce units at all referral centres and I do agree with them and I agree with the recommendations by the committee. Many children have died because some doctors may not necessarily know exactly what a child may be suffering from and they may treat them for some other disease and cause the child’s death. I have seen parents who dash to get Chloroquine because they think because the child has a temperature rise, therefore it must be Malaria. 

Mr Speaker, all they asked for was something to be done for avoidance of illnesses and deaths, which could otherwise be prevented. I therefore concur with the committee that an outpatient department be established and equipped with drugs and other necessary equipment and also staffed. 

We need public awareness because we have seen –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have heard in some quarters that this is an African problem and not for whites. 

MRS MAGOOLA: Mr Speaker, what I know is that Sickle Cell Anaemia occurs in tropical areas, therefore, one would think that we should know better but because at its inception we did not know how to treat it, even if whites knew about it, there is no way of stopping it. I would therefore think that public awareness on radios and other media would be a tool to prevent it.

The chairperson was saying that maybe people could go and have their blood tested because it can be detected since it is genetic. 

I support the motion and request the Ministry of Health to do all it can to save lives. I thank you.

4.37
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): I would like to thank the committee for the report and particularly hon. Zirabamuzaale who presented the petition. 

I would like to propose to the House to adopt this report as it is. It is a very short and well written report and it has all the facts. I think all of us have seen how Sickle Cell attacks and kills very suddenly. Therefore, I would like to propose to the House that we adopt this report and urge Government to increase its efforts in implementing what has been proposed especially by ensuring that all referral hospitals are given this facility. 

I would like to report that also Masaka referral hospital does not have this facility and I would like you to hasten your efforts so that we are all catered for. Thank you very much.

4.39
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much. I would like to give some information. I am a Member of the Social Services Committee and therefore my contribution will be in the form of information. 

Sickle Cell disease is akin to the black race wherever they are found. It is a hereditary disease and it can be in an individual in three forms. Somebody may have traits and will not fall sick. Somebody may just be a carrier and that carrier may not be manifestly sick but he or she will be able to pass the gene to the offspring. 

In the context of Uganda, the concentration of Sickle Cell cases is in Bundibugyo and the central region. I am just surprised that the unit which should cater for the whole country is too small and ill-equipped and it may not be possible to give specialised services to the people. 

It may be proper for the country to recognise where the Sickle Cell disease is concentrated and establish specialised units in these areas. It is true that Sickle Cell disease can be treated by any qualified medical doctor because they are trained. So, most of our district hospitals can handle Sickle Cell disease if there are facilities. 

Unfortunately, in many situations there are no facilities. There may not even be drugs to handle these people because Sickle Cell disease, if it is acute, needs immediate action otherwise the child may die. Even an adult may die if not attended to immediately. So, the information I am trying to pass to the Ministry of Health is that there should be a review of the whole policy on this specialised disease affecting the people in our context so that we are seen to be concerned about the people.

In the white race, Sickle Cell is not there. So, it may not be an important condition to them -(Interruption) 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, the statement that has been made by the professor that the concentration of this disease is in Bundibugyo and the central region worries me, since I come from the North. He is therefore pleading for special facilities in only these areas. 

When I was in senior two at Lango College, we buried two of our colleagues. A number of other cases have been fatal in the North and we have buried them. So, I think the research and the review should be open to cater for the entire country other than limiting it to these areas that he has mentioned. Thank you.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, hon. Odit, for that information but my initial statement was that Sickle Cell is a disease of the black race wherever you find them. So, Lango region is not spared; the Eastern region is not spared and the whole of Africa. So, that should be taken into consideration. But there are areas where the cases are more than the others and that is based on the survey which was done, although it was done long ago.

Last but not least, somebody mentioned screening. I know we are not very keen on going for medical check-ups but all of us may be carrying sickle cells. So, it is important to check yourself. Some of us might be trait carriers and we may just be healthy but that is a danger for the offspring to come. So, screening maybe at deliveries, Mr Speaker, would be very important and I am sure most of our hospitals may be in position, with simple microscopes, to detect Sickle Cell in a child. I think that should be a policy by the Ministry of Health so that people recognise their status well in advance and they grow when they know that they are diagnosed. Thank you very much.

4.46
MR YOWASI BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. I have a friend whose two children have Sickle Cell. The disease is very expensive to handle; it is time wasting and it is money consuming. Every time the child gets an attack, I see this man panicking. The child eats about two trays of eggs everyday and must get blood transfusion to recover from that attack. 

I would propose that we should have a national Sickle Cell control programme. The honourable professor has said that this is a black race disease but I would not believe that it is a black race disease. It is no longer among the whites because they controlled it earlier. What happens in civilised countries is that, before you marry or even when you marry, before you decide to have children, some tests have to be carried out because this is a genetic disease. If you are found to be Sickle Cell positive, you are advised not to produce a child because you will transmit the disease to that child. That is why they no longer have it among the whites and we remain with it here among the blacks. That is why I am saying that there should be a national control programme whereby people are screened before they decide to have children. 

Mr Speaker, in our traditional setting, especially among the Bakonzo, we had our own way of screening. Before you marry, the family from which you are going to marry has to have a record of clean health. That is why you find I have to marry from where my grandmother comes because my family has proved that that family does not have diseases like Leprosy or Sickle Cell. It is a traditional screening method. (Laughter) It is not in-breeding as such because we do not go for first and second cousins. So, I am proposing that we have a national screening programme and focus be put on people as they marry. And before they decide to produce children, they should be screened so that we can control this disease. 

Mr Speaker, it is not only Sickle Cell that is a very big problem in this country. There are also some other diseases which have been neglected and people are suffering in the villages because of those diseases. I think Mulago Hospital should be a real specialised referral hospital whereby such unique diseases should be given special attention and special clinics should be constructed to handle them. Also, people suffering from such diseases are not so many and so we may not need clinics in every hospital in the country but at least at the referral hospital we need a specialised clinic for Sickle Cells and other similar diseases.  

4.50
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have lived closely with families that have Sickle Cell children. Some of them managed to grow into adults but still the pain and the suffering they go through is unimaginable. It is unfortunate that even after research findings have shown that Uganda has one of the highest adult frequencies of Sickle Cell trait in the world, nothing much is being done to check this terrible disease. 

I want to say what the professor has said, and this I learnt when I was very young because of living close to these people who were suffering from Sickle Cell. You in the family could be clean but your cleanliness does not mean that the disease will not come into the family because your son or your daughter may marry a carrier and then the family will have been tainted. From there on, you are going to have terrible suffering because of the disease. I do not want to over-state that.

But the reason I stood up was to thank the minister for accepting to implement these recommendations. However, his acceptance falls very short of our expectations. I would have wanted him to itemise every item and give us a definite deadline as to when these will be implemented. We would want him to say, “This, we will put in our next budget proposals for its implementation in the coming year.” I think the reason this disease has been overlooked is lack of prioritisation. So, if the minister could tell us specifically when he intends- maybe he cannot do it now but I would like him to come back with a paper itemising each item and giving us a date as to when they are going to be implemented. I would think he is becoming serious.

4.53
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, sometime last year I received a call from a patient who was admitted at the Cancer Unit at Mulago. He was from my constituency and he wanted some assistance. I went to that place and I thought it was the worst anybody could see.

In one ward, the male, female patients and their keepers sleep together and they share one toilet facility. I came back and immediately filed a question to the Minister of Health but my question still remains unanswered. 

After the presentation of this report the sickle cell unit appears to be worse than the cancer unit. It makes me think that there is no single good unit left in Mulago.

Can the minister tell us the programme that his ministry has to revamp all the units in Mulago to make it a truly national referral hospital? As we speak now, it is just in name. We just see buildings but inside it is like a tomb. It is painted well outside but it smells badly inside. It is like a tomb because when you bury someone the inside cannot be like outside.

I think the government should take the state of affairs in Mulago very seriously so that we go back to where Mulago was. I toured Mulago for my senior six tour. I could see my image on the floor in those days but today you cannot believe that it is the same Mulago that was there in the 60s.

I lived in Kololo when I was a public servant and my immediate neighbour had children with Sickle Cells, we lost three children in seven years and it was a very sad experience. Unfortunately, the family was also from Lango. 

The government should take it seriously. My concern is that Mulago should be addressed. There is no use talking about the national referral hospital, which has got nothing inside.

4.57
DR BRIAN ASIIMWE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): I want to thank the committee for the good report. I have a few comments to make about Sickle Cell Anaemia.

I come from Bundibugyo and it is true we have very many cases of Sickle Cell disease. It has been a long time before tackling this. The problem is not the disease itself but how to manage the cases. Most of the parents of children with Sickle Cell disease do not know how to manage or look after these children. You find parents living very near our district hospital and when these children get attacks of the Sickle Cell disease, they have nothing to do. Even when they have some little money to treat their children, they do not know what to do.

You can imagine in this era of improved communication but sickle cell management is still a myth to many of the patients. Some even believe that their children have been bewitched when they get recurrent attacks. Awareness is extremely very important and sickle cell management especially the pain cannot be managed by Panadol, which is very common in villages.

The painkillers cost a lot of money and these are not available in the hospitals. These kids below five years are supposed to be on Folic Acid, which helps in the formation of red blood cells which are broken down say when a kid gets a Malaria attack. These cells are easily destroyed because they are quite fragile and the patients depend on Folic Acid.

Folic Acid is one of the cheapest drugs in this country but parents do not even know that they are supposed to keep their patients on Folic Acid everyday. And for prevention of Malaria, Chroloquine is also a very cheap drug but patients never get it. They can get it when they are taken to hospital for a week and thereafter the patient has nothing to prevent him or her from getting Malaria attacks, yet this drug would be given to that person for a very long time to prevent the attacks.

One thing I am emphasizing and I am asking the ministry is to cause more awareness of this disease and its management in the population. Then there is also need to have a fully fledged unit as my colleagues have already alluded to. The unit we have in Mulago is very small, very congested and it does not even have enough physicians. You find many physicians in other departments but the sickle cell unit has very few. You find 100 patients on sickle cell clinic days with one or two physicians looking after them.

The unit is neglected; the disease is not given priority in this country and patients are suffering. I think Government needs to come out and assist parents and create awareness about managing the disease. Even wiping out this disease is possible if we have a strong policy whereby people who intend to marry are screened. The screening only costs Shs 20,000 in these private laboratories in town; many couples can afford it but most of them do not know that they need to carry out such tests.

Can government put emphasis on screening people who intend to wed and have children? But government and the ministry are silent about controlling this disease.

5.02
DR EMMANUEL OTAALA (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo): I will try to echo some of the important points that we need to know about this disease and to clarify some of the points that colleagues have already spoken about.

The honourable professor has already told us that this is a hereditary disease. However, the point to stress here is that this disease is preventable though not curable. Once you inherit it from your parents, you will just continue living with it. The mainstay is for us to prevent people from acquiring it, and the only way to do this is through pre-marital screening. This is the most important point that I want to emphasise. 

Like we are now testing couples for HIV/AIDS before getting married, the mainstay of preventing this disease is to screen couples who intend to get married for sickle cells. That way, we will be able to identify the carriers. This is because when two carriers marry, there is a likelihood of them producing children who are affected by this disease, and some of the children will also be carriers. I want to stress that this should be mandatory for people living in central Uganda and Mbarara. Yes, the other regions of Uganda –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I also wish to thank the honourable minister who also happens to be a medical doctor, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is really from a point of ignorance. Now that you are advocating for screening people before they get married, if I am a sickler and a carrier for that matter, but I feel that before I die I must have a child – I think others are able to live up to between 30 and 40 years - what should carriers who wish to have at least a child or two do? 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. I assume that as I seek this clarification, the honourable minister is responding to our report as well.

First of all, I would like to seek clarification on the issue of screening sicklers. When you talked about screening, I thought you would give us a practical proposal, that you people in government have a plan to roll-out the possibility of screening. I am saying this because I do not expect government to lament with me from the committee. I expect you to tell us that people are now free to go to health centre IVs and be screened. If that is not possible, then you should be telling us your plan two. 

Also, while the minister and most of the colleagues seem to emphasise Bundibugyo and Central Uganda, I would like to put it to you as government that the information available to us as a committee is that the last study was done in 1960. How can we make any assumptions now basing on the study of such a year? The problem should be bigger now and I expect government, especially Ministry of Health, to be telling us something about a new study instead of telling us how they are going to adopt all these recommendations or something that is up-to-date. Otherwise, from 1960 to date, the population dynamics have long changed. 

For example, the people from Teso like hon. Ecweru have married from Bundibugyo –(Laughter)– you know that type of thing. (Laughter) Yeah! I am being very honest because these are some of the things that cannot confine these scenarios only to Bundibugyo and central Uganda. 

I also expect concrete answers to the question of policy, because the Minister of Health just said they had adopted all these, yet policy, for example, on Chloroquine is not yet addressed. People still need Chroloquine for these children. I am talking from experience because I live with sicklers in my house and looking for Chloroquine can be a nightmare. So, is government allowing us or importing a minimum dosage of Chloroquine? That is what we need to know.

The other thing that requires clarification is the question of blood supply to our blood banks. You need to go around the country and establish whether our hospitals have blood. This is important because when some of these anaemic children are rushed to hospitals there will be no blood for them. You have a major hospital with only two litres of blood; it is a problem. Those are the practical things that the ministry should respond to.

Further, I also would like to hear about the question of the general drug supplies. As we talk, NMS seems to be having problems in supplying, particularly my district Soroti, with drugs. The last supplies went to Soroti Hospital in September last year. Every health facility in Soroti has no drugs. 

I would like to tell this House the nightmare I went through last Wednesday. A woman came to the hospital with a miscarriage problem, but you will be surprised to hear that there was no drug in the whole facility. What the clinical officer did was just to prescribe what the woman would buy. Although she was bleeding, they just asked her to go find medicine wherever she could. I am sure she lost that pregnancy. That is why I am saying we have a problem with drug supplies. You need to tell us whether you have the drugs or not; those are the practical things. Thank you.

DR OTAALA: Thank you, my colleague, hon. Alice Alaso. The hon. Minister of Health will respond to some of the issues raised. However, when I was making my submission, hon. Wadri raised a clarification regarding sicklers who may wish to have children and the issue of carriers. This clarification came about when I was talking about pre-marital screening. 

I would like to say that it is possible for sicklers to have children. The point is that if you have tested a sickler, then you should be guided not to marry a fellow sickler or a carrier. You must marry someone who is free of the sickle cell trait. If you married someone without that sickle cell gene, you will as a sickler, produce children who are carriers; all your children will be carriers. Subsequently, those children must not marry fellow carriers if we are to prevent the disease. 

The other aspect is if you are a carrier, you must not marry a fellow carrier. This is because there is a one in four chance that if you produce four children, one will be a sickler, two of them will be carriers and one will be normal. Of course, this is probability and you can end up having all the four children as sicklers. It is chance.

What I am saying is that the importance of premarital testing is for us, as medical people, to guide you on the type of person you can marry; otherwise we do not prevent you from marrying. I must say that you can also decide to marry a fellow sickler and you say, “We shall not have children.” We have a living example of very high profile people in this country. Both of them are sicklers but they decided to marry and not have children. That option is also possible.

Hon. Alice Alaso said that as government, we should have concrete positions. I want to agree that as government we need a clear position on what we are able to do, but I think the honourable minister will update us regarding the necessary policy changes, especially in view of the fact that we changed the policy from Chloroquine as a first-line drug to Coartem. The honourable minister will update us on that.

One thing is that the sicklers suffer from common illnesses like any other person. Sicklers are highly susceptible to Malaria, which each and every health worker is able to treat. Secondly, sicklers suffer from lung infections such as Pneumonia. They are also susceptible to severe anaemia and generally when we talk about anaemia and relating it to the point that hon. Alaso raised, I must say that we who are healthy must be the ones to donate blood. 

Parliament must lead by example, but instead you find health workers going to seek blood from school children who are depending on posho and beans. We who are healthy, are eating better and have enough blood, should be the ones to say, “On such and such a day, we are ready as Parliament to donate blood”, so that we lead by example. I am sure that the Minister of Health can arrange a special day for us as Parliament to donate blood so that we are able to save many people who die due to lack of blood.

Severe anaemia is one of the commonest presentations of sicklers. They come when they need to be transfused. This is the reason that when they are seen at the lowest levels of care, the health workers refer them to general hospitals and regional referral hospitals because there is no blood transfusion facility at the lower levels -(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Otaala for giving way. I am seeking clarification from a point of complete ignorance, I think. This is because there are arguments in society that malaria parasites cannot survive in the sickle cell. That has been said in many cases. At the same time you are saying sicklers are endemic to malaria.

At one stage, I remember visiting an NGO clinic in Bwindi treating Sickle Cell and one of the experts was arguing that sickle cells were developed as a defensive mechanism towards malaria and in areas where there is a lot of Malaria, the prevalence of sickle cells is very low because malaria parasites cannot survive. That is, the cycle cannot survive within the life of a sickle cell. This is where I required some clarification from your statement. Thank you.

DR OTAALA: Thank you very much. I want to say that the red blood cells, which are sickled break down very easily. So to some extent, it is true that sicklers would not be able to incubate Malaria until the overt illness. That is true to some extent.

One thing to note, however, is that in sicklers, most of their red blood cells are sickled so they break down easily, but the remaining normal blood cells now nurture Malaria and the sicklers end up with severe Malaria. That is the clarification that I would like to give my colleague.

As I wind up, I want to clarify on what the MP from Kasese said that these sicklers consume two trays of eggs per day to recover. I want to say that this is dangerous because even for a normal person, if you ate more than two eggs, you are increasing your blood levels of cholesterol and subsequently if you continue like that, you would end up with heart disease. It is better to eat in moderation other than giving these children two trays of eggs in a single day. This is very dangerous for them.

The other clarification that I would like to make is about marrying relatives. This to me is in-breeding and when you do this, you have higher chances of passing on these hereditary diseases. This is again dangerous and I would like to discourage my colleagues from that kind of breeding. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. In the gallery, we have youth from Bukabuli in Bunya East. Fortunately, the Member of Parliament representing you is here; you are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. I think we should complete this.

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to clarify a few issues. Of course, I would also like to thank colleagues for the pertinent concerns expressed. May I also thank the doctors, Dr Asiimwe and hon. Dr Otaala for the clarifications made!

For the implementation framework, I will definitely prepare a statement outlining when the Ministry of Health will be implementing each of the action points. These are about policy, infrastructure, medicines and reagents as well as health education to create awareness. 

Hon. Okello-Okello put a question for oral answer. The response to this question is ready. If I could be given a slot, preferably next week, I will do the needful. 

Mulago has a master plan. There are very good indications that the African Development Bank is going to fund the master plan and we believe that most of these issues will be addressed. 

It is true that recently, because of the upsurge in malaria cases, we had a blood shortage in most of the health units. But of course, since the schools’ holidays have ended, the situation is already improving.

Last year, during a meeting of the Committee on Social Services, we agreed that members of the committee, together with the staff at the Ministry of Health headquarters, would lead Members of Parliament in creating awareness about donating blood. I was waiting for Parliament to resume so that members of the social services committee could move with me to the headquarters of the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services in Nakasero to donate blood.

That function –(Interjections)- no, we agreed that the committee would move to Nakasero and thereafter, Uganda Blood Transfusion Services would come to Parliament so that Members of Parliament would donate blood from here. This will be handled soon. 

With those clarifications, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also promise that issues to do with sickle cells are going to be prioritised. As I have promised, next week, if I am given a slot, I will present a statement about what we are going to do and when.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we have come to the end of this debate - 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for letting me speak again. There are two sets of issues I would like to raise.

As we wind up this debate, I would like the honourable minister to clearly explain to the House about funding to the health sector when he comes back; the 15 percent which was committed by the government in 2001 under the Abuja Declaration. This is because every time we come up with budgeting, it becomes too difficult and you cannot manoeuvre. We would like to have a progress report. When do you envisage giving the health sector the 15 percent of the money that we need?

The other aspect is the issue of neglected diseases. The Bannakazadde came here and gave us a petition, but there are so many neglected diseases in this country like pneumonia and diarrhoea. If we manage to control them; if we manage to vaccinate, for instance, against diarrhoea, I am convinced that the cost benefit to this country will be enormous. We do not want to have a petition on diarrhoea and then another one on pneumonia next week. What plan does the Ministry of Health have to handle those neglected diseases which are very costly?

I have raised the issue of drug shortage in relation to sickle cells, but I would prefer that the ministry gives us a substantive response. There are no drug supplies. Our committee agreed with you that we would send 70 percent of the money to the National Medical Stores and 30 percent for PHC - now the drugs are not in the health facilities. It is not only in Soroti, but also in Katakwi and Amuria. There are no drugs everywhere and people are dying. 

Those are some of the things I am begging for your indulgence. The minister should come up with a substantive response. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. The motion was to receive, consider and adopt the report. We have received, considered and the question is to adopt the report, which the ministry should use to address the problems we have been discussing. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Our next business will be the Bill, but there are certain problems. We cannot handle it now. We will handle it on Tuesday. As I communicated earlier, because EALA is being hosted by the Uganda Parliament for about 10 days from 8th to 19th, we shall be using the same facilities for our plenary sessions. Their plenary sessions also start in the afternoon. So, we have decided that since we are the hosts, we should give up the afternoon session. We shall be sitting in the morning from 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. so that they can start at 2.00 p.m. This will happen for as long as EALA is here.

The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 9 February 2010, at 10.00 a.m. Thank you very much for coming. 

(The House rose at 5.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 February 2010 at 10.00 a.m.)
