Thursday, 01 February 2007

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to welcome and thank you for turning up.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.51
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I would crave your indulgence that that matter be deferred pending the arrival of the minister. He must be on his way.

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS OF PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATIONS ABROAD IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 30 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

2.53
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr William Okecho): Mr Speaker, the report I am about to present has been circulated and it has also been posted in the Members’ e-mail addresses. I, therefore, would wish to just introduce the report here for purposes of getting the Members aware of the content of the report.

In compliance with Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure, which obliges a parliamentary delegation upon return to report to the House its experiences and findings, I beg to present the report of the delegation that attended a training workshop on the financial oversight functions of parliamentarians that was held in Accra-Ghana in December 2006.

Mr Speaker, you authorised a delegation of five people, comprising of – 

    1. Hon. William Okecho
    2. Hon. Samuel Byanagwa
    3. Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera
    4. Hon. Christine Bako and
    5. Robert Tumukwasibwe, all from the Budget Committee to join their colleagues from the sister parliaments of Tanzania and Malawi –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe just bear with me to introduce hon. Matia Isoke, who has joined us. He was a minister.

MR OKECHO: The team joined the parliamentarians of Tanzania and Malawi at a training workshop on the budget. The workshop was held in Accra-Ghana, and it was organised by the Parliamentary Centre of Canada and facilitated by the staff of the Poverty Reduction Office in Accra. 

The six-day workshop took place from 11 – 15 December 2006. The theme of the workshop was, Financial Oversight Functions of Parliamentarians: tools and mechanism for optimum government budget analysis.

The workshop was extremely exciting as we learnt a lot about the tools that legislators should use to analyse budget documents, questions that they should ask of the Executive, budget documents that they should consult and information they should seek in order to make the budget a meaningful political, economic, social and legal tool in the delivery of public goods and services.

We examined five principles of good budgeting namely; comprehensiveness, predictability, contestability, transparency and periodicity. We further examined the role of parliament in the budget process at the budget formulation stage, debate or approval stage and monitoring and audit stages. 

We looked at how legislators can ensure budget compliance by emphasising three key issues during the entire budget process namely; accountability, openness, and participation. We also looked at tools that legislators can use to analyse whether the budget is pro-poor and is in tandem with the poverty reduction strategy paper, and also whether the budget supports the millennium development goals and targets and also whether it enhances gender equity.

Mr Speaker, I should also report that I led the Uganda delegation to the training workshop and I was unanimously elected to the steering committee of the African Poverty Reduction Network to represent the East African legislatures. (Applause)  

I am now performing that function under AWEPA, which cooperates with the parliamentary centre and is now using my services to train other parliamentarians in the parliamentary budget processes and I have already been to Somali land on that mission. I shall continue with other 25 countries to perform this very honourable task.

The detailed report shedding more light on the tools for budgetary analysis is hereby laid at Table and we have also, as I said, sent copies to Members’ e-mails. Copies have also been made and are available outside on the tables. We encourage all Members to read the report and use the contained analytical tools to make the intervention of Parliament and its committees in the budget process vibrant. 

As you are aware, the budget process is now on. We have held the first national budget conference, which was held on the 11-12 January this year and I have requested Members to take special interest in the budgeting processes in their districts and I am told that many of them are attending. 

I wish to end by thanking you, Mr Speaker, very much for giving me the opportunity and also the Members for having taken so seriously the task of going to represent Uganda in this function.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you and the delegation for the presentation and for this report. I want to appeal to other delegations in future to invoke the provisions of Rule 30 so that others who are not in the delegation can benefit from the experience.

MR DOMBO: I just want to seek clarification from the honourable member who has been presenting the report. He said that he has sent some information to our e-mails. What I want to seek clarification on is whether our budget here as the Parliament of Uganda, the one we approved, complies with the five principles he has stated and the other two pillars of pro-poor and supportive to the millennium development goals? If not, what can we do to measure up to what you have been studying in Accra? Thank you very much.

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, we examined budgets of very many countries while we were in Accra. We also took there our own budget speech and we realised that there is a great deal to be done to make sure our budgets are pro-poor. 

Our Members have been asked to examine the next budget to ensure that all the principles we learnt are complied with. That is why we started by requesting the Members to go right a way to the districts and so on, to make sure that most of the issues being discussed there are understood, so that when they come, we have to relate whatever is being brought in the budget to the various qualities and issues that we think must be contained in the budget. 

But there have been so many loopholes and so many missing gaps in many of our budget speeches. We think that since we have started quite early, next time we will make sure that we comply with the provisions required.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you must be aware and I believe each one of you has a copy of the Budget Act. The purpose of enacting a Budget Act was to give you more effective participation in the budget process so that you do not only listen to the budget being read on 15th June, but you must have participated in its formulation. 

As you know, beginning 1st April, His Excellency the President will send to Parliament indicating matters related to the budget and you will have a month to look at the proposed budget so that you can have an input. When this exercise begins in April, take into account what has been contained in the report that has been given to us. This will enable you to effectively participate and suggest ways of improving the budget. Thank you.  

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 18/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT


3.03
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE:(NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): “ When will the Ministry of Water and Environment provide safe water to Kamwenge town council given that only 6% of the town residents have access to safe drinking water, with a jerrican of water being sold at between Shs 1,000/= and 1,500/=”

3.04
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Mrs Mary Mutagamba): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I have not been able to provide a response to this question because I did not get the question. And secondly, I got a call this afternoon at 1.15 p.m. telling me that I had a question on the agenda. I have tried between then and now to come up with the answers, but the printing and the rest of it is still going on. If Parliament can hold on, the papers will get to me. Otherwise, I was proposing that we handle it next week.

THE SPEAKER: A comprehensive answer?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Yes, please.
   
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwebaze, you have heard; she wants to answer the question next week.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Next question, hon. Stephen Wasike.

Question 15/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.05
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  
“What is the criterion the Ministry of Education and Sports uses to select sub-counties in which to build seed-post primary schools?

When will the Ministry of Education and Sports build a seed-post primary institution in Busitema sub-county since the sub-county does not have any government-aided post-primary institution?”

3.06
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to give an oral answer to question 15/1/08 by hon. Wasike Stephen Mugeni. The first question was, what criterion does the Ministry of Education and Sports use to select sub-counties to benefit from seed post-primary schools? 

The answer is as follows: There are at the moment 75 sub-counties without post-primary schools in the country. Members would recall that post-primary education has had limited access up to this year when we are starting universal secondary education. Therefore, many sub-counties have not had any unit, which can be termed a post-primary institution. 

As I report this afternoon, there are 75 counties countrywide without post-primary schools and currently construction is going on in 41 sub-counties based on the following criteria: 

    • Lack of schools at the post-primary level; be they private or public: Mr Speaker, there are sub-counties in this country where the private sector has not invested in schools and where the government has not constructed any post-primary institution. So, in such sub-counties, we are trying to put up what we term as “seed” schools. “Seed” meaning that it is the first attempt to put education or to access education in that area.

    • Distance from the nearest school in the neighbouring sub-county: There are sub-counties with more than one school and within walking distances. Looking at such distances has guided the location of the seed schools because sometimes the boundary is just a few kilometres away from the neighbouring sub-county.

    • Large numbers of primary schools in a given sub-county: Mr Speaker, there are some sub-counties with 20 primary schools; there are those with seven primary schools. We are looking at the number of primary schools in a sub-county. But let alone the number of schools, we are also looking at the population of school-going children in those sub-counties.

    • Location of the sub-county geographically: Geographically meaning that there are some sub-counties surrounded by either forests, or swamps or mountains etcetera. Such sub-counties are given priority over the others bearing in mind that the children or students cannot easily walk across rivers and valleys or up mountains. So, the geographical factors are also very important. 

    • The location of the sub-counties in the district also matters because there are those that are very near the urban areas and those that are in very remote areas. So, preference is given to the remote ones where transport or communication and accessibility are very difficult. Those are the criteria being used to locate these seed schools.
 
The second question was, when does the Ministry of Education and Sports intend to build a seed post-primary school in Busitema sub-county since the sub-county does not have any government-aided post-primary institution?

The answer, Mr Speaker, is that, the Ministry of Education and Sports and indeed government plans to improve access to secondary education for children who successfully complete primary education. In that framework, secondary schools will be constructed in all sub-counties as and when resources become available. 

In addition, the construction will be done in several phases until the whole country is covered using the sub-county as an operational unit. In other words, government has a plan to ensure that we have a post- primary school in each sub-county but that cannot be achieved in one phase. It can only be achieved in several phases when resources become available and for the first few phases it will be the sub-county as an operational unit. So, those sub-counties, which may not come in phase 1, will come on board in the subsequent phases because the NRM programme is to create access to secondary education for all the children who successfully complete P7.  

Mr Speaker, I am happy to say that right now selection is going on for these pioneer children who will benefit from this programme. I will ask my colleagues and the entire population to support the programme while bearing in mind that we are planning to cover the entire country as and when possible. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Do you have any supplementary question?

3.10
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard the criteria and I am wondering when you use these other factors and you leave the population, isn’t it again worsening the scenario? Like in one sub-county in Busia, there is a private secondary school but the owner has refused to partner with government. But government has not put into account constructing a new one or taking facilities there because of the population. If such a scenario arises, doesn’t it lead to a loss of facilities for the more people who would have deserved unlike where you would put it because of the geographical factors - the population is small, there are three schools in one sub-county and you have left a bigger population with a deserving need. Isn’t it wiser to consider population more?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague the Member of Parliament. I would like to thank him because he has availed me with a list of population figures in his constituency, which is very good. But this time round as we start this programme, we had not yet put population as a factor in this but it is a very good advice and suggestion that probably population should play a part in selecting where we are putting these schools. 

But by numbers of schools we could easily look at the population in schools because population by itself might not be a determining factor if you don’t look at the number of schools and their enrolment. The most important element here is that, this is phase 1 and the programme is to continue like we did with the UPE programme. We started in churches, mosques and all sorts of areas but now most of the children are in schools. 

So, this being the first attempt on this programme, I just want to emphasise that it is phase 1 and we are definitely going to take note of all the factors as they come on board including population, and then we shall roll up the programme and fill in the gaps.

3.12
MRS MARY OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a supplementary question. Government is offering universal secondary education to 120 students, but some of these schools in the villages may not even be able to raise this number. I was wondering; there are some students who wrote to me from my constituency, they passed PLE like two years ago and they got very good aggregates but they could not go on because of lack of fees. Now, can’t government take on those students, instead of saying let us take on the ones who have just completed, whereas you may find that some of these schools cannot raise those numbers? 

Honourable minister, I do not know whether it is possible for government to consider those students who sat like two years ago, they got very good aggregates and they have no school fees? I do not know whether we cannot take them on under USE? Thank you. 

3.13
MR AGGREY BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a supplementary question. We have heard the honourable minister telling us the criteria of selecting the schools in the sub-counties. I am wondering why the ministry has decided to take over private schools in some sub-counties when those sub-counties have community schools that are fully furnished? The community is ready to hand over those schools to be taken on as seed schools but they have been left. Thank you. 

3.14
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been informed that schools have the option not to participate in this programme. Is it true, and if so, why? I have been informed that there is a government-aided school in my constituency, which is not participating. I am wondering how our children are going to benefit from this? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, your questions should be supplementary; in that, they should be related to the answers given. 

3.15
CAPT. (RTD.) DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a circular from the Ministry of Education and Sports signed by a certain Dr Mbabazi and addressed to all chief administrative officers in the whole country. I saw one in the case of Ibanda. It is also addressed to all the district education officers. It is calling for the submission of all government schools - in a situation where there are no government schools, community schools; where there are no community schools, private schools - in every sub-county. I have that circular in my file. 

Madam Minister, can you explain a situation where there   is a community school or indeed a private school and both are ignored and then government comes in with scarce resources to put up what you call seed schools. In particular, I have that case in one of my sub-counties called Nyamarebe. I have been seeing some of the officers like Assistant Commissioner for Education, John Agaba, but it looks like the situation is not clear. 

I would want to find out because in that particular instance, the communities are incensed. Since we have a community school, rather than government bringing in extra resources to improve on this school, why are they putting up another seed school more so that it is a kilometre away?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe let us put up, as many questions as possible and then the minister will answer.

3.17
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the effort -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do not thank the minister. Just put forward your supplementary question.

MR MUKITALE: Yes. My supplementary question goes to the issue of whether we are looking at the secondary school going age or private and community schools. We are hearing issues of community and private schools yet the citizens of Uganda of secondary school going age, whether in private or what you call community schools, are entitled to access this programme. My question, therefore, is, what is the ministry going to do in order to bring on board as many citizens of this country of school going age who are not necessarily in public schools? 

Remember that before government found resources to bring in USE, there were community efforts to set up these secondary schools. I would think it would have been more prudent to look at what the enrolment per sub-county, per district, was prior to the implementation because what is going to happen in our rural periphery places? We are going to kill the public-private partnership whereby a private school, which has been charging slightly around the same fees that the ministry is now going to give as a scholarship, is going to be denied the catchment because for once government has now found resources. I would request the ministry to address this problem so that we give scholarships according to enrolment irrespective of whether it is a church or community founded school or a private ownership. 

I also want to add that in UPE, we had a problem –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there should not be debate in this session of supplementary questions. You only put a supplementary question.

MR MUKITALE: Yes, Mr Speaker. I would like to end by requesting the ministry to correct what went wrong with UPE. One problem we had with UPE was that, some parents as stakeholders and some foundation bodies relegated their responsibility of running and owning these schools. Can we, therefore, request that this time round we see more of foundation bodies, parents and communities involved instead of looking at a programme as a government and district programme? Therefore, we should not leave some of the structures which had been started by communities’ initiative abandoned because they are not funded by the USE programme.  I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I appreciate the concern because this is a season for education. 

3.22
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two supplementary questions arising from the answers from the minister: One, what is the future of grant aiding to the community schools, which already exist and are not participating in this universal secondary education?

Two, the Ministry of Education wrote to the chief administrative officers requesting them to forward at least six names of firms which would be contracted and one of them would be selected by the ministry to construct the seed schools. A case in point is in Kanungu where one seed school is being constructed but the ministry selected a firm, which was outside the six, which were locally identified by the district and it has caused confusion in Kanungu. So is she aware that her ministry selected firms, which were not among those identified by districts such as Kanungu district?

Three, given the responses from the members, does she think that it is necessary for her to bring a comprehensive statement on Universal Secondary Education for us to make an input as parliament? (Laughter) 

3.25
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, hon. speaker. I have one question related to the criteria – the minimum number of schools. The Minister has said that one of the criteria is on the large number of schools. Karamoja is one of the disadvantaged parts of this country and we are talking about the poor parts having more considerations. Would the hon. Minister think that disadvantaged areas would be one of the criteria to consider in the selection of the six schools? This is because we have some areas in this country, which have not seen education for the last one hundred years.

In my constituency, in three sub counties, there is no secondary school and this condition seems to fulfil most of these conditions. May I seek clarification as to why in Nakapiripirit District we did not get a chance to be selected, particularly in my constituency which is remote, rural – where none of my sub-counties was selected for consideration in the first 41- 46 schools? Thank you. 

3.27
MR ELIJAH KYETUNDA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to first thank the minister for expediting the USE and for giving me an average share in the constituency although it has acted as an appetiser for us to ask for more. I have two questions to ask.

One, It seems like the ministry has informed us that not all schools that are benefiting from USE are going to get the same number of student beneficiaries. We might be proud of getting three schools but in actual sense, you get 50 per school and another school may be given 200 at ago. So you might be getting one school equalling to three schools in that constituency or area. So, I request the Minister to clarify whether all schools benefiting get the same number of students benefiting from USE. And if they are going to get different numbers, what is the criterion to decide that this school gets 150, or 80 or 200?

Two, I would like to know whether schools in areas which are disadvantaged, either by terrain or by geographical factors – has there been any consideration for that? Because you may find that one sub-county is advantaged in such a way that it has that school taken in the middle of that sub-county, while another bigger subcounty has its school at the extreme end of that sub-county. What will be the fate of such a school? Yet the essence of this programme is for students to access the services, so that they can be able to walk to those schools from their homes. 

What plan does the ministry have for us, especially we who come from the mountainous areas, where our sons and daughters may not be able to walk the long distance to the one school that has benefited from this programme? Thank you.

3.30
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, my supplementary question to the minister is why doesn’t the ministry ever broaden their scope of consultation when designing such programmes, to include all stakeholders? These officers should not only understand programmes of government like USE and UPE; if this were done, criteria would not be asked on this floor. 

In my constituency I am being asked, “How was school x selected in preference of y.” It is like some miracle happening where one school is selected and another is not - why not have as many consultations – national, regional and district wide. Why do you sit in the ministry and use the same yardstick across the country? 

Some sub-counties are more populated than others. As I talk, in my area, the district council has approved the creation of three new sub-counties, which are waiting the approval of the minister. Now when they are planning here, it is one secondary school per sub-county. You do not look at the geography of the sub-county. Why can’t the minister think about this? And we the members of Parliament are put to task and petitioned to be involved in the design and understanding of these programmes?

3.31
MRS RUTH TUMA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the minister’s explanation, she said that seed schools are put in places where there are no government schools. But at the same time, a colleague was complaining why a seed school had been put in a place where there is a government school, a private school and a community school. In my district, I have a sub-county that does not have a government school. Why haven’t you considered Jinja district for a seed school? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is that too much for you hon. Minister or you are ready for more? [Mrs Bitamazire: “It is okay.”] Okay

3.32
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Mr Speaker, my supplementary question is as follows. How does the government propose to improve the infrastructure standards of community government aided schools to match the standards of seed schools? Why am I saying this? Government aided schools that were constructed by the communities are in a sorry state yet now government is putting up seed schools that are of a good standard. We appreciate this but we have situations where there are so many imbalances between schools in neighbouring sub-counties. Does government hope in future to improve the standards of the government community aided schools?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, why does the government seem to have rejected the church founded schools? The different churches that we belong to, the mosques and so forth started many schools in this country. Why are we now shunning church based schools? We need an explanation because that seems the case. Honourable minister, I would be grateful if I can get an explanation to give to my constituents. I thank you.

3.35
MR OGWEL LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Mr Speaker, I would like to provide a supplementary question on the seed schools. First of all, I would like to thank the Minister and the Ministry of Education for giving Moroto District one seed school. It is going to benefit the sub-county that I hail from. I used to be an implementer of the ministry criteria in awarding sub-counties seed schools before I came to Parliament. That time there was only one sub-county that benefited because of the criteria set there. 

One supplementary question I want to ask is: Why does it take too long to implement the next seed school? Do you remember that the other one was granted in 2000 or 1999? Since then it was only last financial year when the seed school appeared in the budget of the Ministry of Education.

The second supplementary question to the honourable minister is when you provide these seed schools there is one component which is not included and which is equally important because according to the criteria land should be got from the community. It must not be individual land or church founded land. It must be public land or the community must commit themselves and provide land for this school. However, sometimes the community has land from the villages where they choose to put these schools, so you find that it has only two to four classrooms but no teacher’s house. 

It would be very prudent when you are providing classrooms for these seed schools that at least a block- because the school is not complete if the teachers’ house is not there. You will realise that all the teachers and pupils will be day scholars, and our experience is that when both teachers and students come as day scholars the school begins at about ten o’clock and eventually the curriculum is not completed at the end of the academic year. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will allow four more questions then the minister can answer.

3.37
MR ROBERT KASHAIJA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My supplementary question goes to the minister. It is about the government policy concerning nutrition standards in UPE schools. I understand a few years ago government had passed a policy for a milk school programme. I don’t know what happened. Has milk become very expensive? And if not what happened? 

Secondly, what plans does government have for USE in relation to that programme? I thank you.

3.38
MR BUSIMA MAFABI (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two questions on the seed schools. The first one is that the minister in their allocation insisted that the land must be ten acres. Now where I come from is not flat, it is highly mountainous and heavily populated. Getting five acres in Budadiri- I am the richest man there with two acres- so getting ten acres is a big problem. So, honourable minister, is there a way people like us who come from heavily populated areas with small pieces of land can come out of it and get a seed school?

The second issue- and this is very serious and it has been raised by hon. Baryomunsi- is that of selecting the contractors. I happen to be an expert in buildings and I have found it very difficult to believe that a block of two classrooms and a small administration block with two small toilets can cost Ugshs320 million. 

So, my question to the honourable minister is, why is it so expensive, because at that rate- I can see the other day we got 41 seed schools and she tells us now we have 75. Where I come from because of the mountains and valleys I may need about three schools per sub-county because we are poor. But at the rate of Ugshs 320 million, I can see that the programme may be defeated. So, can the hon. Minister explain to us why it is so expensive? Thank you. 

3.41
MR ERISA KAAHWA (NRM, Buruli County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question is, is the minister aware that in some areas where construction is supposed to be going on there is no construction at all? The sub-county I have in mind is where I come from, Pakanyi, Buruli County, Masindi District where the tenderer who is supposed to construct a seed school was recalled by the IGG following procurement problems. School is about to begin yet no construction has gone on. 

What is likely to be the fate of the children who are supposed to be in school when the term begins? Can the minister therefore explain what programme the ministry has in place to make sure that these children are in school in spite of the fact that no structures are in place? Thank you.

3.42
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, honourable Speaker. I have two supplementary questions. One is when will the new districts especially Buliisa benefit from the seed schools because this district doesn’t have many schools. 

Furthermore, there is another programme for laboratory and library. Since according to the Minisrty of Education we should be science oriented; and all the secondary schools in Buliisa district don’t have this equipment and when it is time for going to higher institutions they consider sciences. What are we going to do for these secondary schools in Buliisa District?

Another question concerns posting. Now that we are beginning with USE and I say thank you to the minister because four teachers have been posted. But our worry is that when they are posting they don’t consider those teachers who are already teaching in these schools. According to the experience in the last posting, the three teachers who were posted did not turn up and the same may apply. What plan do you have for those teachers who don’t turn up to their posting areas?

Furthermore, my request is that during postings they should consider those teachers who have already been teaching in those schools to fill up the teacher-student ratio. Thank you.

3.43
MR JOHN OTEKAT (INDEPENDENT, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two supplementary questions to the minister. The first one is on the delay of launching of these schools. Kojjetenyang Seed School was selected in 1999 but up to now, having fulfilled all the requirements by the ministry, it has still not been launched in Kateta sub-county, Serere County. This has caused a big uproar in the population of Kateta sub-county. About two weeks ago, the minister was in the Eastern Region launching some of the seed schools but Kojjetenyang Seed School was not launched.

Secondly, still in Kateta sub-county, because that is the only sub-county in Serere without a secondary school, during the selection of schools to benefit from USE, Kateta Hillside Community School was left out and a private secondary school, Sunrise Secondary School, which is really at the tip of the sub-county, actually closer to my sub-county of Kiyere and which has got over five secondary schools was preferred instead of a community school which is in Kateta. 

This again goes back to the minister. What is the criterion for selecting these schools, because if you select a private school then the community school definitely will lose? So I would request that Kateta Hillside be selected instead of the other one, which is just at the tip and close to a sub-county with over five secondary schools. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.46
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much honourable Speaker and madam minister. The biggest stumbling block with the implementation of government programmes has been observed to be close monitoring and evaluation. This time round the USE programme is being funded directly from the centre and the monies are paid directly into the accounts of the various schools. 

How is the monitoring and evaluation going to be done when the district administration is not involved considering the distance between the centre and some of the remotest schools involved?  Thank you very much.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much Mr Speaker and my colleagues. So far 19 of you have raised issues and asked questions. The first question was asked by hon. Mugyenyi, which was the population factor in deciding this programme and I noted that we should put that on board as we roll up the programme. 

There was a question, this time I am sorry, Mr Speaker, I didn’t get the names of the people who asked. The next question was that why don’t we start from where the first group of UPE sat primary seven, many of whom have missed the opportunity to join USE. This has been a popular question. I would like to explain that going back to 2003 when the first group sat PLE would give us numbers which we could not accommodate with the available resources. 

This time round resources have been a driving factor. Many of you would recall when we opened the doors for primary education in one year the population grew to 3.5 million extra to what was in the schools at that time. This time round, having learned quite a number of lessons from UPE we didn’t want to say that whoever wants to do secondary please come over because we would end up with millions of people and realising the resources that we have, we would go through exactly the hectic challenges we had with UPE. 

Therefore, we realise that the first group of UPE completed in 2003 but we as a government are now launching the programme in 2006. We thought that we could start with the numbers that we can cater for realising the resources and facilities available. We realise that those children who did not transit to secondary education missed but we are at the same time working on programmes from which these very candidates can continue and sit for O’ Level as they proceed in their early lives as adults. 

Many of you would recall that we have so many opportunities now for people to continue with education and I am sure that with a lot of encouragement and other investments in the education sector these young people can catch up. We didn’t want to make the mistake of just opening the doors at this level otherwise we would end up with numbers which we wouldn’t be able to cope with. We are working out other supplementary and complementary programmes, which we shall implement as we move.

The next question was about numbers. I have explained that the numbers imply the resources. We have capitation grants and we have capital development grants. We also have the teachers’ wage bill. So, when you look at all the costs, numbers matter a lot and that is why we have to be careful with the numbers in order to fit the resources into the programme.

Another question was, “Why do we take over?” or, “When do we plan to take over these community schools?” And, “Why are we now partnering with the private schools and not with the community schools?” This is a very good question and I want to inform Members of Parliament that this programme is strengthening the partnership between the private sector and public sector especially in the delivery of educational services. 

And when we went around the country to select what schools will take off immediately, we had to look at the resources they have and the status of those schools. We are looking for schools which have got facilities with which we can start the programmes instead of picking on schools where we would have to put a lot of capital development projects. 

So, we looked at facilities, we looked at the status of the school and we looked at the willingness and readiness of the private owner or the community to partner with government. These schools’ proprietors and leaders have been met, and memoranda of understanding have been signed on a voluntary basis of those who want to join government in giving this programme. 

I would like to conclude this point by saying this is a trial with these partners and indeed with the memoranda of understanding in place. We shall see how we progress and make adjustments as we move.

Question no. 5 was whether schools are free to join Universal Secondary Education or not. The Government schools are not free to do so or to opt out. But we looked at those big schools and these are about 115, which are charging money which government cannot pick up right now. Here we have the Buddos, the Nabisunsas, the Ntares and so on, where about Shs 300,000 or Shs 500,000 is paid every term. These are schools we thought in the first phase could remain out because there are indicators that the parents with children in those schools can pay. We are looking at a situation where Ugandans cannot even pay Shs 30,000 per term. We left a certain fraction of those schools out. So, if a school in your area is not under this programme, it means that it charges more money than what government can pay. 

Secondly, the left out schools have an official boarding component. We are focusing on day schools, rural schools and schools which charge less money than what some of the other big schools charge. We have those different criteria and we are looking at the first phase to cover some schools and to leave out others. 

Hon. Guma pointed out a circular from Mbabazi talking about seed schools, private schools and public schools. As I explained earlier on, seed schools are put where there are no schools at all in some sub-counties of course not covering all, but there are some public schools which are either girls only or boys only. With girls’ schools, we did not want to start a mix up and bring in boys without further observations or to co-wage those boys’ schools without further examinations. Where we have found such situations, we have put some seed schools. 

Because some schools, as many members have said, were founded on principles which must continue to be observed - in a church founded a school for girls only, we cannot as government just push boys in there. And if they started it like Ntare for boys only, we do not want to push girls there because of this programme. So, where we have such schools, we have preferred to put a seed school, start one which is day and then we shall see how we roll it up later on. 

There was a question on the school going age. I do not know in Uganda today if we have a school going age and, therefore, accessibility or eligibility was not based on age. Why? We are saying all primary school kids should start at age six, but many of you have found them at age four under the UPE programme. We are struggling to eliminate that age because that age is not productive in education. 

We want those kids to grow at home, but it is still an upward task. But now with Universal Secondary Education, we have not limited the age. Many World Bank reports would talk about the age, but in a developing country like Uganda, some of these primary school leavers are 18 or 20. But we have not brought in the age factor with the accessibility or eligibility. When we develop a little bit further, probably the age factor will come in. But now, we are looking at access and eligibility in terms of ability to continue with the programme.

There was a question by Mr Chris Baryomunsi about the future of grant-aiding community schools. Grant aiding is a system where government takes over a school and pays all the costs for running that school. That programme has been halted for the last two years and it will continue to be halted while we introduce Universal Secondary Education. What is going on now is partnership between a community of private schools and government where government is going to pay a specific amount of money but working in partnership with the private owners who contribute and government contributes in order to improve access to education. 

Then the same Member of Parliament raised the issue of contractors. I have taken note about the Kanungu case and I will find out from my technical officers what exactly happened in Kanungu with the contractors who are supposed to construct these schools. 

“What criteria can we use in Karamoja?” Well, it is a very good question but I have stood here many times to explain the case of such areas and under the Universal Primary Education, we have what we call ABEK (Alternative Basic Education for Karamoja). It is working miracles, it has stimulated interest in education and that programme has seen many young kids join formal school education. But when it comes to Universal Secondary Education, I am happy this time, Mr Speaker and dear colleagues, my minister of State for Primary Education comes from the Karamoja area and he has taken on vigorously the task of assessing the situation in Karamoja particularly in addition to his other duties so that he can correctly advise government on what can be done in that region of Uganda. 

But I am happy also to say one donor, I think it is the Irish Government, has come up to construct secondary schools in Karamoja, which have got hostels again to attract many more children to participate in education at that level. The Karamoja situation needs to be studied very carefully because other criteria, which apply to other areas might not squarely apply to Karamoja and my minister of state is tasked to advise government correctly and in details on how we can implement this programme in that part of our country. 

Another question was that not all schools are benefiting. Yes, we have been looking at the facilities available. Facilities have been a driving factor in this respect. Where we find that the school does not have an extra classroom or where it has very small classrooms, it is not good just to push 300 children there. 

We are looking at the classrooms available and other facilities and then we decide whether a school is to take 60, 120 or 180 children according to the facilities, which are available at the moment. We do not have a lot of resources to construct additional classrooms. We are for the first time going to use what is available and a decision was based on what is available to start school on the 19th. 

And of course the location of the schools; as I explained earlier on, quite a lot of factors are looked at in this regard. But we are saying that we want every Ugandan child to access education in the long run. So, location of schools is also another factor, which we are evaluating and examining and definitely whatever we discover will guide further policies and programmes regarding this very factor of location.

Consultation; one of the Members brought up the idea of what the consultation process is. We have consulted quite widely, but on a representative basis. Many LC Vs, many leaders in different categories, head teachers, CAOs, District Education Officers, have been involved in these consultations. And one large consultation seminar of 700 people was held in Mukono recently about three months ago where some Members of this House participated. 

Quite a number of consultations have been held. About a week ago we had a consultation with the foundation bodies and the private providers. We have had consultations with many people including the President himself. So, here I would pledge that we shall continue consulting on those areas where gaps have been identified, and we have left our doors open. I want to thank all of you MPs because I believe many of you have been in the office to see or to get clarifications on some of these issues and I want to assure you that we shall continue consulting on these programmes. 

Hon. Tuma asked where the schools in Jinja were. I will look up the lists and see where we have had new schools coming on board in Jinja.

There was a question about improving the infrastructure in the schools we are partnering with. I must say during the first year this might not come easily, but as we roll down the programme, we shall see how best we can improve the infrastructure in those schools which are participating in the programme. But the same Member of Parliament asked why we reject church schools. I do not think in Uganda we still continue to look at schools belonging to churches or sections of people. 

It was in 1964 when the school system in Uganda was integrated, meaning that all the boundaries for schools were broken down. And since then we have run a very good system of education where anybody walks into any school without considering whether it is for the Church or for the Moslems. But if there is any oversight, hon. Member for Nyabushozi, I think we shall have to talk and I look at what might have happened. But no selection was based on Church or religion or tribe or ethnic group because in education there is no room for such feelings and biases. I will have to consult you on further details regarding that.

I think again one of our colleagues from Karamoja said since 1999 there was a plan to put a seed school and it has never come to pass. It is the same problem of resources. We shall continue mobilising resources and we shall continue putting seed schools and more facilities to make sure that access to education is strengthened. I am just calling upon Ugandans to bear with the Government; at least a step has been made and even a journey of a thousand miles starts with one step. So, we shall continue and see how best we can improve the situation with more resources becoming available. 

A subsequent question to that was that there are no teachers’ houses. Yes, we are calling upon all of you to facilitate this situation. If you have a room to rent somewhere in your home town, give preference to our teachers who are posted there. Otherwise, teachers’ houses are part of the scheme. As you know with the UPE, we have constructed quite a number of teachers’ houses and we shall definitely start with teachers’ houses at secondary level. But where there are not, we are appealing to local communities to assist.

Hon. Kaija I think talked about the nutrition in the UPE programme particularly the milk programme. I will again repeat this: it is the resource envelope which decides whether the children are to feed on milk or posho. But even the posho is not available at the moment. So, what we have done for UPE and what we are doing to Universal Secondary Education is that we are leaving feeding to the parents and guardians for the time being. I do not know for how long, but we are asking parents to take care of that while we try to see if we can meet the tuition and any other costs, which the parents may not be able to take on. We are not feeding these teenagers. Mr Speaker, I take this opportunity to appeal to my colleagues here to counsel the parents to make sure that they feed the teenagers under this programme.

The small boys and girls of eight, nine or 10, have been able to contain it jumping around during lunch hour. But these teenagers need a lot of food; they have a lot of energy and they have a lot of creativity. We would not like to see them creating their situation where they will get lunch in some way because at the end of the day, the programme might not benefit them. It is very important that the parents and guardians take feeding very seriously. For a teenage girl of 16 who will go without lunch for a month, she will get somebody to give her some lunch conditionally. I think we need to really counsel on these issues so that our young people do not miss the objectives of education.

Hon. Mafabi, I am happy to hear you have a large piece of land, but dear colleagues this requirement of 10 acres was to make sure that we can expand these schools. We need to start agriculture, many schools have no land, they have no play grounds, there is no land to put teachers’ houses and there is hardly any land around the schools to develop education as it should be developed. That is why we took the opportunity as we are putting seed schools to start on the ground where we can broaden the scope of education at that particular school. 

Playgrounds are so essential for development; we need to start agricultural and any other experiments, but in many cases we do not have the land. We are requiring that where possible, let us get land where we can expand the programme to benefit the children. We are going in for skyscrapers where we cannot get land, but that is not the best. 

Those of you who pass through Ndeeba can see a primary school there which I think is three or four stories high, but the children are just confined upstairs. That is not education! I really regret every time I pass there, but that is the land available. So we are encouraging people who are starting schools to have land so that you can expand the programme. Hon Mafabi, that might not be a factor preventing people in your area from accessing education, but we shall look at the situation and decide accordingly.  

The contractors - that is a very good question - are giving very high bids. When I learnt about this I went through it with the technical team, which told me it is because of the bidding system. There is a system, which requires that all construction work be bid for and it is a little bit tricky. I think we should look at that as a country. Because we introduced that law, we must look at it and how it affects the costs of construction of facilities in this country. I understand you cannot bend that law and hire those who can offer you the lowest cost. Again, we are looking at quality too. So, that is a very pertinent question but I am studying it also to see how best we can overcome it. 

Delayed construction in Masindi: Yes, I am aware there is a delay in constructing the seed schools in Masindi. My officers are studying the situation.

In the new districts schools have no labs and libraries and yet the policy is on sciences. We are overcoming some of these issues by being very creative in sciences. We have what we call science kits where you can teach science from a table like this one without necessarily having a lab. I want to thank the head teachers; they have been very creative. I am just waiting to see how well sciences were done, but there has been a lot of creativity in making science teaching possible in these schools. 

Posting teachers who are already on the ground, we have already given instructions on this. The teachers who will not report within a specified time to their station will have to choose one or the other. They will either go and report and teach in those areas or they will have to be told to stop where they are. We are finding a problem of teachers wanting to stay around urban areas only. I always say, can we go to India and get teachers to teach in remote areas and Ugandans teach in urban areas? We are having a problem. I am happy that a member is raising it. We are appealing to the teachers to report to their new stations.

Delays in launching a school:  I think the school can be launched even if it has been in use for two or three years. Launching is a ceremony, but I will find out what exactly happened. What I understand is that the school was completed but it is not in use. Why? I think there must be something. I will look into that.

Monitoring of Universal Secondary Education: I am glad you are raising those issues. We are saying that monitoring can be done by anybody. It is the inspection, which is professional. Monitoring means that when you go to your constituency and find that there is some sort of disorder, do not just say, “What is happening in that school?” You monitor, find out what is going on and you may even take a report to the local level but you can also bring a report to the ministry and then draw our attention to what is going on. 

What has weakened these programmes is that they have remained “to whom it may concern”. When you are driving your Pajero and you pass by a school where you realise there is nothing going on, go there and ask what is going on. If you find out that the head teacher is not there or six teachers are not there -(Interjections)- okay let me correct that.

THE SPEAKER:  No, there is no need.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Let me say, when you are passing by -(Laughter)- when you are passing by a school in your constituency, take interest and see what is going on. You might find the head teacher is not there and the teachers are not there. Make a report and say that when you were passing by, you found nothing going on and on your way back there was still nothing. Please, that is your monitoring role. Say what is going on and then we can start the processes which should take care of that.  

Monitoring is just to see what is going on. Somebody can monitor this Parliament. They can come here and see that there are just a few people, the other side is empty, and find out why. So when you think there is something that requires attention, kindly please monitor and let us know. Inspection, on the other hand, is a professional, statutory role where you can go and look at lesson plans, schemes of work, but the monitoring can really give us a clue as to whether inspection is required in that area. 

Mr Speaker, I want, once again, to thank the Members as I always do. They always come up with very good ideas most of which we put into practice. Others are pending resources, others formalities and bureaucracy, but I am sure with this type of co-operation and participation the Universal Secondary Education should start well.

I want to inform this House that Uganda is one of the few countries in Africa which is starting on this programme. The entire Africa is planning to meet in 2008 to discuss this programme but we are ahead. What I am saying here is that let us start vigorously and make sure that the programme continues as UPE did. I thank you so much my colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you, honourable minister, for the impressive way you have handled all the questions. You have been able to answer 19 of them. You were able to jot them down and then you have been able to answer. However, as you were answering the questions, a question was sent to me here. I could not pass it to you but maybe you will be able to answer it. 

Mine is that nobody considered the prisoners. I heard recently when the PLE results were released that a number of prisoners had passed these exams. The question is: will they be participating in the USE policy? The question from a Member, I think from Kigulu South, was under UPE: pupils are not supposed to repeat yet USE states that only students with an average in the range of 4 aggregates to 32 will be taken. What will happen to those with 9 x 4, that is, 36?  

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Probably, I will take the opportunity to answer a question I had overlooked. “Is USE not going to kill the private schools?” I want to say, it will boost the private schools. We are encouraging those with money to take your children to a school, which fits your pocket. Many parents have indicated they are ready to pay a little bit more money for the education of their children. So honourable member, I do not think this will kill the private schools, the St. Lawrences and so on. Those schools you have seen around the country I am sure are going to fill up, but let us watch.  

I think the case of the prisoners is an indication that Uganda is determined to have access to education by all. We are looking at the prisoners and we are going to work out how Universal Secondary Education can be implemented within the prisons of this country. Since they have done PLE, and I believe they always do even O’ Level, this programme will extend to them equally like any other Ugandans.

Now those who scored 9 x 4, it is a little bit clumsy but we are saying those who did not make it can repeat. We are saying they are open to repeat so that they make the grades to be able to qualify for Universal Secondary Education. We do not normally encourage repeating at other levels but at that level I think it will be only fair that these young people repeat primary seven and get their chance the next time. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, let us close this chapter.

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I wanted to find out from the Minister why she has avoided answering a question that was asked by an honourable colleague regarding the costs. I thought I should at the same time provide some information to the Minister regarding the same because there is generally an outcry out there.   

In Katakwi, a community school was built, two classroom blocks, with about Shs 4 million. When the ministry undertakes construction with not so many other buildings and the cost is at a whooping Shs 320 million, I think there is generally an agreed notion that the public is concerned. I thought I would only seek clarification from the Minister why she has not said anything regarding the same.

THE SPEAKER: I think she handled you somehow. She did. She said there was a tender system and so forth, and they are examining it. She did answer that question.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I asked that given the interest Members of Parliament have and the many questions coming, don’t you think that Parliament needs to be brought on board by way of a comprehensive statement or a workshop for Members of Parliament, so that we move together as Parliament with the ministry on this issue of USE?

THE SPEAKER: Is it possible for you to make that statement?

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, I will do that. By the time I make that statement, I will even have a lot of information to give. Tomorrow the selection exercise is winding up so in the statement I will be able to say, “This school took so many students, that district got this”, et cetera. I will do that, given about two weeks time. Thank you.

MR COSMOS MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.   It is good to hear from the honourable minister that we should counsel the parents to fill the young children who will be going to school. Where I come from, and I think most Members here will agree with me, the Chief Executive at one time said no extra cent should be charged on those students or pupils. Now that is in rural areas, maybe not in urban areas. When I look at the statement by the Minister and that by the Chief Executive, being a less person I get confused. Should we take it that the Government position now is as the Minister has said? What is it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue here is that when you are making that statement, you should include the issue of feeding the children under UPE and the children under USE.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW FUNDS FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) FOR THE PURPOSES OF FINANCING THE EAST AFRICAN TRADE AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I was coming to start the sitting I received a communication from the Ministry of Finance that the Minister who should be undertaking items 6 and 7 is out of the country. Therefore, there was nobody who would come to handle these matters. In view of that explanation, we cannot handle these items on the Order Paper until next week. That concludes the business for today as listed on the Order Paper.  

I have been informed that on Tuesday there is a function where many of you are expected to participate at Kabamba. Because of this, I am adjourning the House to Wednesday at 2.00 p.m. to continue with business.

(The House rose at 4.25 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 07 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)
