Thursday, 3rd February, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, (Al-Haji Moses Kigongo), in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO (Nominated Member): Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the Public Accounts Committee of this House I beg to present to the House the Committee’s Reports covering its deliberations, findings, observations and recommendations on the Auditor General’s Reports for the years 1986/87, 1987/88 to 1988/89 and then the special audits which were carried out on the Ministry of Education and DANIDA funds. 

The first Public Accounts Committee of NRC was appointed in 1988 in accordance with section 70 of the Interim Rules of Procedure of the Council. However, in 1992, the Committee was turned from a Sessional Committee into a Standing Committee of the House.  The Committee produced the three reports for the consolidated funds and the special audit reports.  

The Committee has encountered the following problem: (1) The Committee found out that the operations of the Auditor General were hampered by shortage qualified staff in his department; and then he has logistical problems particularly lack of transport, to enable staff to move and conduct effective local inspections.  This lack of staff was caused by failure of the Public Service Commission to replace officers who passed away.  

Also due to poor conditions of service such as poor remuneration, last of housing, and other logistical facilities.  There has been a high turn over of the qualified officers in the department for green pastures.  The Auditor General has proposed that we have an Audit Board instead of having a department, and the same have been reflected in the Draft Constitution that we have an Audit Commission. During the year 1986/87, the Auditor General’s Department had only four vehicles to cover the whole country.  The Members of staff would not reach even a quarter of the country for audit purposes. 

The Committee has also observed with great concern the absolute lack of appreciation and observance of rules and regulations in the Public Service.  The situation has caused a lot of irregularities in the service.  For example, although there was a ban on temporary appointments, in practice, people continued to be appointment on temporary terms.  The position of the Public Commission was that the accounting officers were the causes of irregularities because of their failure to submit the necessary information on which the Public Service could act.  Furthermore, the Committee observed that some Accounting Officers do not take the work of the Auditor General and that of the Committee seriously; this is exemplified by the failure to respond to queries raised by the Auditor General and the Committee.  This in turn delayed the production of Reports of the Auditor General, and the Committee.  

Accounting Standards: when the Committee commenced its work it noted that accounting standards are deteriorated so much and since 1971, the Accounting Officers and even the Treasury were not able to submit to the Auditor General returns of revenue and expenditures required by law.  Bank Reconciliation Statement of receipts and the issues from the consolidated funds for 1987/88 and Capital Expenditure contained in the Appropriation Bill was estimated at Shs.20, 000,000,000/=. 

However, the final accounts showed the capital development to be 26, making a difference of Shs.5, 000,000,000/= whose source would not be established.  Furthermore, with respect to 20 ministries their statements showed that a total of Shs.9, 000,000,000/= was released as Recurrent Expenditure; and yet, the Treasury records showed that they released 9.6 giving an extra release of half a billion shillings which could not be accounted how it had come about

Also, the balance sheet of the consolidated fund for the year 1986/87 for the general revenue accounts showed a nil balance.  However, the normal practice balance sheet would show the cumulative negative or positive balance brought forward from the previous years.  Also, the out turn of revenue and expenditure was also wrong.  

It was found out that the ministries were not carrying out Boards of survey on cash and stores. For example, in 1987/88 only two ministries carried out cash survey, the rest did not.  Similarly, for arrears of revenue, the ministries do not show at the end of the Financial Year what money has not been collected; and in most cases they use this money at source without the authority.  

We look at the management of public funds by ministries and departments due to poor record keeping and failure to observe established accounting regulations.  Irregularities were common in the following areas: Advances, it was noted that Accounting Officers are default to enforce the regulation that requires that official advances be accounted for during the financial year to which they relate.  As a result, the Auditor General reported that several ministries had outstanding advances totaling to half a billion shillings which had not been accounted for.  The Committee has continuously advised the accounting officers not to give fresh advances to any officer who has not accounted for the earlier one.  The Committee has also discouraged the practice of cash advance asserting that if it would be limited to major emergency cases of extreme emergency only. 

Similarly, the imprest has also been handled the same way like advances.  By the time we compiled this Report we had a figure of about Shs.50, 000,000/= a total which had not been accounted for as imprest. Unvouchered expenditure; the overall picture of such payments was that for the three years we had a total of Shs.1, 500,000,000/= old currency and then 1.8 new currency billion shillings not properly vouchered.  

When interviewed, most accounting officers attributed the lack of supporting documents to poor logistical facilities such as lockable filing cabinets, strong rooms for keeping documents and lack of qualified personnel records management.  

However, it is the view of the Committee that misappropriation would not be ruled out.  The Committee recommends to this House, that with immediate effect there should be proved facilities for securing documents.  

On excess expenditure; the Committee was advised by the Auditor General that in 1988/89 Financial Year the Ministry of Finance, released Shs.555, 000,000/= which had no authority of this House; and the Minister concerned has not sought the permission of this House, that was excess Expenditure.  The accounting officers acknowledged the mistake and promised to obtain retrospective authority from this House in the normal manner; nevertheless no step has been taken to date. That is on illegal expenditure that we have not authorised.  

On losses, there have been a lot of losses in the ministries, but most of them have not been reported as required by law.  Funds; some Ministries have maintained funds but most of these funds have been dormant.  The Auditor General advised that if the accounting officers are not interested in such funds, they should be retired and balances transferred to the consolidated fund.  These funds we had the scholarship fund as an example, and it has been dormant.  If it is not required it should be transferred to the consolidated fund.  

The Treasury; as we are all aware the Treasury is at the centre the management of Public Finance.  It receives revenue and funds from external sources as well as to collect the internal revenue.  It also pays out the moneys from the consolidated fund.  The Committee was alarmed by the reports of the Auditor General on the Ministry of Finance for example, for 1988/89 Financial Year.  The report does not mention anything positive, on the accounting obligations of the Treasury; there was either no records or poor and inaccurate statements in all these important areas. (1) The Balance Sheet of the consolidated fund was faulty.  The Balance Sheet of the Treasury General Accounts was faulty, receipts into and issues from the consolidated fund was not balancing.  

The expert had drawn a summary of the Statutory Expenditure Accounts, the same summary of the statement of revenue, and the same statement of Public debt, but there was no record in the Treasury, and it was only in Bank of Uganda. 

Also, a statement of the contingent liabilities like the previous one.  When the accounting officer appeared to answer the shortcomings, he never gave a satisfactory explanation to most of the issues; the Committee attributed the lack of accurate financial statements to incompetent and untrained staff in the Treasury.  Accordingly, recommendations were made for recruitment of qualified accountants from recognized Institutions and Colleges with adequate minimum qualification in accounts.  The Committee also noted with concern that the incumbent Treasury Officer of Accounts had been acting for a long time without any confirmation.  

It is the recommendation of this Committee to this House that the position be filled with a substantive appointment if the incumbent cannot be confirmed.  According to the law, somebody is supposed to act for only six months, but he has been acting Commissioner for the last three years. 

The Committee also looked at the Central Tender Board, and noted from the Auditor General’s Report for the Year 1986/87, that many accounting officers were operating outside the regulations which required them to obtain CTB approval for purchase or sell of Government stores or equipment and for entering into contracts for supplies and services or for building and civil engineering works.  The accounting officers admitted non-observance of the regulations on the Central Tender Board approval, but blamed it for delaying tenders and hence causing price change. This meant fresh submissions of documents for the same contracts.  The Committee noted that, the delays were also sometimes caused by the accounting officers who supplied inadequate information to the Central Tender Board, resulting in length exchange for clarification and details between CTB and the Ministries and the firms hence the delay.  

The Committee, therefore, recommends that this House agrees that CTB should establish a system of monitoring the capabilities of potation firms capable of competing for various activities; and such ensure that tenders are worked to competent firms which are properly registered.  

Abandoned and Delayed Projects; the Committee looked at the example of projects under various ministries that the Auditor General had reported.  In the front we had the Treasury House just across which was partly roofed and abandoned. We had a case of the Buganda Road Court were the contractor was paid but the work was never done.  We had the case of the Imperial Hotel, which was abandoned half way done, when they had purchased the equipment to furnish that hotel and we do not know where the equipment is at the moment.  We had the chance of looking at the Kigumba Cooperative College where the Ministry failed to complete this job though it was paid.  We had a chance of looking at the generator house for the Ministry of Information which was also not well done, and so many others and right now as we speak, the government is being taken to court for breach of contract by its several contractors.  

The Committee looked at the following practices, which lead to the loss of money, delay in implementing of projects or abandonment was common to all these projects.  The Technical Ministry of Housing and Urban Development is fond of issuing interim certificates for payment to be effected when shady work has been done.  An example is that of Buganda Road Court, certificates were given although no work had been done, and the accounting officer was compelled to pay on the certificates.  

Another point it is the revision of contracts, the technical Ministry is very fond of revisiting contracts after they had been awarded, sometimes to higher levels than what the highest bidder awards. Also, there is a delay in the Ministry of Finance to release money for payment of work properly completed.  This discourages the contractors who at times abandon work. An example is this Parliament.  We have approved that money should come, we have our roof re-celled but I understand the money has not yet come.  

Also, what we noticed that there is conflict of interest where contracts are given to firms whose owners or directors were the technical personnel in the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development.  This resulted in interim certificates being issued for shoddy work or no work done at all.  An example; we have what we call Mantam consultants who were contracted to rehabilitate Buganda Road Court, the person who supervised the work was the Director of that Company and at the same time was an employee of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development.  At times firms were paid in excess of the contracted sum without the Central Tender Board approval, an example is the Imperial Hotel; and in some cases contracts were awarded to incompetent firms, which did not have the technical capacity to perform the job at hand.  We had the company technical works that was given to carry out renovation of the Imperial Hotel.  

Also, the accounting officers responsible for payment for relevant projects took no direct interest in insuring that work was properly done before payment could be effected.  The Committee has noted with concern that due to the ongoing weaknesses, Government has lost a total of detectable and calculatable shs.342, 000,000/= old currency and Shs.181, 000,000 new currency in trying to finance the above mentioned projects.  

Embezzlement of public funds.  The Committee has noted with concern extensive scale of embezzlement of public funds both in Government Ministries, departments or parastatal bodies.  Cases involving embezzlement of a total Shs.1, 200,000,000/-, 3,000,000 dollars 60,000 have been handled and referred to the CID Department. The mishandling of numerous cases in the offices of the CID, the SPP and the courts, horrified the Committee. These cases involved millions of shillings; most of which cannot be recovered.  Consequently when the Director of CID was put to task why his department has not performed well in case of embezzlement he gave the under mentioned excuses.  He sighted lack of transport, lack of funds to travel, he is given only 2 million shillings monthly for travel inland and nothing for going abroad to check on the thieves and this is for the whole department.  He also sighted that he does not have - there was lack of information fund, they have only - they have allocated the 50,000 shillings to the PAC squad to check on those who embezzled government funds.  

We looked at the inefficiency of courts.  One; there are frequent transfers of magistrates who abandon cases which their successors refused to take over, and then there is lack of accommodation for some court so that they can proceed at the same time.  We have the cases now of Mengo Court accommodating the former Buganda Court.  

We are also advised that there is lack of a good number of State Attorneys in the DPP’s Department and the few who are there, mishandle the cases.  Then, it is common knowledge that there is lack of transport for prisoners to come to court.  Another excuse given by the Director of CID said there is abuse of discretion in daily application resulting in embezzlers of huge sums of money being released on bail.  This gives them freedom to destroy evidence and influence witnesses.  

Lastly, there is only one hand writing expert who cannot coup up with volume of available work.  Apart from the above reasons the Committee observed and noted that there is out right corruption in offices of CID, DPP and courts which lead to creation - which has led to the creation of porter commission to which hon. Karuhanga is a Member.  We also had special audits.  You recall, Sir, that the Prime Minister requested us to carry out investigations into the missing funds of DANIDA fund with Uganda Constitutional Commission and the later on we requested for special audit for the Teaching Service Commission.  The Committee discovered that there was extreme mismanagement of finances in both cases as a result of the following; for DANIDA there was failure by the government to adhere to terms of agreement on basis of which DANIDA had extended the grant with Uganda Constitutional Commission. 

Two; there was laxity on the part of the Secretary for Constitutional Affairs and also in case of Ministry of Education, the Secretary Teaching Service Commission and the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports in a forcing standing accounting and financial regulations.  It was also found that extra responsibilities were being assigned to officers already who had a lot to do, or to officer who were incompetent, and then having done so, it has been a failure by the accounting officers to monitor the performance of the duties so assigned.  This can be sighted in the Ministry of Education where a senior accountant was made a purchasing officer, and had to approve the input and to sign the cheques; so he was everything.  

As a result of these weaknesses, funds were being used without the knowledge of the accounting officer.  Procurement of stores and fuel was done and managed, but the established regulations and records were not available.  

Funds in the Ministry of Education were deliberately diverted from one Vote to another in a calculated move to swindle.  A lot of payments lacked support documents and one could establish the genuine of such transactions, moneys were advanced for various purposes but recipients never accounted for these advances.  Funds were paid for programmes and activities that had not been put in place or which were non-existence.  

In some cases, funds were drawn but were never paid out to the would be recipients.  Cash was being drawn from the banks and spent in office without the would be recipients being paid.  

Also, in the Ministry of Education, we found out that the wardens were operating bank accounts single handedly. For example, the Warden of Kololo Hostel was the sole signatory and was the paying officer, and we also saw a case where a retired education officer remained a signatory to an account.  Mr. Chairman, these anomalies resulted in the embezzlement of Shs.61 million for Constitutional Affairs and a staggering Shs.797 million for Teaching Service Commission.  

The Committee also made a special tour of various projects; we found out that we had goods imported by UCB on behalf of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  These included agricultural chemicals, buses, trucks, pick-ups motorcycles, poultry feeders and drinkers.  We also visited Namalere; the Committee looked at the farm machinery, company tractors and bulldozers. The Committee also went to Naguru Police housing unit and noted that the project of Naguru was badly designed and nothing had been done.  

The Committee went around and noted that there is a lot of property which had been repossessed where the government had invested money without any benefits; one of them - there is a workshop for the prisons department the owner has come back despite the fact that the government had put in a lot of tools.  

The Committee further went to the government clearing company; that is Transocean and found a lot of items that were lying around but had not been claimed, and the reason was that some Ministries were lacking funds.  We went around the Ministry of Public Service, we looked at the co-ownership scheme retrenchment, and then the low moral in the service. 

We went to the Treasury and checked on the recruitment and training scheme and found that, most of the accounting officers there are being recruited from ‘O’ level and they just go through the ladders despite the fact that we have graduates with diplomas and degrees but without any job; and if you want to join you start as a clerical assistant, unless you are a graduate with a degree.  We also checked in the Ministry of Education and found that the PAPSCA Project vehicles were being misused.  

After the tour, a report was submitted to the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and we hope a copy was tabled in the House for that tour, and we hope he has implemented that one.  

Having gone over all those problems, the foregoing outlines bring out clearly spread mismanagement of public funds, mismanagement of government projects and lack of adherence to government regulations and procedures.  

The Committee, therefore, wishes to recommend to you hon. Members that the following be put in place.  One, that all government departments and ministries should have qualified accountants who can effectively control huge sums of money approved by this Council.  Two, there should be an established internal audit department in the Ministry of Finance, headed by the Chief Internal Auditor, who should report directly to the Secretary to the Treasury independent of the Commissioner Treasury Officer of Accounts.  

The current system of the Ministry of Finance, what we call examination section, is useless to the current one, as the staff manning it work directly under the accountants in charge of the ministries, who in turn report to the Commissioner Treasury Officer of Accounts and cannot, therefore, expose malpractices going on for fear of victimisation.  

The Internal Audit department should be responsible for carrying out internal audit, to curtail misuse of public funds, as the Auditor General’s Department normally audits books of accounts after the end of the financial year, and can only be present - can only present a post-mortem after public funds have been squandered.  That is why we are recommending an internal audit system that we can monitor the expenditure and not wait until the end of the financial year.  

It is also recommended that revenue generating units like prisons, workshops, sawmills, and the like should be provided with sufficient revolving funds to enable them meet the country’s needs.  

Four, the Auditor General should ensure that auditors from his department attached to his ministries and departments should not overstay, as they are likely to result into too much familiarisation and possible collision with the staff of the ministries.  We have seen that auditor who have stayed for over five years and now they are part of the internal system and you know if you wanted to transfer them today they will refuse and we have received reports that if there is any query, it is only a query where they have not agreed with your accounting officer.  

It is further recommended that the Ministry holds periodic seminars for permanent secretaries to educate them about government policies and management of public affairs, and then their role as accounting officers.

As stated above, the Committee noted that most tenders who win government contracts initially under bid their competitors and then see revision of the quoted price in cases which - in some cases which are higher than the highest original bidder.  They under - they are advised that you under quote after that they seek and say look because of the inflation can you revise? The Committee recommends to this House that, instead of excepting the revised - the revision, such jobs should be re-tendered.  

The Committee has recommended for the accounting officers that instead of settling on the certificates issued by the technical ministries, the accounting officers should be interested and get involved in the projects under their ministries, and should be satisfied with work done before effecting payment.  In some cases, it was noted that the Auditor General’s officer is not aware of the contracts being made with the government. 

The Committee also recommends that the Chief Legal Officer of the government, that is the Attorney General, should be involved in negotiations and signing all contracts for government departments and ministries.  

The Committee in addition noted that some suppliers who win tenders do not have physical addresses, they get paid advances or when they supply air, it is very difficult to trace them.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that before any supplier or contractor can be engaged, the ministries concerned must know the physical addresses and directors.  

Number ten; it was noted that Bank of Uganda was being audited by private firms, and the Committee recommends to this House, that the Bank of Uganda should be audited by the Auditor General as was the case before the decree as promulgated empowering the Board of Directors to appoint their Auditors.  

The Committee was advised by the accounting officer that there are some officers who cannot be traced or who are transferred without their knowledge, and in some cases they go without accounting for money.  The Committee has, therefore, recommended that, before an officer is dismissed, retrenched, or transferred, recovery of money advanced and other property should be made through proper handing over for his accountability.  

The Committee has further noted that the government is importing different brands of vehicles without taking into consideration of how to maintain them, and some of them if you went to the Ministry of information you will see a lot of those which are abandoned due to lack of spare.  It is now recommended to this house that we approve that we standardise the vehicles which we import to the Ministry - different ministries. 

The Committee also looked at the embezzlement of public funds, and, therefore, recommends an amendment of the relevant laws to ensure any cases involving embezzlement of government funds immediately action of dismissal is taken and then the case is handed to the police for investigations.  

In the meantime, those who are known to have embezzled mismanaged or fail to account for public funds should be immediately dismissed without prejudice to any legal steps that may have or may be taken.  We have them in these three reports; some of them have been taken to court, and have been acquitted because the files are missing, and then the following day they walk back and say well, I am back on my chair.  

So, we are requesting that where money is embezzled, such officers should be dismissed with immediate effect.  The Committee also recommends that, where there is primafie case of embezzlement the government should recover the full value of the embezzled amount without necessarily having to go to court.  

It is also being advocated by this Committee that the government should allow other clearing agencies to compete with Transocean in clearing government goods to create efficiency.  When we went around we found that the treasury did not have copies of the accounting instructions for the staff; and we are requesting that they do this to their members.  The last note was made in 1970, but I understand they have revised but the members were not aware - the employees.  Recommendation number (17); when we went around Namalere, we found that a wrong type of tractors had been imported from Algeria through barter trade protocols, and are lying in Namalere.  

The Committee, therefore, recommends that in future, the government should develop the capacity to utilize technical personnel, to negotiate contracts to avoid further losses that could be avoided by appropriate expertise and prudent participation.  We should, we a team of negotiators who should be selected and trained. 

Lastly, I wish to  - the Committee is requesting this House that the Public Accounts Committee report should be debated soon after they have been laid on the table; not to take years begging that we debate these reports.  It is so important that when we are debating the public Accounts reports, the accounting officers should be here to see the shortcomings in their ministries. It is so disheartening that we do not have any here.  The Ministers are here but they are not the accounting officers.  

Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do receive, consider and adopt the report of the Public Accounts Committee as presented.  I beg to move. (Applause)  	

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the Motion on the Committees as presented by the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee.  Mr. Chairman, first of all, allow me -(Interruption)

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of order. Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Manzi Tumubweine from Rukiga County, who is a Member of the Public Accounts Committee to start discussing a Report that he had refused to sign?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is quite in order.  Proceed, please.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Actually we signed the original but the original. Allow me first of all to give one small comment about an issue, which has been in the papers recently on the foreign exchange crisis.  

Appreciation of the currency can be as bad as devaluation of the currency.  In other words, we want to appeal to the Bank of Uganda to actually, actively participate in the management of foreign currency, in the buying of the foreign currency and therefore, creating a situation where there is more money supply on the market.  Because if more dollars are going on the market and are not being supported by the local currency, we shall have a greater crisis because exports are going to fall and imports are going to rise and we shall end up with dividends.  Mr. Chairman - (Interruption)

MR. KASAIJJA KABUUBI:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member from Rukiga County to bring us a point about the Bank of Uganda devaluation and what not, while we had a full session this morning that the Ministry ably explained the circumstances pertaining to this issue.  Is there any relevancy? 

THE CHAIRMAN: He is doing it with my permission. Proceed, please.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, let me now move to the report as presented by the Public Accounts Committee.  The issue of lack of qualified technical staff, is brought about by two problems. One, is that the old guard in the ministries discourage young graduates to keep in the ministries and they insist on employing people who are less qualified and therefore who are likely to listen to them more, and this should be discouraged and we believe that the Minister of Finance should encourage in recruiting people who are qualified, especially being that we have got enough institutions producing accountants.

Secondly, the issue of the living wage, created a situation where qualified accountants tend to leave as soon as they join government because they are looking for greener pastures and therefore, we should encourage or we should look at the situation where we can improve on the wage situation in order to retain qualified technical people.    

Another issue that must be stressed and which was looked at is that we need to build the institutions that actually manage the funds of government and these include Auditor General’s Department, which is under staffed, and probably not having so well qualified staff in quite a number of cases.  We also need to give them enough logistics to be able to be above situations where they are compromised.  The Inspector General of Government office should be improved and strengthened, and so should the CID and the DPP’s Offices.  Otherwise, we can have reports but if there are no follow-ups we shall have problems.  

Something else that must be looked at is the implementation of the Leadership Code. It is worth motive that somebody embezzles funds, puts up mansions and when he is found to have embezzled, she has the capacity even to buy the file and get lost and he is left to go free.

There should be a way that we should look at his assets and if we cannot prove on how we achieve them, then we should be able to be questioned.  However, unless the Leadership Code is put into - is implemented, that might be a very difficult situation to have.  We have discovered that in quite a number of ministries, there is a technical loophole that allows Accounting Officers and their staff to spend money without Authority which - of the CTB. All monies spent, which are less than one million, can be done without going to the CTB.  So, what happens, is that quite a number of ministries break down all their expenditures into units of Shs.900 and Shs.1, 000 and, therefore, are able to spend the equivalent of Shs.20 million by having 22 expenditures and therefore, they are able to jump the Auditor General and the CTB and in the long run, they are able to supply air, in quite a number of cases - and in fact -(Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  I would like to add some information to the observation made by the hon. Member, his experience - he is not even limited to a Public Service, we also find it in the Parastatals.  How to avoid that besides putting on a limit, is also to time a time profile to the expenditure levels, so that a person is not allowed to spend so much within a period.  Otherwise, they go on doing exactly what the hon. Member has said.  They just chop it into pieces and they spend all the money and there is no limit.  But if you put a time profile on it, at least it is another counter check to stop multi-practices.  Thank you.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, as a result of that chopping up of these expenditures, members of staff of those ministries end up by being the suppliers, because they are told that we need paper today, and he goes and supplies the paper of Shs.900, 000 of supplies one of Shs.500,000 and part of it is air and then tomorrow he supplies more, and as a result things are not received at the Central Tender Board that the suppliers become members of the ministries. 

We also wish to stress the fact that there should be a level where officers must commit Government, it is no use having the capacity to commit the government, because unless you establish at what level somebody can commit government and government should be committed, we shall have a problem in the long run and quite a number of the debts that the government is having to the private sector, have been committed by junior officers without sometimes the consent and knowledge of their bosses, and therefore, by the time you look around an Invoice is raised goods are purportedly said to have been delivered and the government has got to pay it because somebody has already signed.  So, we need a level where somebody must have the capacity and ability and authority to commit the government.  

In quite a number of cases, accounting officers themselves who are the top officials go mismanage or fail to manage properly their Accounts and the only solutions sometimes is to take him to another Ministry. I think that is wrong, if accounting officers cannot manage one ministry, although he remains in some other positions, the following year, the Secretary to the Treasury should not appoint him as an accounting officer because he has failed to manage funds in one year, he should not be allowed to mismanage more funds the following year.  

We discovered that, the findings of our Public Accounts Committee have no clear linkage of how they can be implemented. It is one thing for you to report, having discussed the debate and passed but, as long as there is no linkage on how it can be implemented, then we will find ourselves in a situation where the reports may lie around.  We feel that Parliament should have a way of passing some regulations that when a report has been passed, it must be implemented.  Otherwise, we shall have the report that we shall have no implementation and we shall keep the same problems and I am sure the Parastatal Organisation/ Committee we are having the same problem. 

We discovered that there is a lot of irresponsibility or lack of seriousness, especially in the cases of technique; ministries which are supposed to help government implement projects.  You can take a case of say, Housing Ministry they are given a Project, they do not bother to finish the project and at the end of the Financial Year as it is normal in government the project is left unattended and there is no provision on how it will be finished.  Soon after they will tell the other Ministry that actually the money was frozen, even the money has been given to that technical ministry is not and there is no follow up by the accounting officer because the Financial Year has ended.  I think technical ministries should be followed up more and should take responsibility for all the monies they received from other non-technical ministries for the project to be implemented.  

Otherwise, we should increase inefficiency and sometimes in fighting of the ministries and luck of seriousness in the implementation of the project.  Mr. Chairman, with those few remarks I wish to support the report of the Public Accounts Committee and hope that they will implement at the earliest.

DR. MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality, East Jinja): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I start by thinking the Committee for presenting us with this Report, a job well done. But this Report is yet another manifestation of symptoms affecting our society.  There are symptoms of a disease that is well spread in our sick society and I really doubt whether dealing with some of these recommendations by Committee will necessarily improve the Accountability in our midst.  I think the solution is for beyond the scope of the terms and references. Of the Public Accounts Committee and we should try to tackle this matter, most obviously than before, when I look at the recommendations, and there are some that I would like to disassociate myself with. 

Number six; on page 16, the Committee noted that in most cases, tenderers who have won government contracts initially under beat their contractors.  This problem, one may want to think that it is a matter of one ministry or another.  But we have got consultants and also in these contracts there are what are termed fractuation clauses; these should take account of any increases in contract prices or the other way. But because government sometimes cannot perform on a schedule especially when it comes to the payment of contractors.  A project, which is supposed to be done in six months, is done in over three years.  Those days when it was easy to devalue, you would find that actually if the dollar rate is changed, inevitably the contractor must come up.  

But then I better declare my interest here, I am the Chairman of the Uganda Association of National Contractors, and so, I have had a lot to do with this matter in pleading, trying to re-consult the differences between my members who are contractors in Uganda on one hand, and the government on the other, and this matter cannot be therefore, it would be more for more expensive for the government to think that, because there is a change in price, you should go to re-tender.  I think it is better we negotiate with the on going contractors.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, if one reads the recommendation from the Committee, the people who actually under compete they act immediately even before the implementation of those project and I think that was the essence of the recommendation from the Committee. People build laws and immediately after building before they start, they want revision and I am saying, in that case, and as a matter of information, that in order to avoid such a situation, one; there should be a negotiating clause.  

Two; there should be a performance bond, so that if you do not perform, you are penalised or you lose, because in most practices in this country, what people do is to build law and immediately because they know how to get round it they go round immediately, before even implementation is done. They say, we want more money; and that is what this Committee was trying to fight.

DR. MAGEZI: Mr. Chairman, I quite appreciate the information but the point I am trying to labour on is that first of all, contracts are not simply awarded on the lowest tenders alone, there are a number of criteria points, there are a number of performance, previous knowledge experience and the rest of it, and this if the consultants do their job, they even have a price at which the job cannot be done below.  But the problem should not be put that when a contractor necessarily asks for a higher price, we should re-tender, I think we should make the consultants more vigilant in enforcing and analysing the tenders before awarding them.  

Even number seven on page 17, which is telling the accounting officers to look at the project before they pay, I mean we are really expecting accountants to be more of technical consultants than may be, if you have got a good consultant, that is a person who is answerable to you and the client should be on course call up consultant in case you made a show for a short job what has happened.  I think this matter has happened over this road to between Kampala and Jinja and consultants have to pay some money to government for a decision not well done.  

Number eight; I would also not like to agree with that one because we have the Central Tender Board and some of Members of this House are members of that Board.  Now, the important thing here is that the Attorney General’s Chambers should be represented may be, there should be a representative of the Minister responsible for Attorney General’s Chambers and he should make in his inputs when these contracts are being done. But many of the contracts now flying around in Uganda either have feedick terms of employment or they are East African, established building contracts. So, Uganda cannot be an exclusion to making its own unless the contract is really very peculiar in origin.

On point nine; on page 17, the Committee notes that physical addresses of suppliers and contractors in most cases is not even known. I think I have never heard of this because most of contracts you do supply pre-qualification conditions whereby physical addresses, working capital, share capital, names of directors are enlisted in that sort of thing and if there are cases where this has happened I would like to call on the committee to highlight them unless they are supplying peanuts but not a contract-worth talking of where you can employ a contractor whose physical address is not known to the government.  And then I go to page 18.  I think here we are again stepping on very slippery ground.  

The Committee is recommending in Clause 13, page 18 that immediate disciplinary action of dismissal is taken and then the case is handed to the Police for investigation.  Suppose he is presumed innocent until proved guilty?  I think this is within, is it human rights or whatever it is - but I know that in Uganda as by our constitution you cannot do this, I think the only provision may be for suspension at half pay but I would not like this House to pass  -(Interruption)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor on the question of physical addresses, if you read the report of 30th June, 1989, page 30, Section (2), 29 (2), the Committee discovered that for instance a company called the Swed Transport Company had been given tender to do some job.  However, the Accounting Officer explained that efforts to recover the money were not successful as the company could not be traced and that means that when he got it, he went but there was no physical address where he could be traced.

DR. MAGEZI: I note and I will take a lot of interest in that case.  But, Mr. Chairman, to go back on my Clause, I thing we should highlight the point that may be if there is this sort of embezzlement let the right arm of government take over form there and we should give them to operate within the established constitution so that we do not appear to be saying  -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to suggest that the hon. Member should distinguish between the criminal cases and the cases of employment.  I am extremely free to employ someone or not to employ him. If I feel that someone is not giving me good service I can terminate his services and the government should be free to terminate services of those people who the government feels are not delivering and the case in point here is that if someone is not delivering the government should feel free to dismiss him and that is what we are saying and then the case of a penal code can be taken later.  This was the case before, it is only very recently that the Standing Orders were amended to provide these cases that we have, that we are dealing with now.  

DR. MAGEZI: Mr. Chairman, I thank hon. Sibo for that information.  I would definitely oppose any proposed amendment to our laws to provide for this sort of sentence before a person is proved guilty by the law courts.

In conclusion -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend and also the House that the Public Accounts Committee’s job is to probe the public finances.  Now, these public finances are governed by Standing Financial Regulations for which the state, the government or a head of department has a say and power to deal with the culprit so thee is no question of going to contracts.  Already the State has the Standing Financial Instructions unless this Chapter 149 is dead or even the so-called Penal Code and other things.

DR. MAGEZI:  I did not follow the information being given. (Laughter) All the same, I hope that when we come to pass this report we shall go clause by clause because I do have some objections on some points raised there but in conclusion, I would like really to appeal to Members in this House that much as we condemn the civil servants and we are exposing a lot of bad things methods of work and the rest of it, we should ask and try to understand why are they behaving this way.  I think even if we dismiss the whole Civil Service today and we recruited born-again Christians tomorrow, all the same these matters will continue coming up.  This is why I think we should try to find out why they are behaving in the manner they are doing.  We may try to bring in all sorts of laws but they will all be broken and we shall only be aggravating the problems affecting our society.  It is time that we took off time and deliberated on what we consider to be the reasons behind the present quagmire of our Civil Service.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWABITA:  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Report by the Public Account Committee and I must thank the chairman and his team for a good job done.

It is now imperative that with the decentralisation policy, the Minister of Finance must build up a proper audit section at district level.  If this is not done, we shall face a lot of embezzlement more than it is being done at the headquarters.  When you go upcountry you will find that the question of air supply and ghost workers is still around because as the people in the DES office or the Treasury have a way of fitting in their own people to work under them or work for them.  

Another shortcoming we found out is that many people in the Treasury offer themselves tenders for the supplies for the district councils so you find that everything is intermingled with the officials of the treasury while at the same time they are the suppliers and definitely the results are not always good because they find it cheaper to supply sub-standard products and therefore maximise their profits.

Another problem we are facing if the audit section is not strong up-country is the collection of cash from the sub-counties headquarters. Somebody from treasury goes to a sub-county headquarters with a funny voucher and collects cash for his job or his bosses sending him.  I would advise that all public funds should be drawn by cheques so that there is some control on expenditure and minimise the misuse of this cash which is being practised at the Gombolola levels or sub-county levels.

When we talk of the personnel in accounts departments especially in ministries, we find that the so-called accountants are not accountants. These are again accounts clerks who have been working in the ministry for the last ten to fifteen years and by just mere promotion they have turned into executive officers and from there they become accountants of the Ministry. So we find that -(Interjection)- Pardon? (Interruption) 

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The point he is raising is very critical, but sometime, back we sat here and very laboriously established a Central Purchasing Corporation.  I ma therefore seeking clarification from the chairman of this Committee, the Public Accounts Committee, what role of this Central Purchasing Corporation in all these problems.  We seem to be talking about problems in accounting offices, on permanent secretaries and supplies, and yet we set up this organisation, and we thought it would assist us to harmonise purchases in all these ministries.  What is the CPC doing, Mr. Chairman? Thank you.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, I cannot answer that, I think the chairman could prepare a better answer.  Now I was talking about these executive officers who become accountants.  With such a personnel, he cannot have the ability to do financial analysis, or to do bank reconciliation or foremost, to do proper budgeting.  Every year when we go through the budgets of various ministries, you find that the figures are basically arbitrary and they have got a system where they say last year we increased by ten percent, this year fifteen percent. What is the criterion? So these people are just used to those systems and they tell you that is how we do it without any reasoning really.  So, really the Auditor General has got a problem, he must man most of these departments in ministries with qualified accountants.

Then, I want to talk on forgeries  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you giving information? Mr. Wanendeya, please.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The point is that in most parts of the world when you have qualified accountants and are member of professional organisations the embezzlement is very much minimised for the simple reason that those who are professional and are members of professional bodies they will be expelled from their own organisations.  So, it is very high time that the government considers in recruiting and employing professional accountants if the government is interested in minimising embezzlement and corruption. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BYARUHANGA:  Point of information. It is only in the Ministry of Finance that this happens that a person starts as a clerk and ends up as a commissioner.  Otherwise, in all other ministries if you started as a Clerk you end at the level of Chief Executive Officer, if you have done very well and if you start as an Assistant Officer, you end at the level of Principal Assistant Officer but you do not become a Commissioner. We have assistant commissioners in the Ministry of Finance who do not have any professional qualification whatsoever.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member of this House that the staff even if at one time may be working in the Ministry of Finance, are the responsibility of the Public Service Commission.  The Ministry of Finance does not recruit its own people, and it does not promote its own people, and these people are regulated like all other people by the Public Service Regulations.  Sir, I want to give the right situation, Finance neither recruits, sacks or promotes but all these are public servants as they are in all Ministries.  Thank you very much.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I was talking about forgeries.  Three groups carry out forgeries in ministries - the suppliers, and the staff in a certain ministry and then you have people in the Ministry of Finance.  They collude together and use artificial companies, raise documents from certain ministries and they pass them through all the stages very fast and within a week a cheque is printed and it is signed and it is paid to that artificial account.  This has been found out and I hope the Ministry of Finance is taking measures to correct that because if it is not done you will find that millions of shillings have just gone through that system. 

I am suggesting that in order to reduce these forgeries, before the Ministry of Finance pays a cheque, it should first go back to the mother ministry so that they can check “is this our company, and what have they supplied us.”  But most of the time these people collect their cheques in the Ministry of Finance and by the time you know it is already a double payment or the cheque is already paid on artificial companies.  So, I warn the Minister of Finance to put some measures to stop these air payments just manipulated by the staff themselves.

I want to have a word on store-keeping.  Many ministries especially those who have supplies, due to poor management of their stores get a lot of items going bad or waste especially things like drugs, like cement or any perishable items.  Now, instead of using what we call ‘first thing first out’ they continue using ‘last in first out’ and then at the end of the period you find the goods at the end of the store are all rotten and who cares, after all they write them off.  That is a lot of loss to the government and our country.

I want to end with abandoned projects. Everybody can witness this.  The Treasury building is a sore in the eyes of the public.  This is the Ministry of Finance who controls finance but this building has been there for the last five years if not more.  I do not know why they cannot budget at least in one year if not more.  I do not know why they cannot budget at least in one year and finish it and use it because they need it really.  

Another good example is the Posts and Telecommunication building, that white elephant in the centre of the town.  We are here crying for offices but the offices are there rotting every year. Now, what happens with such projects?  When a project is started and is not completed it can be even three times more expensive that it originally was.  So, with our economist and financial managers in the Ministry of Finance they should see to it that if there is no money to start a project, do not start it, especially in construction.  If you start a construction project, please make sure you finish it; otherwise it becomes very expensive and, therefore, a wastage of national resources.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OKURUT: Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would like to thank you for making it possible for us to discuss this Report.  I want my hon. Colleague to realise that PAC is a Committee of this House.  You have constituted these committees, and you have appointed them, and they have produced reports and yet these reports are not discussed. PAC works according to the reports, which are prepared by the Auditor General, but now once the Auditor General has written the reports your committee, PAC works on it, and scrutinises the report of the Auditor General and after that a report is made by PAC. What is really a pity is that when these reports are tabled here, they are just put into the dustbin, which is really a pity particularly with certain reports that are very valuable. We have had another report, this Departed Asian Custodian Property Board report that has been forgotten completely.  I think there is also the Leadership Code and others.  I think what is necessary is for this House to put its foot down and say that we did not appoint committees, which produce reports, and the reports are not debated.  

What is even more important is that what has been recommended, whether accepted - if accepted by this House, action should be taken.  It is important that we take action of what we have decided in this House.  It is extremely important and I think, we should really have a new code, our own code saying that our committees when they produce reports this House should be able to make sure that the reports are not only debated but actions taken.

I would like to correct some sort of impression which - or shall I call it a mis-impression which was created by the Deputy Minister of Finance - there is something called job description. I hope you all know it.  The Minister of Finance must give job description to the Public Service Commission of the person they want the Public Service Commission to recruit.  So it is not a question of blaming the Public Service Commission.  It is the Ministry of Finance of Finance, which does not give sufficient information for the Public Service Commission to recruit the staff they want.  (Interruption)  

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, just to add on to that observation made by the hon. Member, the a Medical Assistant who joins the Medical profession remains a Medical Assistant until he goes and trains as a doctor.  I cannot understand why in the Ministry of Finance a clerk starts as accounts clerk and suddenly becomes an accountant without training.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, I wish to give further information that during the Public Service Commission interviews the Ministry of Finance is heavily represented when they are recruiting the staff to be recruited in that Ministry.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, I want for emphasis to repeat the information I gave.  The Ministry of Finance is not a recruiting Ministry for staff who work there, and neither are the job descriptions, the authority of the separate ministries  -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I inform -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order. Take your Seat, please.  Proceed, Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, what I want to recollect, Sir  -(Interruption)

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of order.  Is it, Mr. Chairman, in order for the Deputy Minister of Finance to give false information to this House when he knows very well apart from the fact that the Ministry is heavily represented on the public Service Commission, the Ministry of Finance actually is a supervising Ministry for all accounting staff in all ministries.  Is it in order for him to give false information?

THE CHAIRMAN: That is what he is trying to inform you.  Proceed, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Now, Mr. Chairman, I wish Members should - I know it is easy to be excited but I think we should listen to each other.  The Ministry of Finance can ask the Public Service Commission to recruit them some officers, but that does not make the Ministry of Finance a recruitment authority.  All Public Servants are recruited by the Public Service Commission and they are promoted, it does not matter on whose recommendation but they are promoted by the Public Service Commission -(Interjection)- Listen, please. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Please, listen.  As hon. Members give me an opportunity because I am also a Member of this House.  I have sat here, and I have listened to everybody.  If the Ministry of Finance wants an accountant it will inform the Public Service Commission that so many established posts are vacant, the posts in the Ministry of Finance are established, they are not created daily or whenever a situation arises.  These are established posts and, therefore, they are known if they are established and the qualifications needed for each post is also published; it is known by the Public Service. (Interruption) Listen, please.  By the way for me I have at least worked in that Ministry for now eight years why don’t I tell you what happens so that you can correct the situation.  

So, what happens if the Ministry of Finance wants an Accountant - because there is an established post for that accountant also there are accepted qualifications in the Public Service as to who is an Accountant.  So, the adverts go out to advertise for so many accountants and the qualifications are stated.  What I want to make clear to hon. Members is that this is not an arrangement done privately by the Ministry of Finance; if there are no qualified accountants it is not deliberately taken by the Ministry of Finance to leave a qualified Accountant and give a job deliberately to someone who is not qualified. I want to make this one very clear.  

So the problem why there are no qualified accountants in the Ministry of Finance are also known because there are no qualified accountants in sufficient number in the country and the few professional accountants find it more paying to work for Barclays, to work for Shell, Mobil and so on that the Public Service - because of remuneration and because of the shortage.  That is why the government recognising this came up to ask you to provide, to pass a law, to create an institute for Ugandan Public Accountants which will be assisted by the Ministry of Education to deliberately create a body of professional accountants.  It was intended to address this shortage of personnel.  I thank you very much.

MR. OKURUT:  Mr. Chairman, now that the Deputy Minister has dragged me to this question of recruitment, I would like to say that since he has been there for eight years and he has been following a bogus recruitment policy we would like him to change his mind and realise that it because of recruiting wrong people that is why we have a problem of embezzlement and management of finance.  We have got enough people -(Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of information.  I want to inform my Brother in-law holding the Floor, on three lines; one the question of recruiting under qualified or unqualified people has been going on in the country for many, many years.  Two in the past whenever a new Government came into power under the guys of cleaning the bad guys it caused a lot of inconveniences by uprooting many Ugandans from their jobs.  I would like to state that when the National Resistance Movement came into power as you may know, and one of the steps taken was to let everybody remain where he or she is in order to create an atmosphere or stability that is a fact.  Whether they were qualified or under qualified that was the case done, in the course of time to begin replacing one by one or two by two when the public including Member of this august House have realised that, that particular person if not competent for a job.  

You may recall, that when we tried to clean up the Ministry of Education where primary 7 dropped outs were headmasters of primary schools there was an up lower in this House that were replacing services nearer to the people I think if this point is missed it will be a big mistake, even some of us now making contribution have been responsible for recruiting incompetent and under qualified people and placing the many places and when they are suddenly replaced we are the first ones to go back to our constituencies that “abasajja batuli bubi” that we are being harassed; so if this point is not noted we make a big mistake.  

The second observation, Sir, is that education since the early 70s till about recently, toward the end of the 80s, was not taken seriously so that professional training was resorted to as a last resort that has created a big shortage of qualified people within the country.  

The third one was that because of instability within the country even the few we had run out of the country so we are not training new people, the few qualified were running out of the country obvious result is that you would have a shortage of qualified people in the country, and since Government offices and countries cannot be closed or declared bankrupt as one Member said yesterday, Uganda either would have been declared bankrupt or the official office is closed somebody must run the office of the principal accountant, somebody must occupy the office of the Commissioner even when they are terribly under qualified.  

So, instead of complaining that these events are taking place it would be more fruitful if hon. Members could make suggestions as to what could be done to address this eminent position making complaints alone and pointing out errors is not sufficient we must make a contribution as to what can be done to redress this matter and he should also be prepared when he incompetent people are removed or when certain programmes are put in place for the proper training of our people that Members of Parliament should go along with it. I recall sometime back, when we put all the money for rehabilitation of Teso College, Members of Parliament here were complaining that we should spread this money so thinly that every constituency gets a shilling to be taken in the constituency and that would have been the best way of winning professional training so we should not speak as if we do not know our history. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. OKURUT:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the Minister for Education and Sports who is also my Brother in-law.  I appreciate the steps he has been taking in his reports and that is where he has really been tackling the question of personnel and management of sports in the country -(Laughter) I am merely saying that we have seen the Minister for Public Service as per -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Colleague holding the Floor of the House that when we are debating national issues the question of in-laws  -(Laughter) - or friendship in this House is of little use, we are debating a very serious important matter of finances because a Government that cannot manage the finances delivers poverty, for those who are appointed particularly some of us who are in business if you over trade or lend too much money or you lose too much, you lose the business.  

So, equally with the Government I would like the Government to be very serious, for example, in 1989, to knock off the point raised by the Minister for Education that because there are no accountants trained to be employed within the Public Sector of finances, I think that is inaccurate. Let him read the monthly report of 1989, whereby he should now be in position, for the eight years he has been in the Government to produce technical products who should be the finances, and he should be ashamed, not have produced all these people by now. (Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of information. I would like to give more information.  I hope if I say the veteran respected Parliamentarian who was in this House when I was a secondary school student. But producing an accountant takes time, and people have been graduating from Makerere now but cannot be in these high positions. They will be harvested maybe in the other 15 years to come; they are in the process of being trained on the job to acquire the practical skills. So we have been producing these people and they are not yet in position to hold the high offices we are talking about, and I am sure hon. Obwangor is aware that when he was a Minister for Justice, he also tried very much to recruit many lawyers and that is why we an abundance of Judges.

MR. OKURUT:  Mr. Chairman, I hope I would be given the liberty to continue be in the debate, but I would like to remind the hon. Obwangor that even the House of Commons they address each other as the right hon. Gentleman, so this is in order and he should not take offence. I was addressing a question of recruitment, and the question of recruitment is very crucial particularly in the Ministry of Finance.  

As I said, we have already discussed this issue with the Minister for Public Service we have brought to their attention that if we have to manage our finances in this country we must address ourselves squarely to the question of recruitment the question of retention and if it needs be retiring these are three things which happens in management you must be able to organise the recruitment of the right staff and you must try as much as possible to retain that staff that is how the question of remuneration comes in and the Minister for Public Service did agree with us that as time goes on as economy improves we will definitely try all possible way of recruiting the right persons and retain them.  

I would like to come to the question of the reports, Government have put in place a system of tax collection which is now really proving to be - for this nation.  It is now up to Government and should do it as a matter of agency to put a system whereby, there is a proper management of our finances, whereby there ways and means of checking the way our funds and our money is used.  This can be done easy it is a question of getting the right staff to manage our finances, we are talking about accounting officers, our problem is apparently and I do not know maybe, the Secretary to the Treasury or the Minister for Finance will - why every Permanent Secretary should be an accounting officer.  Why should he be appointed an Accounting Officer?  Because this is very crucial, we must have the right people, is it need that you an examination why not? So that you get the right people to deal with your accounts because the accounting officer is the one responsible for the finances of that Ministry.  Now, we find anybody is called an Accounting Officer, and there is a lot of professionalism here -(Interruption) 

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  The term Accounting Officer does not entitle a man to have an accounting experience he is like a Chief Executive Officer in a company.  The people we are concerned with are those who are handling figures looking at eh books, the person ultimately answerable for all those books and he his the one they call an Accounting Officer, and he does not even need to have the knowledge of accountancy as in companies you have a Chief Executive Officer where the managing director does not need to have the theory of that work.  The people we are concerned with are those who are chief executive officers in the different ministries who send the information up to the Permanent Secretary who ultimately is the managing director of that Ministry.

MR. OKURUT: The question I was raising is that there should be a difference between a Permanent Secretary and Accounting Officer, there should be that differentiation because at the moment as it is unless there is going to a difference at the moment the accounting officer is the only person who can sign for 1 million shillings and above.  So, he must have a knowledge of accounting you cannot just put anybody there anybody less is only authorised to sign for anything less than 1 million shillings  -(Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA: Point of information.  I disagree with hon. Kanyomozi, and I think if somebody is going to look at records, or at information put before him and make a decision one way or the other, he must have the working knowledge to decide whether this is correct or not correct.  So, really an accounting officer should have a working knowledge of accountancy, and he is not supposed to be -(Interjection)- If I can go further, a permanent secretary should not be a permanent secretary. He must be a man on contract and he should perform his duties and be allowed to carry on the basis of performance and results. I would agree with him if he is the Chief Executive Officer of the Ministry. Therefore, his right to continue in that post depends on his performance on how he directs the Ministry and part of his knowledge, which must be strong, is knowledge of financial management.

MR. OKURUT: Mr. Chairman, I am not being controversial at all, I am only telling government that we have got to be very serious about the management of our financial.  I can give you a terrible case where a Permanent Secretary was given vouchers and he just signed, and when we asked him why he signed; whether he knew that he was signing away his death warrant; he was signing away 5 million shillings; this is serious.  He could not even understand that the senior accountant was putting him in trouble and poor fellow just signed and I am sure if we are very serious in this House; these permanent secretaries who happen to be accounting officers, then we should take him to task.  Because you cannot sign away public funds like that.

So, what I am trying to say is that there should be a difference and there should be a differentiation; and if it needs taking these people for exams let it be.  And that is a question of management of finance which I am raising as a serious issue because it is true there that we have got embezzlement.  You know what happened, this accounting officer signed a voucher instead of him actually scrutinizing the voucher, the voucher was meant to pay certain officers and the rate was so much per - what does he do he signs the voucher as so much per annum, and yet the rate is there.  How do we go on like this with management of our finances?  

So, when I was discussing this question; this is our money and this is the money that belongs to Uganda; and we should all be concerned. What we should do is to find a way of rectifying the situation; that is all.  It is just rectifying the situation and it can be done.  

The other issue I want to raise is that some of the accounting officers are not serious another place where there is money are the stores, you have a lot of money locked up in the stores when there is a board of survey they are not bothered, in fact, boards of survey are appointed they come there maybe, because they come there maybe, because they have not been paid their allowances they walk away, the accounting officer will not follow the question with the secretary for the treasury and tell him look I want that board of survey to come back because I want to know what is in my stores because a lot of capital is in the stores we have got Ministries and departments that have a lot of supplies, a lot of equipments and yet this is a thing which should be seriously looked into by having these board of surveys.  

The other issue is the question of losses - things get lost bit a vehicle is taken at gun point they will not bother to report it either to the Police or to the Auditor General later on to the Secretary to the Treasury because it is important, he has got what we call pecuniary responsibility to see that he looks after the property of that Ministry.  He is peculiarly responsible.  So, this is another loophole where our accounting officers are not serious, we have got to be serious this is our country and when a thing like this is pointed out you think it is politics know, it is money, it is not politics it is our money.  

I would like to end by saying that the accounting officers -(Interruption) 

MRS. KALEMA: Point of information. Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I just want to support hon. Okurut regarding the case he is making.  That permanent secretaries with their title of accounting officers have not taken their work seriously enough.  I would just like to quote or to say from my experience when I was a Deputy Minister in Public Service. When I joined Public Service, there were only 7 vehicles around but on the record there were 25 vehicles, most of them were in the garages and the transport officer and permanent secretary did not know the actual number of the vehicles that were in the Ministry and in fact the few vehicles that were around two belonged to the Minister, one to the Deputy Minister, one to the Permanent Secretary and three others to the chief heads of department, but the rest of the vehicles ere all over the garages in town and in Entebbe, but the Permanent Secretary and Transport Officer did not know where they where until I asked for this list.  It was a shock to know that we had actually all the vehicles all over in garages.  So, I just want to make that point that is actual, they must be made responsible for the assets and all the equipments of the Ministry as Accounting Officers.

MR. OKURUT: Thank you very much for this.  Because we have a lot of money in garages.  We have a lot of vehicles littered everywhere.  In fact, the Sectoral Committee on Finance and Economic Planning has recommended that let us sort of allow this not to be boarded on.  Of course, they interacted there also. But at the same time, we should also try to survey some of these vehicles; in any case in that Ministry, the Minister himself, let alone the accounting officers -(Interruption)

 THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up, please.

MR. OKURUT:  He should know what vehicles were.  Because it is important.  A lot of our money is there. The other issue that I want to end up with - I am glad you have given me quite a bit of latitude. Is that the accounting officers should take into seriousness this report by the Auditor General. They do not even bother to look and read the report. It is only when they are called to PAC; then the man begins writing letters, correspondence starts. Instead of getting the report and acting on it. In any case before they get the report, they can deal with the Auditor General’s Office and even answer some of the queries.  The report does not have to put everything that the Auditors have found out.  It is not necessary.  But if the accounting officers are serious, they should actually deal with the Auditor General and answer some of the queries.  But they do not take those reports seriously.  

I would like to call the attention of this House, that for the good management of our finances, and for our economy, the Auditor General’s report must be taken seriously.  I am glad that when the NRM Government came, it reinstated, the functions and operations of the Auditor General’s Office and so did you in this House make it possible. First of all by the appointment of the Committee; and made it possible to get the NRC organise all sort of facilities in order for us to produce the report.

I have taken so much of your time but I thought I should say something about some of these things. Except there is one thing; if you are dealing with material Management - you see, if you play around with your materials as one gentleman has pointed out, if you do not follow the principle of life, and then you go to fight, you are going to see that some of the materials, spares and so on, will become obsolete. In other words, they will rot and Government funds be wasted.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUSOKE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity.  I would like, first of all, to say that as I support this Report, I would like to be very sincerely thank the Public Accounts Committee for coming up with this very mature and very well researched Report.  This is the type of its own in this House and I hope from now on words this House is going to be very serious on Public Accounts Report, so that, we deliberate upon them as soon as they come. (Interruption)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of order. Mr. Chairman, we are discussing a very important report, first of all, we have virtually nobody in the front Benches, neither do we have anybody in the treasury benches, and looking at the House itself, we do not form a quorum.  Are we in order to continue with this serious Debate?

THE CHAIRMAN: We are not in order. With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  Thank you.

(Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 9th February, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

