Wednesday, 7 February 2007 

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is a question of not allowing a vacuum, but honourable Sebunya, you are welcome. (Laughter). 

Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and I thank those who attended the big day in Kabamba. I want to thank the Ministry of Defence for the arrangements.

Honourable members, in our presence here we have students from Mukono university. They are here to see how you transact business. You are welcome!(Applause).

Honourable members, we have been having a problem, which has been going on for sometime, but I am happy to say that the matter has been solved. The meteorological predictions are now certain. You can start preparing the ground so that you can plant- (Applause).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.47
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a short statement to this august House on the visit to the Luzira prisoners on 5 February 2007 by Members of Parliament led by the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament.

On the 2 February 2007, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, hon. Prof. Moris Ogenga Latigo, wrote to the Ministry of Internal Affairs notifying the minister of his intended visit with other members of Parliament to the Luzira prisoners on Monday 5 February 2007 starting at 10.30 a.m. The letter was, among others, copied to the Commissioner General of Prisons. 

Following receipt of this information and other information suggesting that they intended to hold a public rally at Luzira/Kitintale area after the visit to the prisons, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Inspector General of Police and Commissioner General of Prisons contacted the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. They advised him that those intending to hold the public rally get in touch with Inspector General of Police for the Police to provide security in the area, and to minimise any inconvenience to the public by the rally.

With regard to the visit, Mr Speaker, visits to prisons are governed by the following regulations.
1. The Prisons Act, Section 78(1), deals with the communication of a prisoner with the outside world. It states: “Communications other than communication with legal representatives between prisoners and their relatives and friends shall only be allowed in accordance with this Act, subject to such restrictions as the officer in charge may think are necessary for the maintenance of discipline and order in the prison and the prevention of crime.” 

2. The Prisons Standing Order, Chapter 26(1). This deals with taking of photographs of -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, the Rules of Procedure, Rule 8(3) specifically, talks about sitting arrangement. It says: “The seats to the left hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of the Opposition and members of the opposition parties in the House”. Is the honourable member procedurally right and is this House right to proceed when our rules are being violated?

THE SPEAKER: As observed at the beginning of the sitting, I was wondering whether it was a question of not allowing a vacuum and that is why hon. Sebunya was doing that, but he is advised that this seat is for the opposition. Any time they can walk in and it may be an inconvenience having you- unless you have crossed the Floor. Would you please move so that they do not think in their absence their seats were taken. But he is a scientist therefore –(Interruption)

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, did you say I should move to the other side and tolerate all -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I am saying is that the Rule, which has been read, is correct. I said as a scientist you are trying not to allow a vacuum -(Laughter)- but since there is a legal provision, please comply with the law rather than science- (Laughter).

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I was just pointing out that the second regulation that governs the way the prisons and visitors are handled is the Prisons Standing Orders, Chapter 26 Section 1. This deals with taking of photographs of prisoners and prisons buildings. It states: “The taking of photographs in or at any prison building or installation or of any person or persons in the custody of the prisons department except as provided by Section 13 of the prisons ordinance is strictly prohibited without the specific written authority of the Commissioner General of Prisons.” 

Mr Speaker, when the honourable members and Leader of the Opposition reported to Luzira Prisons for the visit on 5 of February 2007 at around mid-day, the members of Parliament were requested to register since they had not earlier submitted the names of those to visit the prisons. The request is in line with the rules and regulations that I have mentioned above. 

While the registration exercise was going on, the Leader of the Opposition asked members of the press to be allowed to accompany them inside the prison. This request was not allowed since this contravenes the Prisons Rules and Regulations, Chapter 26(1) of the Prison Standing Orders, which require specific written authority from the Commissioner General of Prisons. 

As an alternative, prisons management offered to avail the Uganda Prisons media team to accompany the honourable members of Parliament during this visit. The visiting team declined this offer. They therefore decided to call off the visit saying that they were going to prepare and visit some other time.

Mr Speaker, members of Parliament had come with provisions including soap and sanitary towels for some female prisoners. These were left with prisons authorities who later handed them over to the intended beneficiaries. 

Those who wanted to hold the rally, first moved form Luzira to Kitintare, then they came back to Luzira, and eventually address some people at Luzira Secondary School at about 4: 00 p.m. 

Mr Speaker, it should be noted from the above that both the Police Force and the Prisons Service carried out their duties to facilitate the honourable members of Parliament to achieve their stated objectives. It is unfortunate that they chose not to follow the laid down guidelines and the advice given to them by those in charge. I advise that in future, honourable members of Parliament and indeed the general public follow these well laid down guidelines. The Police and the Prisons authorities and indeed the Government of Uganda are always ready to corporate.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister for the statement. Well according to our Rules, there is no debate, and I think it is all clear.

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 210 OF THE CONSTITUTION AND SECTION 39(2) OF THE UPDF ACT, 2005, FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REQUEST BY THE PRESIDENT TO DEPLOY UPDF TROOPS IN SOMALIA

3.00
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I beg to move a motion for a resolution under Section 39 of the UPDF ACT, 2005, requesting the approval of Parliament for the President to deploy Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) troops to Somalia.

Mr Speaker, I am moving under Section 39 of the UPDF Act, 2005, No.7 of 2005 and Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

MR MUSUMBA: I second the motion.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, WHEREAS Section 39(1)(a) of the UPDF Act, 2005, Act No.7 of 2005, authorises the President to deploy UPDF troops outside Uganda for purposes of peace keeping; 

AND WHEREAS Section 39(2) of the UPDF Act, 2005, requires Parliament to approve the deployment of troops outside Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS the meeting of the Inter-Government Authority on Development (IGAD) Heads of State and government held on 31 January 2005, decided that there is an urgent need to provide security support to the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia to guarantee sustenance of the outcome of the IGAD Peace Process and requested AU member states to give them the mandate for the deployment of a Peace Support Mission Somalia; 

AND WHEREAS the Peace Security Council of the African Union, at its 24th meeting of 7 Feb 2005, authorised IGAD to deploy a Peace Support Mission to Somalia; 

AND WHEREAS the IGAD Heads of State and government meeting expressed their hope that ultimately the mandate given by AU Member states be endorsed by the United Nations;
 AND WHEREAS the meeting of IGAD Council of Ministers held on 13 June 2006, requested Uganda and Sudan to expeditiously mobilise a Peace Support Force to Somalia in accordance with IGAD Summit Resolution of 20 March 2006, and approved a Security Stabilisation Plan; 

AND WHEREAS the United Nation Security Council through its Resolution 1725 of 2006, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, authorised IGAD and member states of the African Union to establish a protection and training mission to Somalia: 

AND WHEREAS the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at its 69th meeting held on the 19 January 2007, decided to authorise the deployment of an African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); 

AND WHEREAS the African Union has requested Uganda to participate AMISOM deployment; 

AND WHEREAS the President proposes to deploy Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces troops to Somalia in accordance with Sections 39, 40, and 41 of the UPDF Act under the mandate of the UN, AU and IGAD; 

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows: 
That in accordance with Article 210 of the constitution and Section 39(2) of the UPDF Act, 2005, Act No.7 of 2005, Parliament approves the deployment of UPDF troops to Somalia by the President. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. But doesn’t’ it require further explanation?  

DR KIYONGA: As a way of further elucidation to this motion, with your permission, Mr Speaker, I would like to indicate to honourable members the genesis of the situation in Somalia and why we think that it is important that Uganda participates in the mission to stabilise that country. I believe, Mr Speaker, that all Members of this House are aware that Somalia, a sister African state, has been unstable and virtually a failed State for the last 16 years. The international community recognises that the situation as it exists now in Somalia -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To us as a House this is a historical opportunity when we are for the first time debating the decision by this country to deploy troops outside Uganda. The motion as moved by the Minister is moved under sections in both the Constitution and the UPDF Act. Ordinarily during the conduct of business in this House, the domain of this Act is the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

We adopted as a method of procedure that this House shall conduct business through our committees of the House. Would it not be procedurally right for this motion to be considered by the committee of the House so that it can examine the merits and compliance of the law to enable us as a House to debate the report of the committee, Mr Speaker? I wish to seek guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I quite appreciate what you want to achieve – what you raised, but what the Minister is doing does not contradict that. Let us get his explanation then when we participate in the debate we can decide on that.

DR KIYONGA: There is recognition both regionally and internationally that active intervention needs to be made in Somalia in order to reduce the risks to Somalia, but also to the Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa as created by the difficulty in that country.  

The international community, therefore, moved through IGAD, the African Union and the Security Council to take measures towards stabilisation of the situation in Somalia. IGAD set the ball rolling and organised negotiations among the warring factions in Somalia. The negotiations went on, and calumniated into the successful signing of the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement of Somalia and the formation of an interim Parliament and government that is now known as the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia. Subsequently, some of the factions did not agree with the process and specifically the Islamic Courts Union differed with the agreement. They subsequently set up a formation of their own in Mogadishu and moved to take over a number of cities within Somalia.

Subsequently the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia with the assistance of the Republic of Ethiopia -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I will need some protection from honourable members here. Subsequently, the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia and their troops with the assistance of troops from Ethiopia moved and drove the forces of the Islamic Courts Union from Mogadishu and other cities that they had been taken over.  

This obviously did not necessarily stabilise the country. The moves that had already been started by IGAD, the African Union and the UN Security Council had to proceed. So in December, as we indicated before this year, the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution to remove the arms embargo that had been imposed on Somalia in 1992 in order to enable IGAD and the African Union to move into Somalia.  

Because of these developments, it is the strong feeling of the President and government that Uganda should participate in the stabilisation of the situation in Somalia. Our reasons, Mr Speaker and honourable members, are as follows: 

First, Uganda is a member of the UN, and under the UN we have the obligation to contribute to maintenance of international peace and security. So in general terms that obligation already exists, and Uganda whenever the situation arises, has to consider participation.

Secondly, the African Union in Abuja in the year 2000 formed the Peace and Security Council in order to undertake Africa’s own peacekeeping operations within the global UN framework. This is an African initiative in which African problems have African solutions. This approach has yielded results such as in the missions in Burundi, southern Sudan and Liberia.

Thirdly, even our own policy under the UPDF passed by this House is supportive of missions and, therefore, this enjoins the UPDF to undertake such missions for the good of the region and the world in general.  

The fourth reason is that there are now established clear annexes between the unstable Somalia and the small arms proliferation into Karamoja region and beyond. So as we struggle to stabilise Karamoja by disarming our brothers and sisters, we have to sustain it by cutting the route through which re-arming of the warriors in Karamoja takes place from time to time.

The fifth reason is that there is the consideration of the good will and the trust Somali people have for long placed in Uganda ever since the initial period of Somali turmoil in 1992. They have held Uganda, particularly President Museveni, in high esteem and have consistently sought Uganda’s intervention to resolve the Somali crisis. This, therefore, places Uganda in a favourable position of playing a role in the mediation.

There are also other secondary benefits for our participation because the military, in this case the UPDF, like any other profession, gains skills through exposure and interaction. The forces will be put into an operation with other forces from elsewhere and this is going to increase the professional capability of the UPDF. So for these main reasons, the President and government feel that the UPDF should be deployed in Somalia to participate in stabilisation of that country.

We do recognise that the issue of stabilisation and peace in Uganda and Africa as a whole is a common good and, therefore, is not a matter on which we should be politically divided. I, therefore, took specific steps to brief and discuss the matter of the proposed deployment of the UPDF troops with the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo.

Following my discussion with Prof. Latigo on the 23rd of January at his office in Parliament, I presented to him a written brief on the subject matter the following day, the 24th of January. I have also kept close contacts with you, hon. Speaker and the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. These consultations shall be kept on as long as they are necessary. I thank the Rt hon. Speaker, hon. Latigo and hon. Rosemary Namayanja for the constructive pieces of advice they have offered on this matter.

There is no need for me to go back in detail on the legal framework but for the purpose of avoidance of doubt, I have already stated that we are moving under Article 210 of the Constitution and sections 39, 40 and 41 of The UPDF Act. In summary, the requirements are: -
    • We should get approval of Parliament before the troops can be deployed outside, and in this case Somalia.
    • Once that approval is given, then the government must enter an agreement with the African Union in this case and also the authority of the TFG in Somalia. Once the approval is given, we shall follow through these requirements so that we move within our legal framework without any omissions.

As I said, Uganda will be moving under the overall umbrella of the African Union and as far as this particular mission is concerned, the African Union mission will be expected to do three things: -
    a) Conduct peace support operation in Somalia.
    b) Provide support to the transitional federal government institutions in their efforts towards stabilisation of the country and the furtherance of dialogue and reconciliation. 
    c) To facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance where required.

Mr Speaker, Uganda will not be moving into Somalia in isolation. The appeal has been wide within the African Union and I am glad to inform honourable members that the following African countries have also agreed to provide troops: Ghana, Malawi, Nigeria and Burundi. Together with Uganda, so far, five countries have agreed to provide troops for this mission.

The requirement under the African Union is that, initially we should move into Somalia with three battalions. The contributions of the five countries so far have resulted into a force of four battalions. So, for a start, we are more or less over subscribed. But eventually the mission should build up to eight battalions and we are confident that other African countries will in due course be making their offers.

In terms of the budget and resources, our financial contribution will be within the current budget of the defence sector and the partners in this mission will meet the implemental costs. The African Union has secured resources for this mission and the information so far indicates that the following countries have made contributions: 
    • The USA has pledged a total of $40.5 million;
    • The UK has pledged a total of £4 million;
    • The European Union has pledged 15 million Euros.
    • France and Canada have also indicated that they will be making pledges but they have not yet quantified them. 
    • Algeria and Egypt, fellow African states, have pledged to provide air lifting of troops once they are moving into Somalia.

In some quarters, there has been concern that moving to Somalia may impact negatively on our security responsibilities within the country. Mr Speaker, I would like to assure this House that that will not happen. First of all, the troops we are going to deploy to Somalia, once Parliament approves, are a total of 1,500. These particular troops have been under preparation for almost one year and they have therefore not been participating in disarmament in Karamoja, or stabilising the situation in the North or any other part of the country where we have been having security problems. So, the movement of 1,500 troops now to Somalia will not negatively impact on the security situation in the country. 

In the case of disarmament in Karamoja and protection of neighbouring areas, not only have we already increased troops in those areas of our country but also we are moving to strengthen the anti-stock safety unit and the police unit so that that area of our country can stabilise as quickly as possible. 

I want to take this opportunity to assure the House and the country at large that, deployment of UPDF in Somalia will not negatively affect the effort to stabilise Northern Uganda to handle the Karamoja disarmament and to ensure that standby actions against any possible threats to the country can be handled even when our troops are in Somalia. 

Mr Speaker, there have also been inquiries about the remuneration of the troops that would move to Somalia. To complete my presentation, it is necessary that I give information in this regard. The soldiers who will go to Somalia will earn an additional $400 per month, which will be paid straight to their accounts. The government for each soldier that goes to Somalia will be paid $100 per soldier per month. Every soldier that will be deployed in Somalia will be fed to the level of $12 per day.

In the event of death, if this were a UN mission, the compensation would be $100,000 per person. But because the African Union anticipates that their resources may not be to the level of the UN, the proposal is that the compensation would be $50,000 and not $100,000. In the event of injury that permanently maims the individual affected, a compensation that will be close or a fraction of $50,000 will also be paid.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the peace-keeping role in Somalia is a regional effort led by the African Union. This effort is also supported by the UN, European Union and other countries including the USA and the UK. Uganda is ready to deploy up to two battalions and the incremental resources required to deploy to Somalia will be met by partners in this effort. Government is seeking parliamentary approval to proceed with the participation in this support in Somalia under the mandate of the AU. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable ministers. Honourable members, the motion was formerly moved and following that the minister has presented his case justifying the prayer for a resolution of this Parliament in that if this was an expertly case, we would have acted on that - (Laughter) - evidenced case made by him to say yes or no. 

But as you heard from hon. Dombo, this is a unique matter or subject being dealt with by this Parliament for the first time and his view is that this matter also be taken by the relevant committee to study and provide the opportunity even to outsiders who cannot come on the floor to have their input before we make a decision. I think this is a fair request and I think you agree with hon. Dombo and me that we submit this matter to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

It is not that every resolution goes to the committee, but I think since this is the first time to invoke the provision mentioned in the resolution that we allow the committee to look at the resolution and even consider the case which has been presented by the minister and advise us - even those who are not with us may in the committee be able to go and present their case. So, for this, I think we send this matter to the committee. But it should be handled expeditiously because the situation warrants that we go to the assistance of our sister country Somalia.

So, I would request that the committee considers this promptly as from tomorrow and maybe next week. [Hon. Members: “Tomorrow”]. One day? [Hon. Members: “Yes”] Okay. But it will not make a difference if we give them two days, they will still have to report next week. But let us hear from the chairperson.

MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This will not take us a lot of time. Tomorrow we shall sit as a committee and interact with the ministers, the departments that are concerned and then Friday if there are any other people. I think by Tuesday or Wednesday we shall be ready with the report in Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: And, therefore, I think I saw the situation and I said next week. Any objections?

MR OLENY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Well, this matter before this House has been talked about for a long time and also all of us do understand the urgency that it calls for. I would like just to seek clarification from the Speaker. Under our Rule 50 it reads: “Manner of debating motions:
(1) When a motion has been moved and seconded in the House, the Speaker shall propose the question on the motion in the same terms as the motion, and debate may then take place upon that motion and may continue for a period not exceeding one hour.”

Then also Rule 56 reads: “Motions to amend Rules: (3) When the motion has been proposed and seconded, it shall stand referred to the committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, and no further proceedings shall be taken on it until that committee has reported on it.”

So, I am raising a matter of clarification here, that the motion that has been moved and seconded is not a motion to amend rules and, therefore, should be able to attract debate. Unless the motion was to amend the rules, then we would be right to say it is referred to the committee. I beg for clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is nothing to comment because what you have read is in our rules. What you have said does not contradict what we are deciding. I entirely agree and in fact, I had told you that it is not normal that we send these resolutions to the committee, but because this is a special type of motion that we have, let us even provide opportunity to the outsiders because people have been talking about this in papers, over the radio and they will not be able to come here on the floor and make their contributions.

Let us listen if there is any objection to them and this can only be done in the committee. It does not do any harm and you have heard that the chairperson is ready to present the report expeditiously. So, it will serve its purpose that we shall have given opportunity to all those interested in this subject to participate. They may not come but it does not matter. We shall have provided the opportunity to them.

That is the clarification I can make on the point raised. So, we send it to the committee - [Hon. Members: “Yes”] - and the only issue maybe is the time. You think you will be ready next week?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, we are going to interact from tomorrow and if the next sitting is on Tuesday, we shall be ready with the report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We shall come back to this matter on Tuesday.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO NANYUKI III

THE SPEAKER: Who is in charge? Where is hon. Mugambe? [Hon. Members: “He is not here”] He is not here? Okay. We should have presented this matter. The Order Paper was drawn in anticipation that we are going to debate the motion. I do not think we can consider the report, which was presented by hon. Butime last week. I do not know if you have read it. Is it possible to include this subject? This means we adjourn.

(The House rose at 3.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)
