Monday 7 February, 2005
 
Parliament met at 2.30 pm in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want to welcome you; I hope you had a good weekend.  I am happy to note that our member, hon. Member of Parliament for Oyam South, Dr Okulo Epak who has been visibly absent in this house is now with us.  Honourable we welcome you and we thank all those, the doctors and others that have assisted you to enable you to be back to your work and we wish you well.

2.31
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac):  Hon. Speaker, I want to thank you and colleagues for welcoming me albeit temporarily, but I seek your permission to express my thanks in appreciation to Members of Parliament and People outside Parliament. I think I can say the majority of Members of Parliament visited me in the hospital and in my home.

Mr Speaker, you visited me twice.  Many ministers visited me, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister visited me and to crown it all, His Excellency the President visited me and he did not only visit me, he gave me some money to help me with my medical bill.  I was simply overwhelmed. I must say I am terribly humbled by this show of love, friendship and sympathy.  I thank you all, May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER:  You are welcome.

2.35
Mr DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you for giving me this opportunity.  I want, Mr Speaker, on behalf again of the Bugisu Parliamentary Group to say a short statement concerning something I had talked about earlier in this House but which appears to be expanding unstopped.

Yesterday there was a radio programme lasting two hours on Open Gate in Mbale and another radio which I have forgotten, again saying that the Members of the Bugisu Parliamentary Group collected money to influence your Committee which you chair and I know it is not true so that hon. Wasieba Wanjusi is not approved as a Minister. 

Hon. Speaker, during the CA I was not here but you were there.  Article 113 and 114 were made by you people and hon. Wanjusi was there.  Appointments by the President of Cabinet Ministers and Ministers of state shall have the approval of Parliament and that is precisely what you are doing.  

Some colleagues in this House have also uttered statements to show that we actually stopped or influenced the approval of hon. Wanjusi as a Minister of State (Fisheries).  Hon. Kahinda Otafiire on Saturday during Capital Gang referred to Bagisu Members of Parliament as stupid and today here in the corridor he said, “Bagisu you are hopeless,” because he also thinks we influenced or stopped the appointment of hon. Wanjusi Wasieba to become a Minister.  He also thinks like that, but we did not.

Today as we speak there is a demonstration in Mbale and the names of some Members of Parliament have been written on placards and demonstrators are calling upon them to leave Wanjusi alone so that Parliament approves him as a Minister.

Hon. Wabudeya’s house was a target; it was supposed to be destroyed. We talked to the Inspector General of Police who deployed security there to guard the premises. Mr Speaker, ahead of the demonstrations in front is vehicle Reg. No. LG 0107-30 and investigations have revealed belongs to the LC V Chairman of Mbale.

We met today as Members of Bugisu Parliamentary Group because, some supporters of the other Members of Parliament other than the Member of Parliament demonstrating had wanted also to come from the other end, they meet and cause real violence.  We stopped them and we could have done it, but we said no. 

I request you to do the following if it does not offend you:

1) To tell the nation that we had no hand in the approval or failing to approve hon. Wanjusi Wasieba.  The Bagisu MPs had no hand in it at all.

2) To advise the Members especially those of cabinet to desist from making irresponsible statements on radios because, it does not unite, it disunites and it can cause dangerous consequences.

Mr Speaker, I thought I should make this clear and with the request I have put to you that you should assure the nation so that we stay comfortable in this place of ours, Uganda.  I thank you very much.

2.38
MR GABOI WAMBI (Budadiri County East, Sironko):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like not to elaborate on my Brother hon. David Wakikona’s statement but I would like to state that I am the Member of the Appointments Committee from Sironko district and as far as I know, the matters of Appointments Committee are not deliberated by this House.

Two, if there is anything that somebody is dissatisfied with; I think in our committee it is the Speaker who is the Chairperson who is supposed to communicate to the appointing authorities of the outcome of whatever if deliberated. But it surprises us as Members of Parliament, and especially Members coming from Bugisu Region, to get statements from responsible people insinuating a bad motive from our side; and yet for us when we are walking on the street and people are saying, “Look here, the Appointing Authority knew that either hon. Wanjusi Wasieba had the qualifications or did not have them.”  

It is not us the Members of Parliament from Bugisu to vet our fellow Member of Parliament and it is alleged -because now these are becoming ping pong matters - it is being alleged that it is the same Government that knew that hon. Wanjusi Wasieba does not have the papers, and it is the same Government that is saying, “You see, let us put it there, they will refuse him and we play it in the eyes of the Bagisu” because this is being exemplified by hon. Kahinda Otafiire, stating that it is the Bagisu who are disorganised; it is up to them.  How did he come to get that kind of information?  

So, Mr Speaker, we are responsible citizens, we are responsible Members of the public, I think we deserve a little more respect from our senior colleagues from the Cabinet than belittling us to the level of saying we have gone to convince a committee of 56 members Chaired by you to reject an honourable member being approved as a Minister.  

We are sorry about this, but for us we shall stand clear that we support our Brother.  If the Appointing Authority saw him fit, we support him; if there was no other reason, he should be approved.  But if the committee has seen that he is not fit, then we have no quarrel; we go with what the Committee has done.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have heard what you have said as a group, but I have got my own principles, which I never sacrifice at any cost.  I have many times said, I do not act on pressure; you will never succeed to pressurise me to do something, which I do not believe in or which is contrary to the rules of the game I know.  

Under our Rules of Procedure, following the command of the Constitution, Parliament set up an Appointments Committee to deal with those appointments by the President that require nomination, and the Rules of Procedure direct us as to how to handle these appointments or nominations.  We get to know about nominations when His Excellency, the President, writes to the Speaker saying, “I have nominated so and so, please do the needful.”  

It is within our Rules of Procedure that the discussions, the debate, and the consideration of these nominations are not done in open, but are done by the Committee, which you set up, a Committee which is representative; and there is a term or a word in the Rules of Procedure that these deliberations are secret.  

What I do when I get the names is to inform the Clerk to inform the members of the committee about the business, and to send them various details affecting the nominee or nominees as the case may be and we inform the nominees, request them to come before the committee.  After deliberating, we do not talk to the press and we do not go with hot words to the outside; and then I write to the President informing him of what has happened.  I even do not talk to the nominees themselves telling them, “Oh, congratulations, you have been successful”; I do not.  

I have seen things in newspapers since the day we met on the Appointments Committee, but it is so ridiculous that these speculations are off target.  The Appointments Committee is not concerned with approving a Member of Parliament, because there is no requirement for Appointments Committee to prove the validity of the election of a Member of Parliament; and we were not concerned with whether the people who came before us were Members of Parliament because these were Ministerial appointments, any person who is not a Member of Parliament could be appointed to be a Minister. I want to assure you, we never even considered the issue of the case.

I want to draw your attention to the rules concerning this approval if this is their disapproval. People are speculating this disapproval, and if you look at Rule 141, “Nomination not approved”, assuming this is the case, it deals with many circumstances under which a nomination may not be approved.  They range from lack of professional, academic, incompetence; these are disjunctive, not conjunctive - incompetence, misbehaviour, misconduct, corruption or dishonesty, they are so many. 

 Nobody will force me, under whatever circumstance, to say whether there was approval, or if there was no approval on what ground.  But what I have seen up to-date in the newspapers about possible reasons, those are not reasons and I will not be able to say the reason if there was a disapproval; and I want to say – because if there were reasons to his qualifications, then he would not be a Member of Parliament, and I still consider him a Member of Parliament.  

As I have said, I do not act on pressure and nobody can bring me money to me or to pressurise me; I am a trained professional man with integrity.  Corruption is a foreign term as far as I am concerned. I want to assure you that, apart from having seen the Member concerned, I did not meet any Bugisu Member of Parliament and I did not get an e-mail or telephone call from any of them.  So, the question of influencing me or my committee does not arise.  

The Appointing Authority - I have already communicated that it is the Appointing Authority to communicate the results, and we always tell those who appear before us that you will hear from appropriate sources, and appropriate sources mean the Appointing Authority.  

So I think this is clear and let people not waste their ink writing unfounded stories because what I have seen so far is not the reason and it will not be the reason but I will not reveal in one way or the other.  Thank you very much.

2.50
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am happy that you have laboured to clear the air and put right our image as a committee as far as that issue was.  

I am concerned as a Member of that committee, as members of this House continue to jump up and speak things against us as the committee is their away, Mr Speaker, in which we will also use the same opportunity to send a word of caution to members of this House who want to throw the committee into disrepute?

THE SPEAKER: I think there is a mechanism of dealing with such people and if it is invoked we shall follow it up.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  This is a reminder, we resumed Parliament last Tuesday and I have been looking at the Order Paper since that day. I want to ask for guidance from you, Mr Speaker. 

It was a matter of practice since last year that every month because of the seriousness of the security situation especially in the North and humanitarian situation, the Government would regularly come with a statement to the House and this was again picked up by Alaso’s report which I think it was decided it should be a sort of a special committee which could also report to the House on humanitarian situation.

I have looked at the Order Paper and business to follow and I would be happy to hear from you, Mr Speaker, whether this business of regular report from the Government on security situation and also from the Alaso Committee would come to the House.  

This matter is very dear to our hearts especially those who come from these areas where people live in camps, and we would like to share our experiences with Government based on their report.  So would I know from you, Mr Speaker, whether this would be catered for on the Order Paper in the near future? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I regret that this has not been the case since we started last week. It is an important issue, which we should always constantly follow because the suffering of the people there is causing us a lot of pain.  This is the second week since we started. Unfortunately, I do not see the Minister of Defence; they are not here. 

But I want to put it on record that we expect a statement on the security situation in that area on Thursday and I think they will make it. That will be sufficient time to prepare and consult relevant authorities for that statement. It could be by Minister of Defence or Minister Internal Affairs but we want to hear a statement on that issue. Thank you.

2.54
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have raised on a point of national importance and this is in regard to the outbreak of sleeping sickness in Buvuma islands most especially in Lingila and Bwoya parish.  When you look at the report, which is usually produced in papers regarding the summary of the episodically report from Ministry of Health, it is clearly indicated that Mukono district does not have any case. 

But over the weekend I was in Buvuma islands and when I visited these two parishes, the number of cases reported exceed ten in every parish.  Even the Minister of State Health (General Duties), Capt. Mukula, visited one of these parishes, and he directed the Ministry officials to avail the drugs to one of the health centres in Buvuma, but as I report nothing has been done.  The only alternative our people use is crossing to Mayunge and when I checked Mayunge, there are no cases.  I wonder whether the Ministry officials really go to the ground or they compile office report.  

I just want to urge the Leader of Government Business, the Hon. Prime Minister and Minister of Health is present, to make arrangement to provide drugs for sleeping sickness to Buvuma.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, you do not have to answer.  I think this is a report to you that this is a problem. You are requested to go and deal with it as soon as possible.

2.55
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you Mr Speaker.  Mine is also a request.  There is a problem in the business community.  We started this year East African Customs Union but the in flow of information is very scanty and when you go to public, you find that we do not have any information related to concessions of Governments.  

So, I feel that is better as public ask us, because the adopted Customs Union, the concessions we do not have any and now the public is crying about the rise of prices in things.  So we would like to get some information so that we can elaborate very well to public, we have never got any information from the ministries, which handled this.  We request to get information so that we can sensitise the public about it.

THE SPEAKER: Will the Minister of Finance in charge of this sector avail us with detailed information so that we can inform our people we represent?  I think we give him time within- maybe by Thursday.

I understand from the Leader of Government Business that it has been communicated to him that the Minister of State (Primary Health Care) wants to give some detailed statement on what the honourable member of Buvuma has said, do you want to?

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Alex Kamugisha): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the honourable member for bringing up this matter.  Buvuma islands is one of the areas where sleeping sickness is endemic and we have been having a programme there and I am sure the honourable member is full aware that we have a programme since a couple of years back.  

This sleeping sickness is not only endemic in Buvuma, but also in Busoga area.  But of late we have seen it penetrating parts of Teso, and also very recently in Kaberamaido, and I think some cases have also been reported in parts of Lira District, meaning that there is a wave of a small epidemic of sleeping sickness in the parts, which I have mentioned, which is much above what has been there before.

Last week a team comprising of Officials from Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries visited these areas and they were able to ascertain that, yes, there is a problem; and at this point in time we are scaling up our activities in the area.  For example in parts of Kaberamaido we have opened up a special ward at Alwa Hospital and I want to assure the members that there is sufficient supply of drugs to handle the situation.  

In Buvuma we have the normal programme, but I need to inform the member that among other things we have got a Pan African programme on trypanosomiasis, which is starting in the area; and once this programme starts, it is meant to eradicate this problem once and for all.  Of course, the ultimate end is to kill the tsetse flies, which is a joint effort between our two ministries because sleeping sickness is what we call enosis, meaning it is a disease carried from animals to human beings.  Therefore, one Ministry alone cannot succeed, so we have got a joint programme to trap the tsetse flies, and as I said now we are trying to secure more traps to trap the tsetse flies.  

But on the medical side we have sufficient drugs, we are establishing more centres to handle this problem. I want to assure the Member that- (Mr Wakikona rose_) – if you could let me just finish this.  I want to assure the member that this is a problem we are going to handle and we shall bring it to a reasonable level where at least we shall stop the epidemic; it will not be allowed to spread.  

MR ERESU:  Mr Speaker, I was a bit reluctant to stand up to seek the following clarification, had it not been that the Minister mentioned my district; and also that I am seeing from the Minister’s statement that the spread of the sleeping sickness disease is becoming an epidemic.  

I would like the hon. Minister to tell me that in Kaberamaido and other parts where the sleeping sickness has been spread, we found out that, particularly in my district, the jobs of the entomologists and those other persons connected with this problem has been left to the districts, and it has been one of the major constraints, because the districts do not have the capacity to fight the disease so they make reference to the centre, which is the Ministry of Health.  

At the time, in the case of my district, it looked the Ministry of Health at that time was not equally prepared for the challenge.  So my clarification that I seek from the Minister is, is the Ministry of Health or Government for that matter taking over the responsibilities that they had handed over to the districts in regard to the fight against sleeping sickness?

THE SPEAKER: No, you see this is a problem, which has - because the complaint was about Buvuma’s lack of drugs, now it is becoming a policy matter.  Why don’t we really ask the Minister to get time and make a comprehensive statement about this matter rather than making now this one a sort of formal question when it is not? 

 The compliant was about lack of drugs in Buvuma, now we are seeing a national problem.  I think if it is a national problem, then let us ask the Minister to go back in his office, deal with this matter comprehensively and then we can seek clarification if it is not sufficiently done.  

MR AWORI: I am seeking your guidance, Mr Speaker, on this matter of Communication from the Chair.  Sometimes we raise issues, which are extremely urgent, the Government attentively listens to us then there is no response.  

Last Friday, I raised a question of cholera outbreak in my district; the matter is getting out of hand, there has been no response.  On the weekend, as a matter of fact, the kind of response we got from the Government was ballistic in that a person who went to check on the health situation opened fire on innocent people.  

We lost one person on the weekend because the so-called Health Inspectors went to a home where they allegedly make mandazi in the middle of the night, and people expressed concern, who is this person checking on health facilities in this neighbourhood in the middle of the night; a person lost a life as a result of a gunshot.  

THE SPEAKER: That is another dimension; sorry about it, but that is another dimension of the story –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Now, can the Minister tell us what they are doing about it?  Shall we die of gunshots or cholera?

THE SPEAKER: I think what we do, hon. Minister, you have heard all these - but I do not like really to turn a question of Buvuma, which was about drugs, now it is becoming wider.  As I have said, let him go back and make a comprehensive statement on this problem now otherwise he was restricted to Buvuma, but now it is Kaberamaido.  Please go back and - is it possible for you to give it to us on Wednesday?

2.30
MR HENRY BASALIZA (Fortpotal Municipality, Kabarole): There is another point of national concern, Mr Speaker, in connection with health.  Kabarole in particular, there is an epidemic of malaria.  This is a serious matter. 

Last week I visited hospitals they were full of victims of malaria.  Three or four people were sleeping on one bed, and when I inquired- even in Kilembe Hospital there is a problem.  So, we have that epidemic, I do not know what the Ministry is doing?  

It seems the drugs are not working; there is need for a special team to go and find out what is happening there.  It is a serious matter, Mr Speaker, small children are dying and I am requesting the Minister to look into that matter.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.02
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Mr Speaker, it is not my intention to re-open debates on the tragedy of cotton prices.  As we concluded the last session here, I had sought advice of the Minister as to what I should tell my people when I reach home.  

In between, the Government made a half-hearted attempt to try to ameliorate the situation by giving a token top up of only Ugshs50 bringing the cotton price to Ugshs350.  To compound matters, even at that price of Ugshs350, cotton was still being taken on credit.  

As of now my farmers in Madi-Okolo in particular and West Nile at large are stuck with cotton. The planting season not far away there is a lot of apprehension amongst my people.  

I want advice, should we in west continue to plant cotton?  Is Government coming up with remedial measures of putting in place in the next budget a stabilization fund so that cotton is bought at more than Ugshs350?  If we are adamant as Government what are we going to do about AGOA?  

These are serious matters and the longer we sit on it, the more out of hand it will get.  I need advice so that I can communicate to my people.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Maybe before you now - one of our Members, hon. Captain Birimumaaso retired from UPDF - there are some leaders from Bukoto West constituency who have come to see him performing as a retired UPDF – (Laughter)- and I want to welcome the seven members, including the LC chairman, to Parliament.  You are most welcome- (Applause) 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.  A colleague from Madi-Okolo has raised pertinent issues.  I have not heard the frontbench responding to those very touchy issues that have been raised.  We should be mindful of the fact, Sir, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  The hon. Member has asked the frontbench to help him or advise him about the cotton growers in Arua, can we get a response from - is it Minister of Trade or Agriculture?

3.10
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very important question and I wish the hon. Member had alerted the Ministry of Agriculture because it is such an important matter; you need a well-researched answer.  

It is not easy to find money to add- the other time it meant getting more than six billion.  So it is an intricate matter and we came to that solution after several meetings with His Excellency the President and other people.  

I have no hesitation in calling upon the Minister of Agriculture to interface with the Minister of Trade and give an answer to that question. I was going to say next Thursday, but if it that is not possible, it will be next Tuesday because it is an inter-Ministry matter and it requires a lot of reflection.  I thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.13
THE MINISTER OF LANDS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Mr Speaker in accordance with Section 93 of the Land (Amendment) Act, the minister may by statutory instrument make regulations for the better carrying into effect the provisions of the act and statutory regulations and those regulations should be laid on the floor of Parliament and it is in that regard that we have come up with Land Regulations 2004 and we have the pleasure, Mr Speaker, to lay them before Parliament. I thank you.  

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE WHITE PAPER

THE SPEAKER:  I think to be fair, let me give the first opportunity to the hon. Member, Dr Okulo Epak, Oyam South.

3.15
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am constrained to come although not terribly well yet, but I felt that I should contribute to this important debate.  

I want to thank the committee for the job well done.  I have been following a bit of the committee work and I think we should not forget to thank hon. Janat Mukwaya.  I think she contributed and assisted the committee a lot to arrive at the kind of consensus they did.  

I want to refer Members to page two of the report, “Was the White Paper approach the best method?”  The first paragraph there says: The Oxford Advanced Learners dictionary defines the word “White paper” as a report published by the Government about its policy on a matter that is to be considered by Parliament.” 

This statement plus the principles which the committee adopted in doing its work, which had been adequately elaborated by honourable members who contributed earlier, I think, underpin their work.  

It does not only underpin their work, I think the principles also should guide us when we are dealing in the overall situation of this constitutional review.

In particular one would hope that this was a consultation with Parliament, that the consensus now arrived at between the views of the Cabinet, the views of Parliament through the Committee and what we are saying here, and the petitions from outsiders should guide the drafting of the bill.  It would be very unfortunate if the Cabinet went back and came with the bill, which does not reflect the consensus or rather achieved by a tripartite discussion as presented in the White Paper. 

The Committee did a very commendable job to reconcile the views of the public, the views of Cabinet and those of Parliament.  It indeed resolved most of the controversial issues, which were in the White Paper, submitted by the Cabinet; and that is why I want thank them very much for reflecting widely the views of Parliament and people outside there.  I also want to thank them for suggesting that the bill should be presented in three parts instead of an omnibus, and I believe that Cabinet is taking consideration of this and it will greatly facilitate the work of this process.  

Mr Speaker, nevertheless I have several points on which I do not agree with the consensus, which I want to mention.  The first one is the Office of the Auditor General.  This is a very important office to this Parliament.  In the last Constituent Assembly, this issue was overlooked and the Office of the Auditor General was made a public office.  The provision now being agreed to by the Committee and the Cabinet to me is absolutely inadequate, to give the Auditor General, which is a very important technical office, an oversight function.  

I am suggesting very strongly - I will follow it up if my health permits - that we should actually be thinking of establishing an Audit Commission rather than the present very weak provision; and that the Office of the Auditor General should actually be made the Office of Parliament because that is our technical arm.  Otherwise, without it our oversight function cannot be technically and effectively executed.  

The second point I want to mention, Sir, is on Local Government, that is the question of the regional tier and federalism.  My view is that we should not hurry about this matter.  We should postpone the issue of the regional tier and federalism for 2006, and instead make a transitional provision in this Constitution to provide for a timetable and the procedure for dealing with the matter in 2006.  

Mr Speaker, this Government has been greatly accused of heavy administrative expenditure.  This is an additional administrative cost; it is an additional administrative cost whose implications are not imaginable.  The Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi, will agree with me that even decentralization was preceded by very serious study, which included himself, Prof. Nsibambi and other technical people.  Even after that, the implementation was phased, and I do not see why we are in a hurry to introduce in the Constitution right now the question of a regional tier.  It also involves a question of self-determination.  So, I really want to suggest and beg that this matter be postponed.

The other issue I want to talk about again in Local Government is the position of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO).  Mr Speaker, considering that the Government is even now thinking of paying the Chairmen of District Councils, this is a very serious drawback on decentralization; this amounts to centralization of the whole process.

Actually in the Constituent Assembly, we had almost come to agree that if we centralize the appointment of the CAOs, then the Office of the RDCs would not be necessary.  The RDCs appeared simply because we could not agree on this.  I would really as a matter of compromise say that, if we are going to centralize the appointment of the CAO, then we should do away with the Office of the RDCs, which in any case will not be a proper office in a multiparty system; and at the moment it is really draining to the treasury more than anything else.  So, I am saying that we should look at this very seriously.

The third point I have is on political system.  The Cabinet was very considerate in changing from the title “Political System” to “Democratic Governance” or “Good Governance.”  But then the rest of the text, which is available in the political system, was retained.  One would have expected that, that would be followed by the statement of the principles that will guide and underline the operation of good governance in this country.  I think we could now at this stage avoid the confusions of what are called systems, but which are not systems; and really concentrate on stating the principles, which will guide good governance.

I also want to touch on the question of age limit and academic qualifications.  I opposed this matter in the Constituent Assembly and I still think that this is an electoral issue; and I think including such small things like this one in our Constitution merely belittles the Constitution.  The question of age limit and academic qualifications are matters of campaign.  Furthermore, this restriction actually contradicts the constitution provision, which says, “Anybody of the age of 18 and above is free to access any position of leadership in this country and anywhere.”  Now, why then impose this restriction?  

Secondly, it contradicts the provision on equal opportunities very seriously.  Now that we are going multiparty, the question of screening candidates is entirely the responsibility of parties.  No party would like to send a candidate in the field whom it thinks is useless and is going to be defeated; they will try to send their best. Why should this be a responsibility of Government or Electoral Commission for that matter?  I understand that even Justice Odoki, in his recent statement, has said that those are the kinds of provisions, which need to be revisited.

Finally, the question of Graduated tax:  I want to thank the Committee for bringing in the proposal for the abolition of Graduated tax.  It would be so absurd to have Judges, who are well endowed, not paying taxes and then you go along to tax the poor peasant and the unemployed.  People who are indeed in good situations should be benefiting from welfare support and you reward them with taxing them, you know, burdening them. This is very unfair. I think we could comfortably amend Article 191(2) and instead substitute Pay As You Earn or Commercial Transaction Levy, which I have seen in Canada, provincial governments and other local governments are actually charging. Pay As You Earn is also a tax on income and I think it would suitably replace graduated tax. Let us relieve our people. 

You know, people are being shot with guns, people are running away, young men get married and they have got to go hiding instead of entertaining their newly married wives. It is a very awkward tax and the local government people insist on it because this is the only tax on which they cannot account.  They swindle freely and they do not account for it; that is why they are complaining about its abolition overwhelmingly. They can never show you a road they have constructed using graduated tax nor a water point they have supplied using graduated tax.  

I can challenge any chairman anywhere to come here and show me what he uses graduated tax to deliver services for. This is the money they swindle and they cannot account for it and that is why they are really up in arms against it. I think the Government has agreed; we are battling with the matter whether it should be suspended or abolished.  I think we now generally agree on the idea that the tax is not necessary or be temporary and subject to review. 

My final point, Sir, is on the National Planning Authority. The CRC suggested amendments in the Constitution on the National Planning Authority. I do not agree with those amendments. I do not think they are a constitutional substance. They should be amendments to be included in an Act of Parliament, but my surprise is that, the Cabinet and the committee agreed that this Authority was established subject to evaluation.  

Mr Speaker, I have never heard of any Authority, body or whatever established by an Act of Parliament in this country, which has been subject to evaluation. You only evaluate a project not a statutory body so, this kind of lingering and preponderance over the National Planning Authority is very unfortunate. Those who were thinking like that should be told very clearly that they are anti-development and we need fair distribution of resources in this country. I thank you.

3.30
CAPT. BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA (Bukoto County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the committee for a job well done. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Commander-in-Chief with the board that approved my retirement request with a deserving consideration of my humble contribution by promoting me from the rank of Lieutenant to Captain. (Applause). I feel proud and I will remain so for having been part of this family of the UPDF, and I want to assure everyone that I will remain loyal to the objectives that we set ourselves to achieve. 

Mr Speaker, the people of Bukoto West and I, have this to say on the following issues: Change of political system from the Movement to multiparty. They are really very reluctant to accept that for the reason that the Movement has served them well. But after explaining to them as I was mandated by the National Conference of the Movement, I informed them that much as there are four important pillars governing this country first, the voters who give us legitimacy and authority, we the political elite who are partners in leadership of this country, the Army, but also more importantly the donors, they accepted to change to move from the Movement system to multipartism but on condition that NRM-O keeps the values, the norms, the methods of work and they will continue supporting it. 

On the issue of federation, the people of Bukoto West overwhelmingly 98 per cent support the East African Federation and they do not and I want to repeat this, they do not want to mix cultural matters with administrative issues within this country. They do not support the federation of one part of Uganda with itself. They realize Uganda is one country and the earlier we realize it that we cannot go back, the better. For a compromise and this is purely for administrative reasons, they are suggesting we should have five regions of not less than 10 districts each, for administrative purposes if a regional tier is necessary. But to have a regional tier for only Buganda is not acceptable to the people of Bukoto West and myself. 

On the issue of lifting term limits, they realized that leaders are many - and they mean average leaders - but extraordinary leaders are very few and where this extraordinary leadership appears as the case is in Uganda today, it is a scarce resource which should be utilised to its capacity. The people of Bukoto West want term limits to be lifted now and in the future such that good leadership, which is a scarce resource in Africa and Uganda, in particular since independence, should not be limited more so when the voters, the people who decide the destiny of Uganda, want it to be. 

98 per cent of Bukoto West is fully behind lifting of term limits for various reasons and when I was consulting I used two proverbs in Luganda. Mr Speaker, when I was in Bukoto West I told my people, “I am the speaker today for the ‘parliament’ of Bukoto West” and there are people who say, “ewakula ennume tewakula emu”(that where there is a bull, there can be another one). They said fine, but also they said where you get an extraordinary bull that when it mounts it produces two nyanas every time, you do not remove it from its kraal unless it has mounted its daughters. So, when they have the best bull and it has not committed any atrocity, please keep it.  

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank my colleague here for giving way, and I wish to inform him that, first of all, I am a cattle farmer so I have some good knowledge about these things and I am sure others do. When a bull stays in the kraal for too long, chances are that it will mount its daughters and it will produce bad cows.  (Laughter)

CAPT. BIRIMUMAASO: Thank you for that information, my sister. Good enough we are neighbours and the people of Bukoto West are saying the bull has not stayed for so long. So, it has not mounted its daughters yet. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of land –(Mr Arumadri rose_)- I think my time will be considered.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, my colleague. Really, on a serious note, is my colleague aware of what is happening in Togo? Thank you. (Laughter)

CAPT. BIRIMUMAASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of land - I have heard that information but I have ignored it. On the issue of land, it is good that the honourable Minister today has presented a Bill. The people of Bukoto West want us to move very quickly to have bibanja holders have their bibanja demarcated and certificates issued. It is good that you have received the Bill today, and they do not want to stop on having certificates only, the future of this country and the citizens of this country own this land and it is their biggest economic asset, it should be made transferable. So, the earlier we get certificates, from certificates to titles so that whoever holds a piece of land can transfer it, the better for this country.  

Today I have witnessed the laying of the papers to this Parliament, I will tell the people of Bukoto West that the process has started; the earlier we do that, the better. This idea of having customary land, much as we have to move slowly, but I want to assure you it is backward; we should have freehold.  So, the process of registering, we should move very quickly, bibanja holders to have certificates, from certificates we own titles; that is the future of this country.  

Dual citizenship: They do not have a problem with it. I was in Constituent Assembly, we were very conscious but I think things are moving and changing so, we have no problem with dual citizenship.

Death penalty: They want it to be lifted to life imprisonment save on murder only. Treason should be moved to life imprisonment, defilement and rape.  It should only be murder that the death penalty should be retained.  

Mr Speaker, the people of Bukoto West and their leader who is representing them here, retired Capt. Mulindwa Birimumaaso, feel very proud for this system and leadership and they will work very hard to promote it. Thank you very much.

3.40
MR PATRICK AMURIAT OBOI (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we go through this transition period, we as a country and particularly this Parliament are walking on a tight rope. We are going through a period of challenges and the whole country, without exception, is focused on what is going on or what will transpire in this august House. It, therefore, goes without question that as we deliberate on these very key constitutional amendments, we need to be mindful of our political history, the path that we have walked through since we gained the independence of this country in 1962.  

We also need to reflect, Mr Speaker, on what transpired in the Constituent Assembly. Although I was not a Member of the Constituent Assembly, having campaigned and failed to make it, I took interest in what went on in the Constituent Assembly. I realized a lot of acrimony, a lot of mistrust to the extent that what came out of a person who was considered the member of opposition did not seem palatable to the rest of the Assembly, especially those who felt they were part of Government. So, I would like to earnestly appeal to this House that we have at the back of our minds, as we take these important decisions, the fundamentals that are contained on page 3 of the report of the committee. And I really wish to thank the committee for being steadfast and being able to produce such a beautiful report.  

We should face facts, there has to be reason as a guiding principle. We have got to be tolerant and have mutual respect for each other, and I believe it is important that there is harmony among us. We also need to put national interest above self and party interest. I would like to see us making amendments considering that today we may be in Government but tomorrow, we might be part of the opposition. I would like to see us making amendments considering that we are transiting through this House. There are people who came to this House before us and there will be people coming into this House after us. So, what we are doing is not for ourselves alone, but for posterity as well.

Mr Speaker, I will now go to issues that I discussed with my constituents. I did consult elaborately and I would like to point out a few issues that they felt were rather contentious in their judgment. While doing this, I offered all the leadership guidance that was required of a leader as I am and we reached consensus.

On land, there is a proposal, Mr Speaker, for Government to compulsorily acquire land for investment purposes. This is contained in the report and there is an attempt to amend Article 26 of the Constitution. The people of Kumi are very clear about this, they are resolute in as far as this is concerned, the question they are asking is, why does Government want to be a broker in as far as land is concerned? Why does Government want to make the people of this country believe that the local population who actually own the land are inaccessible to any investor wherever he or she may want to come from? We, therefore, assert and support the position by the committee of this House that Article 26(2)(a) should be retained as it is in the Constitution. Land to us is a source of employment; it is a source of livelihood in Teso.  

I would like to inform the House, do not touch three things: Do not touch a wife of an Etesot, do not touch his cow or her cow and do not touch their land. They have threatened civil unrest if Government goes with a proposal to include this particular amendment in the Bill. This is a warning to Government and I think they should take this warning seriously.

As far as representation in Parliament is concerned, we in Kumi believe the size of Parliament is big. But at the same time, we believe that a precedent has been set, constituencies have been demarcated on the basis of counties and we feel comfortable to retain these counties. However, Mr Speaker and honourable members, we believe somehow the size of Parliament should be trimmed. 

However, I would like to inform you, Mr Speaker, that at an appropriate time, I will bring up a motion here for the amendment of Article 113 where the President has the liberty to appoint ministers from outside Parliament. We believe this is responsible for the increase in size of Parliament.  

What I am saying is that, if Professor Nsibambi who is an ex-officio Member so much wants to come to Parliament, he should go and face the heat of the campaigns out there and get elected to come to the House. This should apply to the others and I believe this is noble. In this Parliament, until about recently, we had ten ex-officio Members. We also had Army men who hardly spoke on behalf of their constituents. All of you will bear me witness, I feel since we are going to a new political dispensation, there is a need for us to keep the Army out of politics so that the Army remains neutral and is not stewed in its thinking and in its actions towards one political party.  

I would now like to talk about term limits, I think this is important. In as far as term limits is concerned, the people of Kumi believe strongly and they were very clear about this; the term limits should remain as they are in the Constitution.  They believe, and by the way these people reason very well, that this particular law has not been tested. 

In all aspects of studies, Mr Speaker, an idea cannot be developed. That idea would generate a theory, at least in science, from the theory you formulate hypothesis and it is after the hypothesis has been proved that that becomes a rule or a law.  As far as this particular Article is concerned, it is at a level of a hypothesis, it has not yet been proved, it has not been known to have worked and I believe we should give ourselves opportunity to prove that the hypothesis that two term limits do not work before we change this law.

Also, Mr Speaker, the argument that has been brought forward by pro-kisanja supporters is that there is this very good person whom we do not want to lose. I think this is actually attaching matters of the Constitution to an individual, and I would humbly like to request the President to come out very clearly on this because a lot of arguments that the pro-kisanja supporters are trading around surround hedges around the President himself as a person. And so, since we cannot ignore President Museveni in the political equation of this country - and I stand to be challenged on this. This is a powerful man, because last time as we were grappling over the issue of whether to open up political space or not, it took just a very mention of a word by the President for a turn around to occur from even the most ardent supporters of the Movement. In conclusion, I do not support the opening up of term limits neither do the people of Kumi support it.

On the issue of a deadlock, when there is a deadlock between Parliament and the President, in my opinion, Mr Speaker, I believe this is speculative and I think it is not wise for us to make a law on the basis of speculation. I would like to support the position of the committee, which states on page 26 that it makes more sense to adopt a graduated response, should they lock, and to have an exhaustion of all the disputes settlement mechanisms, including the judiciary. What does the proposal from the Cabinet’s White Paper seek to do? It seeks to make Parliament less independent and this indeed would be fighting the principles of independence of the three Arms of Government the Judiciary, the Legislature and the Executive.  

3.54
PROF. VICTORIA NAKIBONEKA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, honourable members. I add my voice to those of other Members, who have congratulated the committee for the job well done. This is especially true with regard to the method of work, which was adopted by that committee namely; these principles of facing facts, reasoning, tolerance, mutual respect, harmony and national interest rather than self.

Mr Speaker, I beg honourable members that we emulate those principles and adopt them as a standard upon which all the deliberations of this Parliament at this critical point of time should be debated. There is a tendency of this House sometimes degenerating into rowdy debates just because we fail to accept the truth or we fail to agree that we have differences, but solving differences does not mean that you go to the extent of fighting. This is a very important time and I think the committee has given us a yardstick, which actually we should use.

Mr Speaker, another issue is saving time. We are time bound and I think it is upon us to do more caucusing outside, and then when we come to the Floor we have an agreed position rather than having dissenting views of the 300 Members here. Definitely we will not move very far. Mr Speaker, the problem of trivializing other people’s opinions, I think also is not fair. We should learn to listen.

Mr Speaker, I want to start on what the people of Luweero feel should be the major areas of concern.  The Buganda of which Luweero is a big constituent part hold Balemeezi county - the people of Luweero do not want to break away from Uganda as some other people are asserting, that when you ask for a federal arrangement you want to break away from Uganda, no. Buganda is part of Uganda, but also it does not mean that if you are part of the family, you cannot be an individual. But then as individuals there is some relationship, which binds us together, and the people of Luweero are saying Buganda is part of Uganda. But what they want are the following in place:

One, operationalisation of Article 246 so that actually what that Article says is put in place. It has been there since 1995 but has never been operationalised, and I think that is why there is this acrimony because nobody knows what should be done because what should be done has never been put in place, and that entails recognition of cultural and traditional institutions as basic units for civilisation, cooperation and regional development and harmony. Once people have their cultural status they should be left to practice that culture as long as it does not contradict the Constitution, as long as it does not marginalize anybody.

We are saying secondly that, there should be integration and blending of cultural and traditional principles into the regional government framework, especially those regions with traditional and cultural leaders. That there should be a symbiotic relationship or they should be complementary; that the umbilical cord should not be completely cut as if the region is a separate region and culture is a separate culture. They are saying that culture and the regional arrangement should be blended together, some formulae should be found.  

The issue of having one or two regional councils could be arranged in such a way that the umbilical cord is not cut. You can have two councils, but you can allow each council to send a representative into the other council in order to blend so that each council feeds the other because we are the same people, we are not different people. The king is there for the people of Buganda and the people of Buganda are there for their King. Even if the two are separate, there should be a formula of creating that symbiotic relationship. 

But they agree that their king should not be dragged into partisan politics.  They say that what caused the war in Luweero, the problems of the 1960s and 1970s are still vivid in their minds, they do not want to have a dead body returned to Buganda because “a good Muganda is a dead one.”  That is why they are saying the current king should remain out of politics, but that should not mean that when the king is out of politics Buganda does not exist.

On Buganda again, when they come together as a region, they are saying the boundaries must be permanent so that they cannot be manipulated. The same applies to Kampala; that once a municipality is created, when Kampala expands, there should not be a position where the municipality can be narrowed down; because of that the boundaries should be permanent. That shared responsibilities within the centre, regional governments and cultural institutions should be equitably funded without anyone being marginalized. When those are in place, whether the institution is called federo or some other name, that is a matter of detail, which can be agreed upon. 

Therefore, the people of Luweero applaud the Movement Government and President Museveni for having restored the kingships and culture leaders wherever they are. They are saying that that spirit should not be jeopardized now when actually the issue had been resolved long ago.

Mr Speaker, other issues other than federo or the regional arrangement, were very simple in Luweero.  On opening political space, they are saying they do not have any problem with it. They only want the NRM political party to become a strong party so that those who have been pinching their friends, those who have been beating the seats of the vehicles, perforating tyres are left out to get off board peacefully without wrecking the bus. The people of Luweero are in that bus as a political party kama mbaya mbaya.  

But given the chance, they are saying if they are given a referendum to decide on that issue, they will reject multipartism because for them it has never created anything good, it is the Movement, which has made Luweero what it is.

Concerning term limit, they are saying open up.  Let each President be subjected to rigorous elections every after five years like MPs and other elected leaders. They are saying if we are insisting on the President’s ten-year term let also Members of Parliament have two terms. All elected leaders two terms, you should have set the standard – (Mr Wandera rose_) - you will have your time because this is a straightforward issue I am just reporting. So, what are you going to ask about what I am reporting?

Presidential and parliamentary elections: They are saying presidential and parliamentary elections should be held at the same time. But they were sceptical about the local councils chairmen all together. They are saying let the President and Parliament be together and then the local governments also be together because there are two different electoral laws and we should not combine the two.

On the President dissolving Parliament, they are saying if there is a deadlock, let there be a referendum to decide on who is wrong and who is right. There should not be a position where it is decided that always the Executive is right and, therefore, it should dissolve Parliament. There should be a third party to help and that third party is the referendum.

On the chief administrative officer, they agree with what the White Paper says. 

But on the land issue they say no compulsory dispossession of people of their land. The land should be taken by its commercial value. They said already they have been dispossessed. One person buys a whole two miles with three people because they have money and they just go on giving them peanuts. They are saying the Land Act should be operationalised to stop people from being harassed because the Act is there, but it has never been operationalised.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this one they told me to make it as a tying note. They do not want their traditional leader to be ridiculed or embarrassed by parliamentary sanctions for removal. They are saying let there be some internal arrangement within the cultural institution itself to mitigate the problem, so that there is no time at all when the king or the cultural leader is brought to a position of misbehaving to that level.

4.05
MR HOOD KATURAMU KIRIBEDDA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make my humble contribution, first on the White Paper and second, to bring the views of my constituents.  

I wish to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for this good report presented and I also need to make my humble contributions. But before I do so, I wish to draw the attention of Members of this august House to the fact that, the constitutional making process everywhere is a very significance task which requires us particularly now as legislators to reflect on what has been going on in our country so that we can make a good document for the benefit of our people.  

I have been listening, Mr Speaker, attentively to some of the contributions made in this House by our colleagues and this has been in view of the amendment of the Constitution. What I recall is that, in 1967 Members in this august House simply picked the amended Constitution without their input. That is why it was termed as a Pigeon Hole Constitution. It was amended by the head of state at the time and the authorities that be at that time. Surprisingly, many Members who were participating actively in the politics of this country continued to use this Constitution without saying that that Constitution had defects as the committee pointed out; when in actual fact it had the defects and inadequacies to perform well for the good of our people.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I will stand to be corrected, we have the Prime Minister here, he is an authority in political science but what I believe is that political democracy cannot thrive unless at the base of it, it has a strong social democracy that caters for the interests of all members of society in that particular country.  That is what I believe.

Mr Speaker, the people whom we represent have been analysing the political history of Uganda and they have found that they had been isolated and marginalized right from colonial period, not until the 1995 Constitution that was promulgated here recognized their rights first as human beings and second as people with disability. 

Mr Speaker, a lot is being said within this House and out of this House in view of amending this Constitution. But I believe that a Constitution must exist for the good of the people that is when the Constitution becomes meaningful as a supreme law of the country.  

One of the most celebrated Indian politicians, Pundit Nehru, had this to say and I quote - he made this contribution when the Constitution was being made: “While we want this Constitution to be as solid and as permanent a structure as we can make it, there should be certain flexibility. If you make anything rigid and permanent you stop a nation’s growth, the growth of a living vital organic people.” Members of this House, if you look at what the opening was by the committee and the Constitutional Review Commission it was realized that the 1995 constitution had a lot of defects and several inadequacies, which needed to be corrected so that Ugandans can have a document that can serve their divergent interests.
  
Mr Speaker, on the issues that have been raised that need attention my constituents had this to say: One, on retaining decentralisation as a mechanism of devolving power to the people, they felt that this is a young system, but which has taken tremendous root and spectacular achievement in those districts where there has been transparency and accountability on the part of the leaders. I believe Members of this august House in your respective constituencies, in your respective districts, have seen what has come out of decentralisation. Therefore, my constituents still support decentralisation.

On the issue of the Inspectorate of Government, this was a very important matter, which my constituents looked at. They say that the strengthening of the Office of the Inspector General of Government (IGG) would go a long way to stamp out this evil called corruption, which thwarts the efforts to develop or carry out progress and development of our country. That is why they support the IGG’s Office to be given more powers to prosecute and convict all those found engaging in corrupt tendencies.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, if you prosecute you do not convict. It is the court to convict; you prosecute and then you leave another person to convict.

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. So, we believe that the IGG should indeed be given exclusive mandate to investigate and prosecute, Mr Speaker.  I hope I have corrected that one.  

Mr Speaker, my constituents were very happy for recommending the retention of the affirmative action. The affirmative action was indeed promulgated and included in this Constitution for a purpose; that persons with disability and any other marginalized groups such as women in this country needed actual emancipation so that they can participate fully in the political, economic, and social development of their country. I believe that any exclusion of such marginalized groups would not indeed show well for the good governance, the constitutional governance of this country and I believe honourable members in this House will agree with me that a good law is the engine for the good political, economic and social growth of a country.  Therefore, by including persons with disability and retaining them through this affirmative action, this recommendation was well appraised by my constituents.  

Mr Speaker, my constituents have been very happy about articles in 231; those were the proposals, which did not require any constitutional amendments. They supported the official language to be Swahili because as Ugandans, as we see, we are moving towards integration and language is one form, which can unite us as the people of East Africa and beyond for our own good. But they also say that we should speed up evolution of this language, particularly teaching it as it started in primary schools and any other institutions.

Mr Speaker, my constituents also appraised the committee and the Constitutional Review Commission for retaining the sign language for our fellow disabled people, who have the hearing impairment and those with visual impairment for having retained the Braille teaching.  

My constituents also supported dual citizenship because they looked on our history that many Ugandans went in exile and they are in the Diaspora, and indeed they had lost their citizenship and this would give them opportunity to get their citizenship again. It would also encourage investors to bring in some capital in this country.  

On the question of lifting Article 105(2), Mr Speaker, my constituents informed me and asked me to inform this House that on the basis of Article 1 of the Constitution, that all power belongs to the people, they are saying that the policies which the NRM brought here recognized them and, therefore, they do not see any problem of opening up the term limits so that Ugandans can have an opportunity to elect a leader of their choice at any time given the opportunity through a free and fair election.  

4.20
MRS NANSUBUGA NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by wishing everyone here a prosperous 2005. I would like to start straight away with the points from the consultations of the people of Ntenjeru North, and I would be glad, with permission from hon. Ssempangi, to add on the people of Ntenjeru South, because we conducted these consultations together throughout those constituencies.  

Our people, Mr Speaker, appreciated very much the work of the committee and the Government proposal because we put it to them that the White Paper is not an end to itself, but just a proposal. But they started with one concern that we are amending the Constitution whereas many of them did not have a chance to look at the Constitution of 1995.  They did not have a chance of seeing it in Luganda. So, they put a request seriously to us that when we get a chance to speak in Parliament, we put it to the House that after amendments the new Constitution should be published in many languages, especially in Luganda and even the English version should be circulated to almost all the people of Uganda.

About the change to multiparty system, Mr Speaker, we laboured -I would call it labouring because we tried to really convince our people and tell them all the reasons why we should go for multiparty system. Good enough, I am happy to report that they accepted but with a lot of difficulty because they kept on reminding us of the past, telling us that most people below the age of 40 do not know what those old people went through during the so-called time of multiparty politics. So, they request Parliament that we put a strong law in place to check the indiscipline that usually accompanies multiparty politics.  

The number of Members of Parliament: They admitted that the number of MPs is big, but there was a view that the numbers should remain as they are because –(Interruptions)- I am giving you the views of our people, Ntenjeru North and South. This is their view, they even quoted examples of the Women Members of Parliament and the Youth MPs with due respect. They mentioned that it is not that their Women MPs are not effective, but the areas are just too big for them to be effective. So, they feel much as the number is big but they need effective representation and actually they even requested if they could have two Woman Members Parliament per district. That is what they put to us, trying to really justify the numbers.  

Mr Speaker, they also put it to us that they would wish to see a Parliament of 300 Members whereby we get the pay as we get it, rather than seeing it reduced to 100 as it was proposed and each one getting Shs 20 million. They felt it would not have made any difference. So, let us get the little and remain with those numbers.

However, they wanted strongly the remuneration board to be put in place to determine the pay of Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I informed you last time, this issue of numbers came up actually in the Constituent Assembly. Some of us were advocating for population quota, where I think the policy was to use the counties to determine the constituencies and that you never join the two counties to create a constituency. 

But if you have to reduce and, therefore, use the population quota, you examine some of the counties from which you come from - it is not my county, because my county is really giant; but you may really have to address this issue whether you want to merge two counties to create the population centre and I think the argument was that some parts of the country may be marginalized. I see some districts here, which have now five Members of Parliament, may end up by having one or two. These are realistic issues really you have to address when approaching this matter.

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Now I move on to the issue of land. Our people opposed taking land compulsorily. They accept the fact that development should be promoted, but land should not be taken compulsorily; rather they felt let there be prompt payment and adequate compensation for the owners of that land.

About term limits: The people of Ntenjeru North and South and Kayunga are at the wider picture. The majority felt that they have the right to vote for their leaders and that they should not lose good leaders if their services are still needed. They expressed their gratitude to the sitting President for what he is doing. They told us, especially the elders, that they have had several leaders of this country, but they have not seen a strong leader as His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. Therefore, they asked us to tell you strongly that let the voters decide who is best for the country by exercising their right of voting. 

They are of the view that this cannot happen if term limits are not lifted and they feel strongly again that good leaders should not be barred from serving their people. Let the people vote for their leaders and, therefore, they want term limits lifted. Let it be open and people vote for their leaders; that is Kayunga District as a whole, majority. Yes, I stress that, Sir.

Dissolution of Parliament by the President: our people of Ntenjeru North and South love this system, love the President and love the way we are doing. But they said, as much they love their President they do not want him to be given powers to dissolve Parliament –(Interjection)- NRM, yes, I am proud to belong to it. 

They also strongly feel that when there is a deadlock the issue, which has caused that deadlock, should be taken to the people. We always say that power belongs to the people and they decide, instead of the President having powers to dissolve Parliament. 

Now that time is against me there are some issues, which they strongly wanted us to put to the House.  One of them –[An hon. Member: “Federo”.] Before I come to federo, that is the last point because it is so important - is about the remuneration of local council officials. They said we are all paid as Members of Parliament, but they are doing a great job down there and they are not considered. So, they were happy that at least in the White Paper something is said about that.  

Another one, which is out of the White Paper, is about a law that governs both girls and boys – I think it is about the defilement law. When a boy has an affair with a girl of the same age, that is below 18 years, it is the boys who are harassed. They told us to put on record in Parliament that whoever has authority to amend those laws should amend them for fair treatment of both girls and boys. They should be equally treated. 

Another one was about the law controlling the FM radio stations, and television stations. They said that people abuse the leaders so much that they felt - they abuse their President and they feel that they are abusing those people who elected the President. So, they feel that should be controlled. They wanted us to put this to you. 

Finally is federo. Fifty percent of the people of Kayunga do not want federo, and 50 percent want it but both groups put it that they want federalism separated from monarchism. They want many people who understand federo to go down and teach them more about federalism. But as we stand now –(Interjection)- you want facts. Facts are bitter, that is the fact. In Kayunga 50 percent want federo and 50 percent do not want it. 

4.30
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, it is so detailed, and for properly identifying the objectives for the review of the Constitution. There are four objectives, which are very well laid out, but I would rather further thank the committee for the fundamentals concerning their method of work. I would particularly borrow one of the fundamentals of their method of work, and that is concerning tolerance and mutual respect. I pray that as we talk in this House, this tolerance and mutual respect for one another will continue to be the guiding factor as we endeavor to amend the Constitution. 

I travelled very widely in Manjiya, I have 42 parishes, and consulted on the issues contained in the White Paper. On many matters consulted upon I agree have gone with the committee, and on others we differ but not to a very great extent. 

Article 1, power to the people, this one was a very difficult Article to pass on to the people because they already knew they had power. They explained that, “We have power; we elect Presidents, we elect you, now what else do you want?” I said, “No, I understand they want to give you more power whereby whatever you decide will be final irrespective of all the others.” There was divided opinion on this matter in that some people thought it would be too much for them to have some sort of judicial powers. But others were excited saying, “Yes, we want all the power to come over to us.” Those who were very excited were about 60 percent and those who thought the power they had at the moment was enough were 40 percent. So the majority thought the power should go to them. 

Second; change of political system. Many people in Manjiya constituency did not want to change at all. They think what was on the ground now is sufficient. Politics, parties, that were a hot bed in Mbale or Bugisu in the past, people have died; people have experienced all sorts of evil during the – there were mainly parties anyway. There was UPC and DP – and they could even give examples of brothers who had killed brothers because of differences in parties. After explaining that although the Sempebwa Report came out with 70 percent of people pro-retention of the Movement, the 30 percent must also have their rights expressed. Eventually we agreed, or people agreed, that we should open up to multi-partism.  

On regional tier, it was totally rejected. People did not even think of it, they did not see the value of a regional tier. They are satisfied with the current decentralization.  

On Article 15 concerning citizenship, this required a lot of explaining. “Why is it that we are looking for dual citizenship today? Are investors stopped or not allowed to come to Uganda even when they are not citizens?  Are the Ugandans who have left Uganda to go and do kyeyo not allowed back because they do not maintain the dual citizenship?” A list was produced of very many investors who are here and enjoying themselves without necessarily being dual citizens. You see, my constituency is near Kenya. There are those who lived in Kenya whereby this idea of dual citizenship was tabled and one man stood up and said that in Kenya they wanted this but one Chinese used his citizenship to bring in 500 other Chinese on the same passport, so they rejected the idea of dual citizenship.  

On elections for president and Members of Parliament and LC V chairpersons on the same day, the people of Manjiya did not see any problem with that. However, they wanted Parliament and the President separated from LC V chairmen and councilors. They agree that the President and Members of Parliament should be elected on the same day but LC V chairmen and councilors should be elected on a different date.  

On the matter of a stalemate between Parliament and the Executive or the President, the people of Manjiya think this matter should be sorted out and referred to them. They had two ways of dealing with it. One; if the President, during their referendum, was found to be wrong, it is the President to go.

Two; if Parliament was found to be in the wrong in the referendum, then it is Parliament to go. So, that is two way because the argument is between the two. Should Parliament have powers –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Then how will you elect both the President and Members of Parliament together under those circumstances?

MR WAKIKONA: Sorry?

THE SPEAKER: If Parliament goes and the President stays or the other way round, how do you then invoke the provision for electing the President and Parliament on the same day?

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, I am talking about a matter of confidence of conflict between Parliament and the President. They think the President should have power to dissolve Parliament –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes. What I am saying is this. Your contribution was that you want the President and Parliament to start their tenure or mandate together, say of five years. In a matter of confidence you say the referendum decides. If it favours the President’s position he stays and then Parliament goes. Then it means you will have to destroy the other position of electing the President and Parliament on the same day.

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, that is possible if we put it in the law and have somebody to take charge of the power. It could be the Chief Justice. So –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no. You may be missing the point. Your contribution is to the effect that when you hold a referendum and a referendum turns out in favour of the position of Parliament, then the President goes; his mandate ceases. Or if it is in favour of the President then the mandate of Parliament ceases and therefore, you elect a new Parliament. Therefore, you will be having different mandates running at the same time. Do you elect the two –(Interruption)

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much for giving way. The people of Bujenje were of a similar view. They suggested that a referendum, as he actually explained, should be held. We should elect the President - if he is in the wrong and he is supposed to go - we elect the President for the remaining period say two, three years and if it is Parliament, it would still be for the remaining period and then we hold elections both for Parliament and the President again after that.  

MR ERESU: Some clarification, Mr Speaker.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the information –(Interruption)

MR ERESU:  Some clarification for your benefit, Sir?

MR WAKIKONA: The time you have given me is not sufficient –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: No, we are sorting out the issue of Ugandans -(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Hon Eresu, can you wait please? On the matter of cultural leaders and whether Parliament should be empowered to discipline cultural leaders, this case was discussed. Knowing that a cultural leader is any other citizen, they agreed with the provisions or recommendations of the White Paper that this is a matter of the Constitution and the cultural leaders concerned should be referred to the constitutional court.  

On the death sentence, people of Manjiya think the four categories identified for the death sentence should be upheld except for defilement. The age set, they think it should be cut it by half. The White Paper says those who are found defiling those of 15 years and below should be killed. But the people of Manjiya think 15 should be reduced to 10 so that those who have defiled those of 10 and below should be killed but those who have defiled those aged 11 up to 18 should have life imprisonment; but not all of them should be killed. Mr Speaker, they even cited a case - I had forgotten it – they said that if this had been the law one of you would have been sentenced to death by now. I hear sometime back the papers reported that one of us married somebody of primary five who was –(Interruption)

On appointment of chief administrative officers, this matter was –(Interruption)

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Order, Mr Speaker. Through you I would like to –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, you originally stood to give information and the member did not give way. Is it the reason that the point of order has come? (Laughter).

MRS SEBAGEREKA:  It is a point of order for the honourable member holding the Floor –(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, thank you for the ruling because your word is final. Can you sit please? (Laughter) On the appointment of CAOs, the people of Manjiya feel very strongly that CAOs should remain the responsibility of the district. The reason given for misappropriation of funds is not in the national appointment. Whether people are in Bugisu or in Ankole or where, they are Ugandans. Instead the center should strengthen the surveillance matters so that even those in the district are not left to embezzle and then leave, but there should be a strong mechanism to deal with them.

Finally, on Article 105(2), the people of Manjiya were of the view that this Article of the Constitution gives them power and that same says in clause 4 that there should be frequent elections. They recognise that elections are an in-built mechanism for elimination of leaders. They even gave me examples of dictators who have been here before and had never ruled for more than 10 years. So people can even be dictators from day one. Therefore, my people felt that the provisions of Article 1(4) should work without any prohibition. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.46
MR PETER LOKERIS (Chekwii County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to join those who have commended the work of the committee. We are indeed happy about the committee’s work. We are here having a normal debate, and I am sure the members of the august House are equal to this task. Some people are pessimistic about it, but I am very sure we are equal to this task.  

In the constituency where I come from we only concentrated on a few things to be reported here. We tackled all but there are those they told me to report about specifically. The first one is the establishment of regional governments. These days we are getting various districts in the same cultural areas. We are saying, in order to have a ceiling, some government to put together these small districts, which have got the same cultural beliefs, we need the formation of a regional government. Like in Karamoja we have Kotido, we have Nakapiripirit, we have Moroto and we could soon be having another. We need that kind of government to put these people together to solve our issues culturally and otherwise –(Interjection)- it is not named federo. It is a regional government. If you want to call it federo and it suits you, it is welcome.

On the appointment of chief administrative officers, we had to consider many scenarios. Some people say it is good to appoint them at the center, and to us we were looking at what planning. We see planning as a process and in the process of planning there are people responsible for every stage. There are people responsible for policy formulation, establishing objectives and the mission, and what have you; and there are those who operationalise, the implementers. Then there are the monitors and there are the controllers. So, who is supposed to be implementing? Through the decentralization policy, it is the districts. Should they be at the same time controlling or monitoring themselves? Who should be doing these things?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure to seek guidance from you. As far as I know we are debating a committee report on the White Paper that was originated by the Cabinet. I do not know whether it is procedurally right - and I really beg for your guidance - for a minister of government to debate that report? I seek your guidance because I find that this is a unique situation in which we are.

THE SPEAKER: You are seeking guidance from the Speaker of Parliament whose responsibility is Parliament, to comment on the management of the Executive? You put me in a problem. It is not my role to control how the Executive conducts its business, and I am not supposed to know. I only deal with the issues tabled here. I think you should spare me that additional responsibility.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, in that case, would you permit me to ask the Leader of Government Business, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who is present here in the House, to help us in as far as that matter is concerned?

THE SPEAKER: The reason why I may not is that we will be conducting Executive internal issues in Parliament, which is not very convenient. Anyway, you have said it. If they have ways of doing things, they have heard.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you for your wise ruling. I would like to remind the former speaker that I come from a constituency called Chekwii in Nakapiripirit District, so I am contributing as a Member of Parliament. I also went to consult like any other person and this is what we have to say. 

We are saying that planning is a process and we thought there should be some kind of central control on the chief administrative officers because all the money we release goes there. It is like a mother who gives food to children and there is an elder child. If you do not see how the food is distributed to children, the greedy one might eat all the food and the others die. Therefore, we are saying what the White Paper says is correct. We are only giving supporting evidence that the Government made a wise decision and we the Karimojong support that decision.

Some people say, “Yes, it is easy”. We are not removing the implementation. Their money should come but there should be somebody to take charge. Whenever something goes wrong, they should bring about rectitude. That is what we are saying. These are national funds.

We are also saying that centralizing these people does not make them local. These people have become village chiefs now. You are from one district, you become so local, why do we not make these people national leaders who are able to even transfer to other parts of the country and become permanent secretaries one day? Why keep them there? In fact we subject them to trouble because they are not transferable. When the wanainchi get annoyed they murder them, like that one of Kapchorwa. These are people we need to respect. So we say, the Government center must have control over these leaders.  

I am talking very fast - retaining the term limits or opening up; first of all for us in Karamoja we do not – when things are quiet as they are now - we do not even think of saying we should go anywhere. We think President Museveni is the best leader. But others say, “No, we want also to taste”. 

When I was here I heard that during the Constituent Assembly those who were supposed to be the opposition were in favour of opening up the term limits because they had already been in government and they knew that it is better to give someone ample time, if the people so wish. But when now the Movement leaders have realised that fact, the same people who were in favour of opening up have gone to the other side. Have you got new sense? I do not know. So we say opening up is good and there are very many reasons. 

Supposing there is a vigorous turnover of Presidents? Ugandans are very ambitious. If we say we limit this, they can even limit it further to say that every President should have five terms, but what are the repercussions of these decisions? 

These decisions are very dangerous to the taxpayer. It would be a burden to the taxpayer if we had so many retired Presidents at a time. Let us take a scenario where people are elected every five years - let us not say ten. When a President retires, he is given a Benz; he is given his maintenance, and porters. Supposing in 50 years you have about ten Presidents all of them helped, and they are already dependants on the taxpayer? And when a President is dependant on the taxpayer and we have our extended families; in Europe, and in America you have Bush with two children but here if Lokeris became a President, do you know how many dependants I will come with? About 40, and then when I am retired there are grandchildren all of them parasites on a retired head of state, and they are about 10. It means we are legislating for other people to suffer.

People are talking about dictatorship. When does dictatorship start? Does one have to stay for a long time to become a dictator or he can even become a dictator after one day? What did Amin do? How long did it take Amin to become a dictator? He overthrew Obote and said, “I am the best”. The people of the central region danced for about two weeks but what did we see later? Cars were taking people for slaughter, including in Karamoja itself. So, some of us have been thinking about these things and not just talking about opening up for nothing. We have our reasons. 

Supposing we have very good statesmen who propel this country to prosperity in admiration of the taxpayers? Those people are bound to stay by the wish of the people and the ballot box. They come in, after five years the country is progressing, and a stable country means a stable economy. Which means we shall move forward if each one of them takes 20, ten years, depending on the wishes of the people. After 50 years we could be with about two or three retired heads of state who would be depending on the taxpayer. Why do we need too many to depend on us? One day they will get very mischievous thoughts and form a club of retired presidents even to the discomfort of the incumbent. So the Karimojong say, “Open up so that whoever is good can be voted in for as many times as the people wish, just as is the case for you, the honourable members of the august House”.

Mr Speaker, we know the safeguard should be frequent and fair elections so that if my honourable friend, Mwondha, becomes a president and he is good, we shall continue voting for him. It is not bad. 

The opening up of political space was agreed on by the people of Karamoja. They were hesitant but they say since multi-partyism is sweeping across many areas, we could open up the political space. But then opening up means each party should offer the best and if you have to offer your best, why can the other people also not offer their best? So, the moment we open up and we begin to say we are now competing, competition means offering the best. The Movement people as well will offer their best. If it is Museveni they think is the best to challenge the rest - because of the world of competition we get the best. 

Some people have been saying Museveni should declare whether he is standing or not, but it is not up to the President to declare. He will only be asked by his party to stand and then he can answer yes or no. (Applause) Why do you have to force someone who has no responsibility of saying yes or no, to say yes or no? You leave it until that time. This is the politics itself. So, we are saying that those who say, “You speak to Museveni”, he has no mandate to speak now. People are waiting.

On the elections of Members of Parliament, president and LC V chairmen on the same day, we agree because these three positions are very crucial in the administration of the country. So they need to be elected on the same day and people have a rest for the other elections later on. If I had the time I would explain the proposition why we think so. 

Even as Members of Parliament, some of us want to reserve the seats of LC V so that their elections are far off and when we are defeated here we run down to compete there. It should not be a depository for people of this House to be running down to. Everything should come at once and we end it once and for all. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.02
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking you for having steered the affairs of this House up to this level, with distinction. I am happy to note and appreciate that on many occasions in your communication from the Chair, you have assured the members of your continued commitment and dedication to steering this House with diligence and maximum maturity. I thank you for that. I pray that God inspires and assures you to remain firm, fearless and forgiving where you can. 

I want to echo those that thanked the former Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Janat Mukwaya. Mr Speaker, you remember the start of this work of the committee whose report is before us now was not all that easy. There was a lot of political uncertainty, a lot of mixed feelings here and there, but I think it was the diligent work of Madam Janat Mukwaya that has enabled us to receive this report. I want to thank her and wish that in whatever new assignment she has, she continues delivering in the same manner.

The House is embarking on this exercise of debating the White Paper from a position of suspicion and doubt of our independent abilities to discharge responsibilities and work as independently as possible. This is so because of the argument that some of us have been paid money to bribe us off, to buy us off and, therefore, make it almost impossible for us to independently decide which way to talk and which way to vote. I think, Mr Speaker, that the ball is in our court. It is now up to us to prove whichever way; it is up to us to justify that we are hon. Members of Parliament, we cannot be bought by a mere Shs 5 million, which we almost get every month. This is a matter upon which we are able to prove to the nation that we are hon. Members of Parliament. 

One advantage, which this House has got now, is that of modernisation and improved mass media. The audio-visual services that we have out there have got a fundamental service to give. I now appeal to this nation to make the best use of the service of that machine because it will prove to them who is who in this particular affair, who is bought and who is not bought, and so on and so forth.  

The debate on the White Paper needs a mature and stable mind. We have to adopt a position of give and take in order to ensure that at the end of whatever exercise we are carrying out here, Uganda will still remain one; Uganda will still go on with stability, and Uganda will still develop.  

I listened last Saturday to the debate of Capital Gang, a special programme aired over Capital Radio at 10.00 a.m. Mr Speaker, I expected my brother, hon. Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire not to have forgotten very easily. I am sorry I am saying this when he is not around, but Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire is a person who fought in the bush and walked out of the bush to the city with victory. He should have known what they stood for and he should have been in a position to remember what they profess. One of the things they said was they would adhere to constitutionalism. This means they are going to uphold the Constitution of this country, especially so when it is the Constitution, which they call “homemade”. 

Another thing, which they said, was that they would lead a government in transition to democracy and development. These are two strong points, which I remember very well. But what did I hear coming from our honourable friend, Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire? 

He was saying that if Article 105(2) is amended, it would bring in – which is true – a new president and a new political system, which he was blaming on the opposition party. I think this amounts to dishonesty because the idea to amend or not amend Article 105(2) did not start with the opposition. It was the Government and Cabinet that came here with the idea of amending Article 105(2). So, how on earth can the consequence of that be blamed on the opposition? I think that is dishonesty.

I also have to quote from a reliable newspaper what our friend, Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire said; “We have reached the crossroads of transition and we have decided to have our tested captain to help us cross where the current is strongest.  After that we shall see what to do.” Here he was referring to the matter of changing the president as a result of the 2006 elections. He is saying they have decided to go with their captain. Who are “they” and where did they decide?  

Such utterances coming from a general like hon. Kahinda Otafiire, worries us so much. We may be wasting time here. If the generals have decided, now what are we talking about? Why are we wasting our time here? Let the generals decide and implement their decision. Mr Speaker, these kinds of utterances are very unfortunate.

I want to say something about the issue of the presidency. The most important thing with the presidency in Uganda is the power; power, which we would like to see him hold in his hand. Power corrupts; extreme power corrupts extremely. Now here we are, we would like to see the President sending away Parliament, we would like to see the President controlling the Judiciary, we would like to see the President grabbing the lands around; we would like to see all sorts of things; power! This is bad because power goes with corruption. If it is not properly attained, power goes with totalitarianism and I think this is unfortunate. We should desist from it.

Nineteen years have gone by without peace in this country; 19 years have gone by with war in Northern Uganda. The war in Northern Uganda is a stumbling block to a smooth transition. The war in Northern Uganda has eaten up the whole of Acholi land and is threatening to devour the Lango and Teso sub-regions. With this we cannot expect to offer a peaceful transition. 

5.14
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to sincerely thank the committee for having handled a very delicate job well. They avoided all the landmines and we are safely in the House with their report. 

Mr Speaker, this is our moment. At least you and I who walked out of the Constituent Assembly protesting the provisions of the Movement System, our moment has arrived. The people of Uganda are congratulating us that the likes of the hon. National Political Commissar have finally seen wisdom and are recommending that we should change to a muti-party system. I would like to welcome them on board. We had always said that to pretend that everybody was in the Movement, that the Movement was all-inclusive, was a fallacy and was fraud. I am glad the patience of the people of this country has helped us to arrive at this moment.

MR GAGAWALA: Mr speaker, I apologise for interrupting hon. Patrick Mwondha, but I am constrained to put him to order. In view of the fact that we were all elected to this Parliament on individual merit as Movementists, is he in order to say that actually it was an error? It was intentionally done to bring people together so that they are able to debate this particular situation in order for us to go back to multi-partism. Is he in order to say that really it was a fallacy and it was fraud to have intentionally organised the society of Uganda to move together in an orderly manner so that eventually they go back to parties? Is he really in order? 

THE SPEAKER: This is a very difficult point of order to answer because it is a question of personal assessment of a situation. I cannot substitute my assessment for his assessment. Others who hear it may have their own assessment.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately, hon Wambuzi was not there when I was campaigning into 2001. I told my people that it was necessary for them to elect me so that when this moment arrives in the House I am there to guide the process of transition. I knew it was certainly coming and that is why I told my people so.  

Many people have talked about the term limit and I am going to devote quite some time to the term limit. It was felt in the Constituent Assembly that overstaying in power in itself was unproductive. Overstaying in power is dangerous. That is why the limit was put in the Constitution. That is why it required a constitutional limitation. When one overstays in power he turns a state into a carcass, attracting only vultures. Competent bidders for state power get scared and they take off. So, it leaves only those who are willing to risk it to take it on, and that is not good for a nation’s development. 

When you overstay in power – a member here debated at length about a visionary leader and about vision - you even tend to lose the vision because people surround you and most of them who surround you are doing so for their own interests –[Mr Gagawala: “As it used to be.”] You can say that again. (Laughter) So, overstaying is a dangerous process. And for a young democracy, you cannot even talk of free and fair elections. On the Order Paper we have yet to debate the election violence report and you are talking of free and fair elections, hon. Katuramu, when a Bishop and his wife cannot even vote in Rukungiri? They find their names already ticked! That is in the Report on Election Violence. We have not yet debated it. Maybe we should have debated it before we debated the transition. It would have guided us. 

It is only constitutional limitations that can save us from a dictatorship. You can get a situation like that of the late Eyadema of Togo who passed away at the age of 69 having ruled the country for 39 years; now his son has succeeded him. When Eyadema was taking power in 1967, the boy was only one year old - because he is 39 years old now. Eyadema could have looked at this tot of one year and he saw a President in him, because he was promising himself to stay for that long in power. Are we going to wait for our own Eyademas? Are we? Are we ready? Because I have ruled out the possibility, in young democracies like ours, of free and fair elections unless the Kakooza Mutales of this world have ceased to exist. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But do you not think that this issue should be combined with free and fair elections. We are dealing with the issue of the President. The question whether we leave it at the two-term limit, there is no guarantee that a person who is elected on the first occasion must take the second term as well. Does it not really depend on free and fair elections so that this issue is combined when you are discussing it?

MR MWONDHA: Incumbency has its own contribution to whether the process is free and fair. At the first occasion, it may be free and fair but if you leave me there indefinitely, I can play the cards to my advantage.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my dear brother for giving way. I want to seek clarification from him. Was the overthrow of Obote I and II a result of lack of term limits? And was the overstaying of Obote II in power a result –(Interjections)- I wish you could give me chance to develop my point because he is saying when the president overstays in power, he can do anything. Is it the reason Obote II had to remain in power? Can I get that clarification?

MR MWONDHA: I would rather ask my sister to first get her facts correct because I do not think Obote II overstayed. He was overthrown after four and a half years. And in any case, I was not discussing overthrows. I was discussing incumbency.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. As a senior colleague in this Parliament you have been participating in all governments and you are a Member of Parliament who is well conversant with politics. I would like you to clarify to me and tell me whether all over the world there is a formula, which prevents a dictator.

MR MWONDHA: The formula lies in democracy and its principles. That is how dictators are prevented. And we are saying that the constitutional term limit enhances that democracy.  

THE SPEAKER: Well it is time really; one minute to wind up.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you. We are saying the constitutional term limit helps to enhance this democracy and the ladies of the Movement, you should not be struggling about this matter. You know what happens when a baby is breastfed for a very long time? That child becomes reclusive, that child gets spoiled. And while you breastfeed you will not be able to get another child in the process. Is that what you want for Uganda, good ladies of the Movement? 

I want to end by saying that we are debating not for ourselves, not even for only our children, but for their children to come. We should allow posterity to be calm and posterity to be productive. We should allow this country to enjoy its peace, to remain one, and to remain united. We cannot say that all has been well in the last 19 years. We have misery in the North to look at. So, when you are busy wearing your kisanja in your pockets and in your hair, be mindful of what has happened to the rest of the people. Thank you very much.

5.29
MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am pleased that I have been given this opportunity to address the Members of Parliament because I know they know more and they will be understanding of what I am talking about.  

One thing is that this report they gave us depended on the report, which was given to them by Prof. Sempebwa and on the memorandum from Mengo from which the White Paper was drawn. I was surprised that the major policies, which were given in Prof. Sempebwa’s report and in the Mengo memorandum, do not appear anywhere for comment. It is as if those people were really so stupid that whatever they wrote on the subject was not worth commenting upon. In short, I do think they regretted why they appointed Prof. Sempebwa who could not give them a cure for anything. 

The Mengo people and Prof. Sempebwa wanted federo to be established but you will find that even the White Paper - you could call it the “black paper” – what the White Paper says that there would be a regional tier? What will the tier contain? There is absolutely nothing they have said that it will contain.  

When we come to the report of my learned friends, that one remains mum because it fears to talk about the whole thing. I do not know. So, you find that the wars between we people who love federo and those who do not want it shall continue without convincing us that there are substantial reasons why this matter could not be considered. But as I have always told you, we shall ask for this federo for even the next generation and for as long as we are capable of speaking. And I said we are not liberated yet. I have repeated it quite often –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, ask for federo. If you want to ask for it you do so because these are the people who are going to decide on the matter. It is not the White Paper, it is not the report; so you put your case to them. These are the people to decide.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much indeed for that wise counsel but I did not know that you could say they have put in too much salt in the sauce unless you taste the sauce. However, according to your advice, I will do that. 

Those who wrote the report and White Paper are present; they have heard your advise –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, my advice is to you. What I am telling you is that what you are asking for can only be effected by amending the Constitution. The Constitution is not amended by the White Paper nor is it amended by Sempebwa Commission. These are materials for the people who will amend the Constitution. The people who would have the mandate of amending the Constitution is vested in Parliament. If Parliament does not take the first step, nobody will amend the Constitution.  So, now if you are talking to people who have that mandate, why don’t you make your case?

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr Speaker, I accept what you have said and I appeal to everybody in the House that we are still demanding federo. I have quite often said that we are not liberated yet, because I want to remind you gentlemen, that when the liberation war –(Interjection)- sorry.

HON MEMBER: There are ladies too!  (Laughter)

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Honourable Members of Parliament –(Laughter)- I want to remind you –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not need to have to tell you; you just persuade them.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Honourable Members of Parliament, you will all remember that the war; which was fought, was for liberation after we had seen that existing regime was out of order. This war was not fought by a few people but the whole of Uganda participated and each group of those fighters had reasons why they fight. They wanted to remove a man who had deprived them either of their property or power or something of that nature. They all succeeded but it surprising that it would have been a question of finding out what did this man take from you, but we were taken into the Constituent Assembly and there we lost our way.  

Surely as far as the federalists are concerned, everything was known that this belongs to so and so and this belongs to so and so, but now an ally makes us go down on our knees to beg.  There is no need for begging –(Interjection)- and for that reason I think Uganda has been very unfair to us we who are interested in federo. It was not something new, it was something that was existing, but now there are even people who can ask you that “what is federo?” as if they want to say that it is black or white or what? Any person who is able to read should not blame me, but all this federal is written down and everybody knows what it -(Mr Eresu rose_) I am sorry. 

Secondly, I want to leave that matter because it just shows how unsatisfied with that part, then I come to Kampala and the land. Really, for one to say that Kampala does not belong to Buganda, it is for us all - I do not say it is not, but it is the control. Where is the control? -(Interjections)-  You cannot say so. The fact that you are married to about four/five wives and you remain in my house does not mean that now you own the house because you have more people. Everybody is free to come and settle in Kampala, but however big Kampala maybe, the Central Government remains a tenant in it. That is why you find that only a shilling was being paid – but to say that we are even going to enlarge it and push you out, I think the recommendation is very wrong. 

We must remember that Kampala in 1962 was demarcated; it was a small thing, which more or less fell in Babu’s constituency. But now you say that Buganda should be taking the smaller part and Kampala should be expanding day and night. When those things come, we actually need to sit down and discuss how because this is not a thing, which you can discuss with all the people in Uganda, but you discuss it with your would-be landlord. I am not shy about it, we have so many towns and cities in Kampala, but can we say they are all ours they can anticipate - as we want without somebody controlling; there must be somebody responsible. For that reason, I feel that this matter needs further reconsideration.  

On monarchs there was a very big threat that one day we may find one of the leaders brought to Parliament here to answer certain questions. I do not know who will be the prosecutor and who will be the judge. But I think this thing came out accidentally for one reason that when we wrote the Constitution of 1995, we failed to put in the exceptions. Under the 1962 the privileges were clearly shown but even when we made that Constitution we were cowards; we did not spell them out because we would like to know when a cultural leader goes out of order. 

Even when this committee came, it said the government to come should prepare the privileges. Why not you, we want to know, advise the man or the cultural leader or whoever maybe that if you do that you are going out of the boundaries so that we can really control them without bringing them to Parliament. It would be too sad if a cultural leader was to be brought here and we make him stand somewhere to defend himself. I do not know whether there would be lawyers or what not. So, we need to make these things very clear and I was thinking that the committee would have been responsible to show us how these things can be done.  

Then when I come to resolution of Parliament by the President, I actually I do not know who proposed this.  Who?  Surely, we have a Prime Minister, we have so many advisers, there are professors; how can you allow such a thing to go out? With this one really I blame the inner Cabinet. These are not things, which you could allow our beloved President - and I think maybe you say that this was an error. (Laughter) I will not speak much about that one, but everybody understands that it was an error.  Then we come to –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and the hon. Member holding the Floor. I am aware that my colleague, hon. Nsubuga Nsambu tends to hold conservative views about many issues, but this being a democratic country with a democratic Parliament, we thought it was quite fitting for everybody to exercise their minds politically and present the views they thought they had. It is the liberty of the House to freely debate and make the decision they would like. Indeed Government would be only too happy to hear the views of people who espouse conservative views on issues like this one.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I am running short of time, but I would have loved to respond to that but let me go to the death penalty. My friends, I am an advocate and I would have liked to go to the higher Bench, but I have no courage to sit on the Bench and deliver a judgment against somebody that, “You go and be hanged.” I do not have that courage. Most times when they rule that “go and hang,” the cases go on appeal, and you find them acquitted. The punishment usually is intended to correct the man who you are punishing, but in this case the man is not corrected, instead he is murdered as he did.  Then you have two murders, I do not know which of the two is better. (Laughter). Under –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Member, this question of capital punishment was considered in the Constituent Assembly where you were a Member, and therefore the Constitution envisages a situation of a capital punishment. So, what you can do is to say maybe let us change the Constitution. Do not blame it on anybody, just say you have changed your mind on this issue, in the present circumstances let us change. But the punishment is constitutional because the Constitution talks about it.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much; we are now amending the Constitution –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This was about the right to life and then they say the exception is when it is imposed after a trial.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much.  But what I am saying is that, I want the whole punishment to go because a person who kills one person is killed, a person who kills two is killed, five killed, ten killed; can you say one person can compensate for the ten? Then what is the idea? Again when it comes to hanging this man, he is hanged behind closed doors. You are not teaching the public; you are not using the public so that you teach them to fear.  In fact to me the whole exercise is illogical –(Mr Ogwel Loote rose_) Thank you very much, allow me to finish; we shall meet.  (Laughter)

On the question of the third tier, I do not know really who created this third tier because I was in the Constituent Assembly, there was a very big debate on how many times a President would remain in power, and we all accepted that we would allow two terms. In fact, I think that if the President wanted three terms, with the so much love we had, we could have accepted it. But it was debated heavily, and for you to return it at this stage when people are so aggrieved, others have got their brothers dying day and night and you say you want to bring the man who is killing them to remain for another three –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we allow him to finish because we will be prolonging the debate for nothing.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Mr Speaker, he needs to be put in order. It is not the President who is killing people; it is a war situation. Is the Member holding the Floor therefore in order to insinuate that the President is killing people in the North?  

THE SPEAKER: Murdering or fighting, what is it?  Let him substantiate what he meant.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: No gun can get out unless the Commander-in-Chief has ordered; and in Luganda we have a saying that where a child spoils, it is the father to be responsible. He cannot tell me that those people are committing offences –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you just well know within even the Constitution that a war can be declared, and therefore it is constitutional to declare a war. And when you declare a war, what does it mean?  It means fighting. Therefore if they fight and people are killed, are you going to call this a murder or perpetuation? What did you mean?  Did you mean murdering or –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: To me, what is going on in the North, I am regarding it anymore as Law, because when you consider the suffering of the people –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Member, you are out of order. (Applause). Now, I had given the floor to Nakasongola but I realized it is the same district, the same county; have you sorted out who wants to speak?

5.51
MS TUBWITA BAGAYA (Woman Representative, Nakasongola):  I think I will speak first, ladies first.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to present the views of the people of Nakasongola District on the White Paper.

Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to appreciate the work done by the committee because they really handled a number of issues. But allow me to present the views of the people from Nakasongola District. 

On Article 74, Mr Speaker, on the issue of change of political system to go multiparty, the people of Nakasongola had no problem with that amendment though they still feel that we are not yet ready to go in party politics. Unless they are convinced 100 percent that this country will be stable in party politics, then they have no problem with this amendment.

Another issue, which the people presented their view on is the issue of the Vice President being a running-mate of the President. The people did not recommend this amendment, they agreed with what the Government and the Committee recommended, because the President needs to be given flexibility to work with someone he is really comfortable with than someone who is just given to him.  So, they were not comfortable, they said that let the President be given the flexibility to work with anyone he feels comfortable with.  

On the institution of traditional leader, the amendment of Article 243, the people did not recommend that.  They agree with the Committee suggestion of the Bill being brought to Parliament; that let the Law be put in place so that these traditional leaders can be in position to enjoy their privileges and benefits.  But it should consider that each traditional leader should enjoy its benefits directly without going maybe somewhere or branching off that you will be getting it from another direction, but let it be direct from the center, yes, on source. 

On the regional tier and regional government, the people did not recommend it and they totally disagree with this formation and they do not want Government to waste any money on putting in place these regional governments.  In fact, they feel that the regional government will be taking them back to the old system of federalism, which they do not agree with.  So the people feel that they suffered so much during that period of federal and they feel they do not want to go back into these things of coming together, they are comfortable with the current arrangement.

Mr. Speaker, concerning the dual citizenship, the people are comfortable with it and they do recommend Article 15 to be amended because, this will give some investors to work when they know they are citizens in the area where they are working and even our children who are abroad and are given the citizenships where they are, they will be in position to come back home comfortably other than measuring for them number of days when to spend where, so they feel this should be implemented.

Mr. Speaker, another issue the people of Nakasongola looked at was on compulsory acquisition of land.  The people do appreciate this suggestion, but they said before that can be put in place, they still have their grievances whereby they have suffered since 1900 on the issue of land.  The people of Nakasongola are squatters on their own motherland and they feel Government should do something to make sure that the people of Nakasongola do get their land back, because they have suffered eviction from the absentee landlords and they are going through the same situation, which Kibaale went through. They feel that if Government could hurry with the land fund in the district, they will be much grateful. 

Regarding the amendment of the compulsory acquisition of land by the investors, they do not have any problem with it, but they feel that if at all someone’s land is to be acquired compulsory for an investment, let the compensation be agreed upon between the Government and the owner of that land so that the compensation is okay and that person can vacate and be in position to acquire land somewhere else. They also feel that if this is not done, some people might frustrate investors and we might lose a number of projects.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the independent candidate, the people feel it is a proper arrangement. This will give room to someone who is capable to come in as an independent candidate and he will be in position to compete favourably, most especially where a candidate is sidelined. So they feel that position should be allowed so that if a candidate is maybe sidelined in a party, she or he can stand as an independent candidate.

Mr Speaker, on the election of the President, Member of Parliament and Chairman, the people were comfortable with that arrangement and they do agree. They feel that if these elections are carried out on the same day people who are always undecided will be put in order, because there are some people who stand for Member of Parliament just coming to test, when they are not sure of what they want. So, they want to put people in order so that someone can make a decision whether they are standing for Member of Parliament or chairman. This will also prevent the habit of chairmen or Member of Parliament manipulating the elections downwards.  So they feel comfortable with that arrangement which is coming in place. 

They also feel that the elections should strictly be by secret ballot. They are not comfortable with the amendment of LC I and II system to go back to the old system. They feel this issue where the President had asked the Minister of Local Government to look into the possibility of amending this the system should not take place. They feel that secret ballot is the best way to go, even in Parliament.

Election of Women Members of Parliament: The people of Nakasongola feel a woman member of Parliament should be elected by universal adult suffrage -(Applause)- because when this woman comes to Parliament, she does not represent only those people on electoral college, but all categories of people, and since even we are going for party politics, a party will be in a position to sponsor its own candidate and the candidate will move.  Even in the current arrangement, the Women Members of Parliament have been moving all over the district.  So they feel their election should be by adult suffrage.

Another issue we discussed as the people of Nakasongola was the issue where a Member of Parliament is elevated as a minister. The people feel it is not proper for this person to vacate his or her seat, because they can appoint you today and tomorrow you are reshuffled. So they feel this person can work properly as a Member of Parliament.  

So they feel they do not want to lose the person they have voted in, maybe if he is reshuffled, to be lost in Parliament and yet they still have confidence in that person. So, let the current arrangement remain as it is because there are more comfortable with it.  

Where there is a deadlock between the President and Parliament on a matter of confidence, the people did not agree with the recommendation by Government whereby the President is given power to dissolve Parliament. They feel they are the people who elected the President and the Members of Parliament, so in case there is a deadlock between the President and Parliament on a matter of confidence, this matter should be put to them to decide, and either party should respect their decision. They imagined a situation where a disagreement comes four months after elections and felt that they should be left to decide on that matter.

On lifting of the presidential term limits, the people did not have any objection to that. In fact 96 percent supported the idea since even other positions are open, why not the presidency. If people are tired of that President they will always vote him out and put someone else they want. So, they are comfortable with the arrangement of opening up.  

Chief Administrative Officer: This issue was almost 50/50. Around 58 percent decided that let the Chief Administrative Officer be appointed at the district level so that they can feel that gist of having a decentralization policy in place. They feel that if he is appointed from the centre he might be bigheaded and might not be easy to supervise. But again you cannot leave the other percentage because it was also big, they felt that if this Chief Administrative Officer is appointed from the centre, it could reduce the pressure of the Executive.

6.07
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South): I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to start my contribution to this important debate by thanking hon. Jacob Oulanyah and his committee of 23, 12 of whom signed the report. It is interesting to note that of the five Members from the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, none of them signed, very curious. In the words of this report and I quote on Page 1, “It is a major political landmark in the political history and economic development of our country.”

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, Dr Nkuuhe. This is for the record really. The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces officers are on a course in Jinja, so it is not deliberate that they did not sign the report. Otherwise, earlier on they had participated in it.

DR NKUUHE: Okay, that is noted. I would like to continue the quote: “This is a major political landmark in the political history and economic development of our country.  The outcome of this process will be judged on whether or not it promotes national stability, good governance, constitutionalism and economic prosperity of our country.” 

I am glad that the officers of Parliament, your department, Mr Speaker, have already put this report on our website so with a soft copy we can analyse the report very intelligently. The analysis is as follows: it is 70 pages, 26,000 words, 995 paragraphs, 3293 lines. The word “Museveni” appears 11 times, the word “democracy” 18 times, the word “law” 43 times and the word “Uganda” 95 times.  This frequency, Mr Speaker, is very important and it tells us something, which I will be coming to later.  

I also consulted my people, although I was concerned that this consultation was not very scientific because it was very hard to get a very representative sample size. However, a few questions when we were discussing with them, I can just give a few. On dual citizenship, for instance, they say it is okay but they do not want a lot of poor people coming to enjoy the benefits of Uganda. They say that we should cautious also, but they accept the principle.

On moving from Movement to Multiparty, a lot of them actually like the Movement and they were wondering why we are moving without asking them.  But I explained that this whole thing maybe is an issue where there is a lot of agreement; therefore it is inevitable, it was bound to come, so they accepted.

On appointment of Chief Administrative Officer, whether by district or centre, they think this whole thing should move out of the Constitution and go to the Local Governments Act.  

On federalism, they did not actually understand it until I told them that it might be one way of promoting national unity. From that basis they said maybe we should open our eyes because for them it was so remote. Especially the civil servants within the constituency who were working at the district, they said this might be an opportunity for them to have some sort of movement. They cannot move vertically, they cannot move laterally where you are square in the district you are stuck. If you are a district agricultural officer you cannot go up, you cannot go down, you cannot go laterally unless you die or you are fired. So they thought if there was some other level where they could be moved within the region or whatever, so they think that is a possible win- win situation.  

There were many areas where I did not agree with my people but I was very frank with them that I was a leader and they should also sometimes give me that opportunity to listen. They said yes, if you are a leader we listen to a leader.

Now, in these ten minutes I will focus on one or two issues and I would like to quote Prof. Kanyeihamba an expert on constitutionalism. He says making a Constitution is like putting up a building. First you have a plan then a foundation on which you build walls and a roof and so on.  Then you can partition the house internally into rooms, once this house is finished or changes can be made on the house. Whereas it is easy to change the colour of your walls from blue to yellow, or green or whatever it is harder to turn a bathroom into a sitting room. It is extremely difficult to turn the foundation of the house into a foundation of a shop, a school or hospital.  

In other words, the Learned legal professor was warning us that whereas it is easy to make constitutional changes to issues that are largely of administrative nature, we should be very careful when dealing with issues that are of fundamental nature. Issues of fundamental nature touch on separation of powers between the Legislature and Executive and Judiciary and other things like moving from one Party to Multi Party, third term limits and even federalism.  

In my view for instance the proposal by the President to dissolve Parliament is of fundamental not of administrative nature. The Constitution is so clear on how a misunderstanding is resolved.  Moreover all the Ministers will vote with the President, all the MPs under the multi-party system, the Government side, the ruling side will vote with the Government. So those who rebel against their side will be disciplined by the party machinery.  Therefore, there is simply no need for one arm of the state to dissolve another. 

In fact, as far as I am concerned I saw this proposal more or less as a red herring rather than something you throw in for bargaining but not really serious.

The term limit of the President and of any elected office with executive powers: I would have liked the LC III and LC V chairpersons to be included under this term limit because they all hold executive powers. For me it is of fundamental nature. In fact, those who want to know our history should recall that our problems normally stem from leaders overstaying their welcome, in 1967, 1971 and so on.  

If this Sempebwa Commission Report was to be compared to a wedding, for me the third term issue would be equivalent to the bride and the groom, so important. All other changes are like quests to the wedding; best man, maid of honour, flower girls, Peg boys and so on.

Let us look at the report itself; it is very interesting that the chairperson of the report, Prof. Sempebwa had this to say. On page 264, ‘The statistical analysis of the peoples’ views based on the public hearings and the memorandum from the people indicates a majority in favour of retaining the term limits the president can serve.  Unfortunately, views from the Government and the National Conference were presented when the Commission had almost concluded the exercise of consulting the people.” 

Finally he says, “Most debates so far do not clearly separate the principle from other consideration, the main one being the position of the incumbent President. The pros and cons should be analysed as they would govern any person who will hold the office of the President in future.  The discussion should also focus on the concerns and fears that relate to the term limits.  

In summary - and listen to this – in summary the minority position is that I see no compelling reason for repealing Article 105(2) which limits the term the President can serve to two terms of five years each.” This is the chairperson of the Review Commission so we better really pay attention to what he had to say.  

Then there is another minority view from Commissioner Owori. Sam Owori says on page 266, “The term limit, which was an innovation in the 1995 Constitution has not been tried and cannot be said to have failed. The Commission does not give any good reason for fixing what is not broken nor does it give any good reason why Parliament cannot deal with this matter as provided for in the Constitution.” 

So, you set up a Commission, the chairperson of the Commission tells you his honest opinion, I think we should listen when this happens.  

Now, the third term issue has been mixed up with the popularity and the good works of president Museveni. I want to tell you that if this was a case; I would have no problem supporting President Museveni, a person from my district, a former school-mate. I would support him to stay in power until he is old enough to use a walking stick at 70, 80 or 90. But we are not making constitutions for President Museveni; we are making a Constitution for the good governance of the Republic of Uganda, a republic that will outlive you, me, Mr Speaker, anybody here; it will outlive us. So when we are looking at this, we should look at the performance curve, the pros and cons. 

Everything has a performance curve, the curve goes up, it levels off then it starts going down. As far as I am concerned the performance curve of any leader levels off after about eight years and then by ten years it begins to taper off. Really our President has served enough, but I am telling you his performance curve is on its way down.

So, the Rt. Hon. Benjamin Odoki has written a book, which was launched last week. It is called, “The Search for National Consensus, the making of the 1995 Constitution.” When he was being interviewed before the launch of the book he was asked about Article 105 and he said the Article was put in the Constitution because of our history where Presidents abuse power. It was meant to reduce this possibility.

So, Mr Speaker and honourable members let me conclude my contribution to this 70 page, 26,995 paragraphs report by reminding you that the word ‘Uganda’ appears 95 times, the word ‘law’ 43 times, ‘democracy’ 18 times and ‘our President’ 11 times.  So we should take this that institutions outlive people. People are mortal they come, do their best and leave.  

I think President Museveni is not actually serving two terms; he has been there for almost 20 years.  I think if you are really honest, you will say he was at his best around 1994, 1995, 1996. After that, you have to measure things like investment, poverty - all those parameters - If you measure them frankly and honestly, you will find that his performance curve is on the way down. 

I would not like to see my district-mate being hounded out of his office when I think he should leave when he is still liked and when he is very popular. We shall be very happy to welcome him home and to say this is a very good job done, but if you overstay on a dancing floor normally they say nasty things. So, I thank you.

6.20
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the adoption of the committee report and indeed I do appreciate the good work that was done by the committee. 

Mr Speaker, we are engaged in a very legitimate exercise of ensuring that we make some amendments to our Constitution to bring into conformity with the demands of the time, because a Constitution like any other setting needs constant review in order to update it and bring it to conformity with the demands of the time; and this is definitely provided for in our Constitution.  

Chapter 18 provides for amendment of the Constitution, and what we are doing from the word “go” is legitimate and we should not shy away from our legitimate role as we are mandated by the Constitution. Definitely this is for purposes of looking at omissions, commissions, and any unforeseen views or unsettled matters, and that is why we are engaged in this exercise.  

As we engage in this exercise, definitely we should ensure that we enhance mutual respect, mutual understanding and mutual interest because at the end of the day this is a binding document that is supposed to guide all of us and we should be in harmony as we put it to application. We should avoid mutual suspicion, hatred and even sentimentalism. We should give it an objective outlook if it is to serve the purpose that we think it ought to serve. And definitely, we need some benchmarks for ourselves; we need to do whatever we are doing to ensure that there is stability, economic development and unity. As we sit in this House, these should really be our guiding principles so that we are able to come up with a document that commands maximum consensus from all of us as a principle law.

Mr Speaker, definitely we need to be accommodative as we engage in this and not repulsive, we need to be inclusive and not exclusive, we need to be flexible and not rigid, and the document should be friendly and not hostile to anybody. Therefore we should view it as a mirror, a mirror in which all interests, aspirations and whatever we want to do for our country are reflected. Definitely we have very many interests as a country and this Constitution should play the role of harmonizing the different interests that we have. We have interests in terms of how we want to be governed in a decentralized manner. There are interests in terms of federalism like where I come from, there those interests where people feel that may be an arrangement can be put in place of sharing responsibilities, sharing resources and sharing functions between the centre and the region; and these are interests that are reflected in the aspirations, which I got when I was consulting my people. They feel and hope that as we debate and come up with amendments, those interests should be reflected so that when they read the document and when they see themselves in the Uganda mirror, they are reflected and they get a sense of belonging and a sense of consideration from all of us.

As I consulted my people, there were two main interests that came up; the first interest was on federalism, as I said, that element of getting some power at the region and people being able to do a few things. 

Then the second interest, which stood out, was regarding their power. The people of Busiro East were of the view, in terms of their power, that they should be afforded an opportunity to be able to decide on who should lead them and how they ought to be led. In this respect, they want to reserve that right of determining the tenure of how many. They have that capacity to be able to make that decision and to influence that arrangement provided they are free and fair elections, which are regular and which are properly conducted. 

They do hope that institutions that handle this exercise like the Electoral Commission need to be empowered so that it is in position to handle this exercise in a manner that is impartial, it is afforded money and other logistics to do civic education so that people get to know why they are electing leaders, when they are electing them and who a good leader is and who a bad leader is so that this is a continuous process within which they can renew or they can cut short one’s mandate.  So, that one goes to the power belonging to the people and they want to be given an opportunity to implement that aspect of the Constitution, and they believe they are competent enough to do that.

The issue of national interest is definitely very well appreciated, but it should be subject to the general will of the people. The cumulative effect of the national interest should be a reflection of the general will of the people as it enhances development, it enhances strategic interest within the region and other geo-political and security interests of the country.

The issue of changing a political system raised some excitement, but the people do believe that with civic education, with the level of harmony that has been built, they can be comfortable changing a political system provided that the system that they have been used to, that they have operated under for the last 18 years, the Movement, is available and they have got an option to organize within a system that they understand and to give an opportunity for competition among other political players. Because there has been an excuse time and again where people say that their hands are tied. They believe it is time to give that competition and if you have got any good programme to offer, then you can come and expound it and they have got the capacity to decide and definitely make an informed decision.

The issue of separation of powers is something that they consider to be vital, and as you know, the 1967 Constitution dis-enfranchised the people, it took away the people’s power to make decisions, and the constitution of the 1995, the fundamental departure from 1967 was to enfranchise the people.  

So, the issue of getting power back to the people should be significantly followed as we make amendments because the problems that we have had were by a few individuals taking decisions without involving the general public and thereby making mistakes that have been very costly to this country.

An example was the 1966 crisis. A political question was answered by the military solution and yet, that is an issue that could easily have been referred to the people either through a referendum and you get them involved in decision-making. So they feel that that fundamental departure of empowering them should be seen through as we make amendments so that they are not de-enfranchised.  

People’s power can only be enhanced through democratic practices and there is no way we can enhance democracy without having democrats. In which case, that is something that we need to take very seriously.  

Elections on the same day is something that is agreeable to the people from the viewpoint of cost saving and also to minimize the election fatigue.  You know our people have been engaged in elections time and again and it encroaches on the time for production. So they want few elections, which are focused and cost effective. 

Changing the political system: I have already referred to it. People are willing to go by the decisions of the National Conference and they feel that there is need for more civic education on the matter so that the people get to appreciate the fundamentals of why we are moving and prepare them psychologically to be able to play a meaningful role in competitive politics.  

Dual citizenship is okay, that is the modern trend.  We are living in a global village. We should really be able to appreciate that.

Cultural leaders should not be subject to parliamentary removal. There are other laws in the land that can deal with that. Then we would be drawing them into partisan politics and my people were strong on this matter; that let them stay out of politics. By bringing them to be a subject of parliamentary debate and decision, that is one way of drawing them into politics. Otherwise, if there is an issue, there are laws in place to take care of any matter that could be of constitutional nature or any other nature.

Impasse between Parliament and the President: The peoples’ power should be again invoked and the issue that is under impasse can be drawn to the people for them to be involved in resolving it.

The issue of land: There is a belief that the market forces, market values should be the basis for land transactions with some guidance from government. Otherwise, they are a bit uncomfortable with the compulsory acquisition. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the allotted to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member and I want to thank you, honourable members for your contributions. I think hon. Eng. Kiwagama will start the debate tomorrow, because we have also a statement to be made by the Minister of Education on the matter, which was raised. I appeal that we start earlier than the usual time, maybe 2.15 p.m. By 3.00 p.m. we should have covered other matters, then we start the debate and see how we proceed.  (Mr Kiwagama rose_) I have already mentioned you, therefore, there will be no problem in you getting the opportunity. What you do is to prepare your material so that when you start, it is faster. I want to thank you very much, honourable members –(Interruptions)

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, in view of the many issues which Members wanted to present from their constituencies, and because of the time constraint, if there is an opportunity, can a Member who has already contributed finish presenting some of the views which he or she did not present. Can there be an opportunity?

THE SPEAKER: No, it will not be necessary because I have been advised that the real tool to use to effect the changes will be availed to us next week, on 15th. I will give you an opportunity again because you have a right to make a contribution on the general debate for the motion for the second reading. So you can keep it; we shall be able to deal with it there.  

Otherwise, I thank you. We have made some progress and I think we are preparing ourselves for the big task. I see the relationship is not bad and if it is improved, we shall be able to strike the balance and make a Constitution for which we shall be proud of and the country at large. Thank you very much.  This takes us to the end of today’s proceedings.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.15 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.31 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8th February 2005 at 2.15 p.m.)

