Wednesday, 4 February 2009

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FORM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I would like to inform you that all Members of Parliament are invited to an important workshop to discuss the design of the national insurance health scheme. This workshop will take place on Friday, 13 February from 9.00 a.m., in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. 

The workshop is organised by the Ministry of Health in conjunction with consultants from the World Health Organisation, ILO, GTZ and the World Bank. The intention is to meet Members of Parliament to discuss the in-depth analysis of the social health insurance scheme. You are, therefore, encouraged to attend.

I would like to say that we have to make an adjustment to the Order Paper that has been issued to you to allow the Leader of the Opposition announce the Shadow Cabinet in the House. 

2.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true I made a request. As the members can see, our Front Bench is being manned by only two members today. This is because we dissolved the Shadow Cabinet and we are to announce a new team but our women members who feature prominently are at a workshop. I was going to let you know that we will hold the announcing, but when they come we will formally make the announcement.

THE SPEAKER: Well, if it is not convenient to you to do it today, we can do it tomorrow.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Okay, we will do it tomorrow.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to thank my colleagues, Members of Parliament. I have been away for two months after I underwent major surgery on my leg, but I have now reasonably recovered and back in office. (Applause) I would like to thank most of you for your prayers -(Interjections)- Maybe some could have said prayers to the devil -(Laughter)- but all those are prayers, the sum of it being that I am now feeling better. I would like to thank you, colleagues, for whatever form of prayers that you extended. I am back to work and we shall now do it together. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are most welcome.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: This was the business for the Minister of Public Service. Let us have the next item.

CONSTITUTION OF STANDING COMMITTEES

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have received a list from both the Government and Opposition sides proposing names of members to serve on the committees. We will read the names and decide on the list.

Public Accounts Committee

Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, Chairperson
Hon. Rebecca Otengo, Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Peter Mutuluuza, Whip
Hon. Tindamanyire Kabondo, Whip
Hon. Terence Achia, Member
Hon. Beatrice Lagada, Member
Hon. Alex Byarugaba, Member
Hon. Florence Kabahweza, Member
Hon. Saleh Kamba, Member
Hon. Badhul Katongole, Member
Hon. Tom Kazibwe, Member		
Hon. Rose Namayanja, Member
Hon. Alex Ndeezi, Member
Hon. William Nsubuga, Member
Hon. Grace Oburu, Member
Hon. Frank Tumwebaze, Member
Hon. Simon Euku, Member
Hon. Albert Okello Oduman, Member
Hon. Mathias Nsubuga, Member
Hon. Isaac Sejjoba, Member	

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard the names. Are there any objections? 

MR JOHN ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard the clerk read titles of whips to serve on the committees but our Rules of Procedure do not provide for these. If it is an informal arrangement, let it be done outside the House; it should not be recorded. I need clarification on this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think you are right, but we are interested in the names of members in the leadership. If there are internal arrangements, that is internal. What we can do is to forget about the term “whip” and take the names as they are. What they do is their business. Subject to that observation, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, that is the new committee. Proceed.

Committee on Budget

Hon. Akol Rose Okullu, Chairperson
Hon. Bagiire Aggrey, Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Balikowa Henry, Member
Hon. Byanyima Nathan, Member
Hon. Kiboijana Margaret, Member
Hon. Banyenzaki Henry, Member
Hon. Maate Joseph, Member
Hon. Munyira Rose, Member
Hon. Nansubuga Nyombi, Member
Hon. Okot Ogong Felix, Member
Hon. Tinkasiimire Barnabas, Member
Hon. Tubbo Christine, Member
Hon. Tuma Ruth, Member
Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi, Member
Hon. Akello Franca, Member
Hon. Odit John, Member
Hon. Bayigga Lulume, Member
Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey, Member 
Hon. Okecho William, Member
Hon. Cecilia Ogwal Atim, Member

THE SPEAKER: Any objections or comments? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on National Economy

Hon. Mukitale Birahwa, Chairperson
Hon. Wangwa Rutangye, Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Achia Remegio, Member 
Hon. Bahati David, Member
Hon. Balyejjusa Julius, Member
Hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit, Member
Hon. Byarugaba Grace, Member
Hon. Kabanda Pherry, Member
Hon. Kaddunabbi Lubega, Member
Hon. Kasule Robert Sebunya, Member
Hon. Mbagadhi Frederick, Member
Hon. Menhya Simon, Member
Hon. Tuunde Mary, Member
Hon. Wopuwa George, Member
Hon. Kyanjo Hussein, Member
Hon. Latif Ssebagala, Member
Hon. Ogwal Benson, Member
Hon. Fungaroo Kaps, Member
Hon. Ojok B’Leo, Member
Hon. Oleny Charles, Member

THE SPEAKER: Any objections? Any comment? I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Equal Opportunities

Hon. Kawooya Anifa, Chairperson
Hon. Nalule Sophia, Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa, Member
Hon. Bintu Jalia, Member
Hon. Bukeni Gyabi, Member
Hon. Kasaija Steven, Member
Hon. Kitatta Aboud, Member
Hon. Mpabwa Sarah, Member 
Hon. Nabeta Igeme, Member
Hon. Omwony Florence, Member
Hon. Seninde Rose, Member
Hon. Mugisa Margaret, Member
Hon. Lubyayi Idi Kisiki, Member
Hon. Sempala Naggayi Nabilah, Member
Hon. Nampijja Susan, Member
Hon. Ishaa Otto, Member
Hon. Ocula Michael, Member
Hon. Lukwago Rebecca, Member
Hon. Muwulize Norman, Member
Hon. Amali Caroline, Member

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Government Assurances

Hon. Kiiza Winfred, Chairperson
Hon. Odonga Otto, Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Alupo Jessica, Member
Hon. Mukose Moses, Member                   
Hon. Badda Fred, Member
Hon. Byamukama Nulu, Member
Hon. Byenkya Beatrice, Member
Hon. Kubeketerya James, Member               
Hon. Kyomugisha Grace, Member          
Hon. Mpairwe Beatrice, Member          
Hon. Mugerwa Sauda, Member             
Hon. Nalugo Mary, Member               
Hon. Stella Namoe, Member
Hon. Onyango Kakoba, Member
Hon. Pajobo Joram, Member              
Hon. Omolo Peter, Member               
Hon. Issa Kikungwe, Member            
Hon. Akena James, Member                
Hon. Piro Santos, Member               

THE SPEAKER: Is it okay? 

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was given an opportunity to apply and I gave about three choices and this was not one of them. I beg to withdraw my name. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The member wishes to withdraw and I think we cannot resist that. Do you want to respond, hon. Kabakumba?  First of all, let us deal with her application. She wants to withdraw. Is there any objection?

HON. MEMBERS: Permitted.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I would like to substitute her with hon. Ssinabulya Sylvia Namabidde.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, hon. Sylvia Namabidde replaces hon. Sauda Mugerwa. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises

Hon. Okumu Reagan, Chairperson
Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Tashobya Steven, Member
Hon. Kakooza James, Member           
Hon. Alepar Margaret, Member            
Hon. Busima Cosmas, Member           
Hon. Butime Tom, Member             
Hon. Byandala Abraham, Member        
Hon. Kahwa Amooti, Member            
Hon. Kaliba Steven, Member           
Hon. Katuramu Hood, Member           
Hon. Ssalabaya Haruna, Member           
Hon. Tete Chelagant, Member
Hon. Wonekha Olive, Member           
Hon. Okupa Elijah, Member            
Hon. Simon Tolit, Member             
Hon. Arumadri John, Member           
Hon. Anne Auru, Member               
Hon. Bucyanayandi Tress, Member      

THE SPEAKER: Is it okay? I put the question to the list.

(Question put and agreed to)

Committee on Local Government Accounts

Hon. Katuntu Abdu, Chairperson
Hon. Malinga Johnson, Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Ahabwe Pereza, Member           
Hon. Muwuma Milton, Member           
Hon. Abura Pirir, Member             
Hon. Baba Diri Margaret, Member      
Hon. Bakeine Mabel, Member          
Hon. Boona Emma, Member             
Hon. Gudoi Yahaya, Member            
Hon. Kisira Margaret, Member         
Hon. Kyetunde Elijah, Member         
Hon. Ochieng Peter, Member            
Hon. Olega Ashraf, Member           
Hon. Turyahikayo Paula, Member       
Hon. Yiga Anthony, Member            
Hon. Erias Lukwago, Member           
Hon. Ekemu Charles, Member           
Hon. Ringe Chan David, Member        
Hon. Namara Grace, Member            
Hon. Otekat John Emilly, Member

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I put the question.

MR SAMMY OGWEL: Mr Speaker, I did not hear my name and yet that is where I had indicated my interest.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, as you are aware, hon. Loote is an independent Member of Parliament and really in a way, he is independent of me. For my side, I have catered for hon. Yekko Arapkissa who is also an Independent MP for Kween County. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that we did agree and this House accepted that for the constitution of committees, there should be proportional representation - 14 members from NRM, four are from the Opposition and two are Independent MPs. So, at least from my side Yekko is catered for and from the Opposition, Amongi Betty from Apac, an Independent, is also catered for. In effect, there is –(Interjection)– yes! That is the list that has been read. So, the two slots for Independents are full. 

MR OGWEL: Mr Speaker, normally you direct us to write a letter indicating which standing committee we would like to go to. I did write a letter to the Speaker and copied it to the Clerk to Parliament. I think that is when none of the whips from the two sides have a role to play; it is directly your responsibility. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is a fact that not all Members of Parliament belong to standing committees because standing committees are few and the numbers are limited to 20. There are a number of them; it is not only you, even people probably from FDC or the government side. Actually, I have got a list here of some members on this side who are not members of the standing committees. However, since we are still going on, some people may withdraw and so forth. Let us consider it later and see what we can do with you. 

It is a fact that not all members are members of standing committees, but we shall take you into account. Just give yourself a day and you will see what happens. (Laughter) Had it not been the prayer of the Leader of the Opposition not to make his announcement, you would have heard things.

3.12 
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, I am the chairperson of independents in this Parliament -(Laughter)- and there are three categories of independents. There are those who have signed a memorandum of understanding with the NRM and all those have been catered for. I have heard the list. There are independents who are actually non-aligned - there is hon. Kiyonga, hon. Loote and myself. We request that in future, basing on the numerical value, all independents should be catered for in most of these committees. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know that it is not easy for the independents to have leadership and that is why I had undertaken that apart from those who have a memorandum of understanding from this side, I do look after the interests of the independents and I try. Actually, I only asked that you give me a few hours and I see how to solve it, and I will also look into the other issue. However, as I have told you, not every Member of Parliament belongs to a standing committee, but I will take care of your interests.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, we have two sides in this House and this is the first time I am hearing of a non-alignment. I have known of independents who have been sitting on the other side and they have always taken that side and the independents who have been sitting on this side. So, I do not know in terms of sitting arrangement where the non-aligned independents should really sit. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I think in terms of sitting arrangements for the independents, they continue to be independents whether they sit here or there. So, they can decide where they feel comfortable. (Laughter) However, I will take care of the reservations expressed. 

3.15
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am looking for a cure for this. My experience as a chairperson of a sessional committee is that a chairperson of a sessional committee has too much on his plate. First of all, he is a chairperson of a sessional committee, he is a member of the Business Committee which is a standing committee, and he is a member of the Budget Committee. If you add on another standing committee, that will be too much on him or her. 

One way of creating inefficiency is giving someone too much. So for the good running of the business of the House, I suggest that chairpersons of the sessional committees who happen to have two other standing committees should not have an additional standing committee, which makes them sit on four committees and yet you rarely find them sitting on some of them because it is too much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay; I think that is a good idea. Since the Rules Committee is reviewing some of our rules, this may be one of the areas that they may look at. Also, we may think of probably increasing the number from 20 to 21. This may take care of that but it will also be subject to the rules committee making those recommendations. So I think it is not too late; we can find a solution to these problems. 

3.17
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Interjection)– Yes, I am the late shadow minister. The chairpersons of sessional committees come from the ruling party and the member who raised the question is from the ruling party. Why didn’t he advise his Chief Whip or the Movement Caucus that this is the best way to move?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he is going beyond being a member of a party and he is bringing this to the institution of Parliament to consider and absolve in the rules. I put the question to the list that had previously been read. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters

Hon. Rwakimari Beatrice, Chairperson
Hon. Yeko Arapkissa, Vice-Chairperson 
Hon. Alisemera Jane, Member 
Hon. Baryomunsi Chris, Member 
Hon. Byanagwa Rwamafa, Member 
Hon. Kasozi Joseph Muyomba, Member 
Hon. Kwizera Eudia, Member 
Hon. Kyahurwenda Tom, Member 
Hon. Kyeyago Jowali, Member 
Hon. Lubyayi John, Member  
Hon. Kasole Bwerere, Member 
Hon. Mwebaza Sarah Wasike, Member 
Hon. Najjemba Muyinda, Member 
Hon. Najjuma Farida Kasasa, Member 
Hon. Tumwesigye Elioda, Member 
Hon. Kibanzanga Christopher, Member 
Hon. Anywar Beatrice, Member 
Hon. Epetait Francis, Member 
Hon. Anokbonggo Willy, Member 
Hon. Amongi Betty, Member 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I heard the name of my colleague from Sebei, hon. Arapkissa, as the vice-chairperson of this committee. The Government Chief Whip was not long ago arguing the case of Dr Arapkissa Yekko. According to the Rules of Procedure, no single person belongs to two standing committees. I need to be advised by the Government Chief Whip. 

THE SPEAKER: well, it is possible to belong to two standing committees; for example, in respect of the vice-chairpersons of these committees, they are ex-officio members of the Business Committee. It is possible in those circumstances but in other circumstances, no.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to correct the records on the Local Government Accounts Committee, which you read. The independents there are hon. Namara Grace and hon. Otekat as was read, but Arapkissa is on HIV/AIDS.

MR AMURIAT: That was the Local Government Accounts Committee where the name of Dr Arapkissa Yekko was erroneously read out by the Government Chief Whip.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, I was only giving an example from the names read by the clerk. I have not changed anything.

THE SPEAKER: You have not changed. So, now I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline

Hon. Kiyingi Asumani, Chairperson 
Hon. Lokodo Simon, Vice Chairperson 
Hon. Akumu Mavenjina, Member 
Hon. Bahane Niyibizi, Member 
Hon. Bakka Stephen, Member 
Hon. Kabonesa Juliet, Member 
Hon. Karoro Okurut, Member 
Hon. Katirima Phinehas, Member 
Hon. Kibedi Wanume, Member 
Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera, Member
Hon. Lyomoki Sam, Member 
Hon. Lule Mawiya, Member 
Hon. Niwagaba Wilfred, Member 
Hon. Penytoo Oceng, Member 
Hon. Ogwang John, Member 
Hon. Njuba Kalega Sam, Member 
Hon. Kawanga John Baptist, Member 
Hon. Ebong David, Member 
Hon. Iriama Rose, Member 
Hon. Nyombi Peter, Member

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been one of the clients in the Committee of Rules, Privileges and Discipline and I thought they were changing all committee leadership. In this case, I still heard the name of hon. Asumani Kiyingi. With all due respect to his credentials, I wanted a little light shade on that. 

THE SPEAKER: well, it happened that they have not changed in respect to this one. That is an internal matter. It is within their group so we may not discuss it. You are still not satisfied?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With all due respect, I am satisfied now with that explanation. 

THE SPEAKER: So I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Science and Technology

Hon. Ngabirano Charles, Chairperson 
Hon. Nvumetta Ruth, Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Asiimwe Brian, Member
Hon. Arimpa John Kigyagi, Member
Hon. Baliddawa Edward, Member 
Hon. Dombo Emmanuel, Member 
Hon. Katende Serunjogi, Member 
Hon. Katende Sematiko, Member 
Hon. Mugambe Joseph, Member 
Hon. Nayiga Ssekabira, Member 
Hon. Nokrach William, Member 
Hon. Nyago Lydia, Member 
Hon. Sabila Herbert, Member 
Hon. Tubwita Grace, Member 
Hon. Simon Oyet, Member 
Hon. Amuriat Patrick, Member 
Hon. Kawuma Muhammad, Member 
Hon. Angiro Gutumoi, Member 
Hon. Barumba Beatrice, Member 
Hon. Kabusu Moses, Member 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Appointments

Hon Edward Ssekandi, Chairperson 
Hon. Kadaga Rebecca, Deputy Chairperson
Hon. Kashaija Robert, Member 
Hon. Kwebiha Joyce, Member 
Hon. Loy Kiryapawo, Member 
Hon. Kasamba Matthias, Member 
Hon. Kayagi Sarah, Member 
Hon. Kyatuhaire Jacqueline, Member 
Hon. Magola Zirabamuzaale, Member 
Hon. Masiko Winnie, Member 
Hon. Mulumba Meddie, Member 
Hon. Sekikuubo Theodore, Member 
Hon. Okorimoe Grace, Member
Hon. Otada Amooti, Member
Hon. Teopista Sentongo, Member 
Hon. Elly Tumwine, Member 
Hon. Prof. Ogenga-Latigo, Member
Hon. Okello-Okello, Member
Hon. Joseph Balikudembe, Member 
Hon. Michael Mabbike, Member 
Hon. Margaret Angufiru, Member 
Hon. Francis Kiyonga, Member

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have risen on a point of protocol. The issue of the Appointments Committee is clearly spelt out in our Rules of Procedure. In terms of composition, it includes the Leader of the Opposition by virtue of his office. However, the manner in which he has been placed in the line-up is not correct. Can that be taken note of and corrected?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let it be changed. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Business Committee

Hon. Edward Ssekandi, Speaker/Chairperson
Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Deputy Speaker/Vice-Chairperson
Hon. Apolo Nsibambi, Leader of Government Business
Hon. Ogenga Latigo, Leader of the Opposition
Hon. Kabakumba Masiko, Government Chief Whip
Hon. Kassiano Wadri, Opposition Whip
Hon. Livingstone Okello-Okello, UPC Whip
Hon. Matthias Nsubuga, DP whip
Hon. Tanna Sanjay, Independent
Hon. Ben Wacha, Independent

THE SPEAKER: All chairpersons of the committees are ex-officio members to the Business Committee. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: That concludes the item.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have understood that not every member of this House is to be allocated a committee and so I have not heard my name on any of the committees although I applied to be left on the Committee on National Economy. I just wanted to be sure because I heard some colleagues’ names being read twice and one of them shares a name with me - Betty. I just want to be sure that it is a deliberate decision. I heard my colleague’s name, Betty Amongi, being read on two committees and I was not.

THE SPEAKER: Betty of the Opposition is the Vice-Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee.

MS KAMYA: I heard the name twice. I just need clarity because I am not appearing on any of the committees.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall check later because it is a long list. In case there is a problem, we shall get back to you.

3.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just approved names of members who will occupy the various standing committees and our colleagues who will lead them as chairs and deputies. By this act, we have ended formally the terms of those who served us. I think it would be only appropriate to take this opportunity to thank our colleagues who served as chairs and deputies of the various standing committees and who are no longer serving in these positions. We thank them for their service and we do hope that the new chairs and their deputies will serve this Parliament with equal diligence. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, NORTHERN UGANDA (Mr David Wakikona): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, happy New Year. You will recall that I last made a statement on PRDP to this House on 1 December 2008 and it was debated. I further wish to update you on the progress we have made following your ruling, Mr Speaker, on 18 December 2008 that a few members from the affected zone meet with the Executive to slash out the differences. 

The Prime Minister consulted the following: His Excellency the President, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo, the Leader of Opposition in Parliament; hon. Okumu Reagan, one of the leaders from the Acholi Parliamentary Group, among others to seek their views on the way forward regarding the financing and implementation of the PRDP. 

Arising from the above consultations, it was agreed that full scale implementation of PRDP would begin next financial year 2009-2010 but the PRDP related programmes that have been ongoing would continue and coincide with those which will be implemented under full scale programmes. 

The following ministries, that is, Works and Transport, Energy and Mineral Development, Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, Health and Education and Sports, which received additional funds over and above the normal MTEF ceilings this financial year, would continue to implement their planned activities in the zone. 

In addition, special programmes such as NUREP, NUSAF I and NGO interventions will continue to be implemented as planned. Between now and July 2009, when full scale implementation begins, districts and ministries have been asked to prepare work plans and procurement plans, on which basis PRDP funds will be disbursed to them. 

The Office of the Prime Minister has met all the Chief Administrative Officers of the 40 PRDP districts and taken them through the template on how to prepare work and procurement plans. 

The Office of the Prime Minister has also met NGOs operating in the zone on the issue of integrating their work plans in Districts Development Plans. 

On 31 January 2009, I presented a paper on PRDP to the National Consultative Budget Workshop at Imperial Royale Hotel. Members of Parliament, Local Council V chairpersons, donors, NGOs and technical staff from various ministries and agencies, attended this workshop. 

The Secretary to the Treasury that is the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a commitment on behalf of government to earmark Shs 120 billion next financial year as part of the government’s 30 percent contribution to the financing of PRDP. This position is articulated in the Budget Call circular. 

The development partners, through their chairperson, HE Vincent De Visscher confirmed that development partners contribution of 70 percent for the financial year 2009-2010 would soon be communicated to government. 

Within the next two weeks, the Office of the Prime Minister in conjunction with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be providing PRDP indicative figures to the districts and implementing sectors. These indicative figures will show the percentage allocations to the sectors and programmes. 

They will also reflect the allocation per district for each of the 14 programmes under PRDP. Furthermore, these figures will reflect the allocation for each Government of Uganda programme. 

Cabinet has already approved an additional US $50 million to finance Northern Uganda Social Action Fund, phase II. This has been done to cater for the increase in the number of districts under PRDP from 29 to 40. This will be part of the additional funding to PRDP by the Government of Uganda and we bring the total funding of NUSAF II to US $ 150 million. 

The details of this loan facility will soon be presented to this House for approval after negotiations with the World Bank have been concluded. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

3.40
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank the Minister in charge of the North for the statement that has been made this afternoon with regard to PRDP. 

From the onset, I would like to offer my sympathies to the minister because lately, he has turned into a ball. He has been kicked by us to the government side and the government side has also kept kicking him back. Hon. Minister, accept my sympathies. 

The statement presented before the House today is an indication of lack of preparation by the government. I would like to emphasise my statement by referring this House to the statement and particularly page 1. In Parliament we have got a regional grouping called the Greater North Parliamentary Group. You directed here, Mr Speaker, on the 18th of December last year that members should be selected from across the region to attend a very important meeting where the way forward would be charted. 

This meeting was supposed to be held under the auspices of the Prime Minister. I do not have anything against the Leader of the Opposition neither do I have anything against my brother hon. Reagan Okumu. However, I would like to observe that the composition of that meeting was not representative of the views of the people of the affected region. How I wish that the ministry or the Prime Minister’s Office took Northern Uganda more seriously and meant well for Northern Uganda!

I would like to ask a few questions at this point. How did government conceive the idea that they could have a budget above the normal ministry budget in the ministries that the statement highlights and forget all about the other ministries where they should have done the same?

On page 2, you highlight these ministries as Works and Transport, Energy and Mineral development, Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, Health and Education. These ministries received funding over and above their normal budgets. 

It gives me a sense that you even had the wisdom to have extra budgetary allocation to these ministries. Why then didn’t it happen for all the other ministries? Why then didn’t it happen to the level of expectation of the people of Northern Uganda? Instead you have maintained MTEF ceilings in a number of ministries that were meant to be agencies of implementation of the PRDP.

Question No.2: the President of the Republic of Uganda launched PRDP many years ago and there was a huge document presented before us. Ever since that time, there has been uncoordinated letters going between the President’s Office and the public. Many of these letters are contradictory. What the minister has told us today in this statement, PRDP even at the level of the districts was not ready to take off.

Why should it be now that the Office of the Prime Minister is asking districts to prepare plans and yet PRDP is said to have taken off two years ago? Why is it now that the Office of the Prime Minister has decided that all the papers that are required to facilitate the smooth running of this programme should be brought to the attention of the LC V chairpersons, should be brought to the attention of Members of Parliament and the donor community when initially it was the plan of government that this programme should be winding up now?

These are pertinent questions, Mr Speaker, that I put before government and these should be able to expose the dishonesty of Government of Uganda. 

PRDP in my view never existed; it existed only on paper. To me, it was a gimmick meant to hoodwink the people of Northern Uganda, people who have gone through pain over these many years. If you do not have money, why doesn’t the rest of the country stagnate first, the way we stagnated for these many years of war so that the entire country may feel the pain that the people of Northern Uganda went through?

Why shouldn’t the people of Kabale, Mbarara, Kasese, Kampala sacrifice for the sake of the people of Northern Uganda? Why should this programme that should have been implemented yesterday, be postponed to the next financial year? 

I am sure that the next financial year, if the people of the Northern – the representatives seated here of Northern Uganda, do not mount pressure on government the same excuses will be brought to the Floor of the House. Remember that we have economic problems in the world and government may use this as an opportunity to sideline this programme that we so much need.

Mr Speaker, as far as the funding is concerned, I know that there is Shs 1.1 trillion earmarked for this programme. The government just proposes to release Shs 120 billion. This falls short of even 10 percent - it is just about 10 percent of the total expectation from government that is supposed to be 30 per cent and yet we are in the third year of implementation. 

Does this portray any honesty on the part of government? Would you like to send a signal to the people of Northern Uganda about your commitment to develop the people of the Northern part of Uganda, for us to recover and come to the same footing as the rest of the country?

In conclusion, I think as a person coming from the North Eastern part of the country, we should be told whether government is committed to develop the part of the country. There are all indications that government is taking the snail pace and pushing this programme to the time when we are in sight of the next elections. 

I would like to warn that PRDP shall not be politicised. Do not think you will use PRDP to win the North; we know that the people of the North deserve PRDP. It is not a favour! It is your responsibility as government to see that we catch up and the sooner you do this, the better for all of us. I thank you very much.

3.50
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is mainly to seek clarifications from the minister. The people of Northern Uganda are not happy with the constant expansion of the LRA affected areas. Originally it was 18 districts, it moved to 29, now it has moved to 40 districts, a half of the country. 

The minister should give this House a satisfactory answer to this expansion because when it comes to benefiting, then it seems LRA is very good. We must expand. A half of the country is now being called Northern Uganda. 

MR JOHN ODIT: I want to thank my chief whip for giving way, but I also want him to reflect seriously on this statement. There is no expansion of Northern Uganda. In fact it has reduced itself to Acholi sub-region because the consultation was made by the leaders from - especially hon. Okumu Reagan, one of the leaders from the Acholi Parliamentary Group specifically. So, there is no expansion. (Laughter) In fact the whole geographical area of the North has reduced itself into Acholi sub-region for this matter. (Laughter)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the honourable member for that information but I was referring to this document saying clearly that the area has been extended from 29 to 40. So unless the minister is not telling us the correct information, I would like to say that the area has been expanded.

Mr Speaker, the consultation that we seem to have agreed upon here on 18 December 2008 has not taken place. It has not happened yet and I think this statement is premature. It should not have come here today because we have not had the opportunity to carry out the consultation. I advise the Minister to go back, call Members of the LRA affected areas as directed by you, Mr Speaker, and then come here with a proper statement. This one is premature.

We are politicians; we have also been talking to some of the donors who are telling us that the 70 percent the government is talking about; some of us do not know it. At least one of them told us that their funding here would not go up by $1. They will not increase. If the government would like to call what they normally do, PRDP that is fine. So, where is this PRDP if whatever the government does, whatever the donors do, is now PRDP? What is PRDP? 

I think if there is nothing for the North, the government should be very clear, frank and honest and tell us that we do not have any programme for your area so that we know what to tell our people. This idea of wasting time, calling meetings, spending a lot of money in seminars, workshops, the money which should go down to help the people who are suffering will not do.

Mr Speaker, we have very many ministries. I believe all of them are relevant in the LRA affected areas, but to refer to only five in a statement like this, leaves a lot to be desired. 

We are being told that police posts have been established at all sub counties. This is not true. There are so many sub counties without police posts and I would have loved to see Ministry of Internal Affairs on this list. 

I think the Budget Committee should take interest in this matter as well as that of Government Assurances. The new chairperson, the Budget Committee, I think before you get tired, this is your starting point. Take this matter very seriously and even these ministries listed here, we should know the extra funding that is given over and above their budgets instead of just giving us a list of the ministries that have been given extra funding. How much extra? Even if this PRDP was not in place, the ministry budgets are not supposed to be the same every year. Everything is growing; the number of people is also going up.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have heard from the submissions so far given on this matter that on 18 December 2008, we agreed that you make consultations with representative stakeholders of the region. But according to what we have heard today, the consultation you did was consultation with Members of Parliament from Acholi region, which is a fraction of the area concerned. 

I think that consultations should have been made with the representatives of the areas of Teso, Lango and so forth. What do you say about this So that we can see a way forward? (Mr Reagan Okumu rose_)- But you were included among the people consulted. Okay, let him say and then - 

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, on 18 December 2008, the minister presented a statement here and Ministers of Education and other ministries also were presenting their contribution to PRDP. We protested on the Floor of Parliament here, we asked them to withdraw and the Prime Minister stood up and that sitting came to a halt when you directed that actually we should go out and sort ourselves out. It was not only sorting ourselves out with the Members of Parliament from the affected region, but the committees -

THE SPEAKER: I am the one who suggested that in view of the subject matter, it is better that the Prime Minister goes and consults those directly concerned. I may know what is going on but people who are more affected can make a bigger contribution. That was the arrangement. So, it was not the committee but we thought that you people in the area would be able to polish this up. 

What happened then is that when the ministers came to make a response, they were just telling you their ordinary business in the area and we said, no, this should be a special programme on top of what we usually do. 

The concern, as you heard from hon. Okello-Okello, was that half of Uganda had been reduced. Then hon. Odit said: “No, what actually happened is that the Acholi land became the region”. So, there was that confusion.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I totally agree with you, but I was only trying to bring up the background where you directed that there should be consultation. 

I was also shocked to see that the Rt hon. Prime Minister consulted the following: No.4, Reagan Okumu, one of the leaders from the Acholi sub-region. Mr Speaker, I interacted twice with the Prime Minister. The first interaction was on that day on the 18 December 2008. Before you concluded, the Prime Minister called me out with the minister and Chairperson of Presidential Affairs and we agreed that we should extend the interaction to the following day. 

On the 19 December 2008, I went to the Prime Minister’s office and in that meeting there was the Minister for General Duties, the Prime Minister; there was the Minister for Northern Uganda Rehabilitation and there was the PS. Actually that meeting was not a consultation because the Prime Minister tried to justify that Finance had given the money which we had distributed on the Floor. So in that meeting the Prime Minister directed the PS, in my presence, to organise this consultation meeting with all the relevant and affected Members of Parliament; and that this should include the district chairpersons and the Chief Administrative Officers who should all be invited. That is what I thought was going to happen. 

On the 23 December 2008 at 4.01 p.m., the Prime Minister called me on phone, because I recorded it, and he said, “Reagan, I have called you to tell you that we have consulted. We met the President and we agreed that PRDP should be an addition. For that matter, we do not see the relevance of this meeting. And since there is no relevance of this meeting, I have also consulted the Leader of the Opposition that this meeting will now not take place. I wish you merry Christmas.” 

At the beginning of the year we received a newspaper report stating that PRDP had been suspended. So I am also wondering because this was not what we consulted on. What we agreed on in the Prime Minister’s office when I met the two ministers, because I recorded that meeting and each of the contributions –(Interjection)– no, you cannot say that it is not fair. This is a public matter! It is a matter of public importance and I recorded it. 

So what I know is that what we have been waiting for in the meeting you directed that the Office of the Prime Minister should meet the stakeholders. Therefore, it would be erroneous for a statement like this to include my name as among people who have been consulted and that after this consultation we agreed to suspend this process and go on. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what do you have to say?

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, hon. Members. This is a copy of the Hansard. The Speaker said, “Good, thank you. I would think that Members of Parliament from this zone should meet with the Executive. They will choose who to be there, so that you sort out these differences” –(Interjection)- I am still continuing. Let me stop there -(Interjection)- no, it stops there. The Prime Minister said, “Yes”, The Speaker said, “Okay”. (Laughter) 

When the Prime Minister said he had contacted the Leader of the Opposition – obviously if you are contacting a government, you contact the Leader of Government. And the Prime Minister has no right to come and choose representatives -(Interjection)- I am telling you just –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I chose not to begin this debate so that members from the affected sub-regions would express themselves but where we have reached, I think it is important for me to give information because I am specifically mentioned as having been consulted. 

On the morning of 25 December 2008, Christmas morning, I went to church. While I was in church I got a call, it was a landline and I did not answer it. Then at around 11 O’clock, the Prime Minister called me. He said, “President’s Office tried to contact you this morning.” And I said, “I found a missed call but I was in Church.” And he said, “They were contacting you because we have discussed with the President and we agreed that the issue of PRDP funds be part of 2008/2009 budget”. 

He further said that, “The members raised (the issue) that money could not be traced and for that we had set up a committee to trace it; government accepted that even if there were monies that were given in the context of PRDP that money cannot now be traced. And because of that, government agreed that they would put aside specific money for PRDP, Shs 120 billion every year for three years starting in Financial Year 2009/2010.” 

He added that, “In this context, would it still be necessary to call a meeting that was directed by the Speaker to verify whether PRDP was funded?” And I said, “Obviously what we wanted was an acceptance on the part of government that what was claimed to be PRDP was not specifically funded and therefore we want clear funding.” 

He said, “In this situation what do you think would be most critical?” I said, “Even when that is in the budget, it must be a separate item whose activities can be traced and ascribed to PRDP.” He said, “In that case they would ask the districts to prepare a specific proposal so that the money for PRDP, as agreed with the districts, could be traced.” I said, “That is okay.” Then he said: “In this case, could you inform your colleagues?”

And actually, after talking to the Prime Minister, he called hon. Amuriat; unfortunately I did not get him. I called hon. Ben Wacha and informed him. Later on, I called hon. Okello-Okello and also talked to hon. Reagan Okumu. I tried to call hon. Kassiano Wadri, but I did not get him. My understanding at that time was that the problem of PRDP – I stood up here; it was I who objected. Having looked at what the budget claimed to be part of PRDP, with no extra money above what had been budgeted, it was again I who asked why government would call a normal budget for Northern Uganda PRDP. So when they said they would give Shs 120 billion over and above what had been budgeted, I accepted because it made sense. 

The big challenge we face now is whether that money will honestly be over and above the budget that will go to Northern Uganda as reflected in the budget framework paper. We can only verify that when the indicative budget comes; and when the actual budget is passed, then we will pronounce ourselves –(Interjections)– well, apart from that, we can engage in idle talk. 

I am saying this because in accepting that they will fund PRDP from next year with Shs 120 billion for three years means that government has accepted that in this financial year, there is no specific funding for PRDP, yet our argument was based on the content of the budget. Beyond that I don’t – (Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Maybe let us hear from the Minister of Finance.

DR SURUMA: I want to clarify –

THE SPEAKER: You see hon. Members, we started this debate – it was about the consultation we had agreed on. And I think in the report two people were mentioned, the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Okumu. The hon. Leader of the Opposition has given us the details of the discussion he had with the Prime Minister –(Interjection)- hold on – and for him it seems the impression is that if government provides Shs 120 billion over and above the normal budget for government activities, that would be enough. But the issue is: do we need consultations or not? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] I think that is the one we should dispose of.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: It is actually a little unfortunate because if government had said that having reviewed the complaints from the PRDP areas, it agreed – without this there would no problem. 

I have just been reminded by hon. Kassiano Wadri that we actually talked. Christmas time is a period when many things happen; I may have talked to him and forgotten. (Laughter) Anyway, I just brought this as a matter of information. I called the leaders of the various regions. It is up to them to decide what to do but it is important for me to inform the House what happened. The consultation with me was not on whether we should put Shs 120 million. I was merely informed. The Prime Minister asked me whether the meeting to follow up the PRDP claims that were being made by the ministers was necessary and in my view, I told him it was not necessary. That was my view.

THE SPEAKER: Let us be structured in our debate. Let us start this way: was the envisaged consultation carried out?

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: Ok. Let us be structured. Let us move on by solving issues.

4.15
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, as the Leader of the Opposition did point out, the Prime Minister did his best to consult -(Interjections)– Yes! The phone is a form of communication, hon. Otto. He did his best to consult the leaders from the region on this but if colleagues want further consultation, I do not see any problem with having a bigger forum. We are prepared to consult in as many meetings as you want. 

I would, therefore, like to request that we close the debate now and together with the Leader of the Opposition and other leaders from the region, organise a consultative meeting as soon as possible on the subject of PRDP, its funding, its implementation and all issues that pertain to this project. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think what he is saying is that on 18th we decided that there should be consultation but the envisaged consultation has not taken place and people want it. Let us have it and then we come back because it is useless to continue. (Applause)

4.16
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to confirm that although I was on leave, I was certainly consulted by the Prime Minister on this matter and we agreed that an additional Shs 120 billion would be made available in the next budget. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that the minister’s explanation was going to reduce the issues over which the consultation is going to take place. In the consultations you will discuss the magnitude of the problem - how much money you want. And as he was going to tell us, the commitment as far as funds are concerned, this is so that when you go for consultations, maybe this will not be an issue but you can discuss other issues. What is wrong with that?

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, when the Prime Minister presented the position on the Floor of Parliament, it was the position of government. One cannot say that the Minister of Finance needed to be consulted again. It was the position of government and Parliament in its wisdom decided that there must be consultation and right now. 

Mr Speaker, you have ruled and the Leader of Government Business has made a statement in acceptance. He said that there is need for that process to take place. We need the Minister of Finance, who is also part of the problem, to go to that consultative meeting so that we discuss with him instead of wasting our time on the Floor of Parliament. The Leader of Government has ruled and in protocol, I thought that you had concluded business on the other side.

Secondly, this issue should not be looked at as an issue of the Opposition versus Government -(Interjections)- I have seen honourable members from this side rising and speaking. We have many members on the other side who agree and stand with us on PRDP. Therefore, PRDP should not be politicised. It is a matter for the people of the North and affected areas and the rest of the country also wants to see that the North recovers. It is not an issue of the Opposition and Government. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think let the minister concerned with the Office of the Prime Minister arrange a date, we agree on the date, make consultations with stakeholders on this side and the other side and you come back. Otherwise, it is useless to go on with the debate when we cannot point out anything. 

MR WAKIKONA: Most obliged, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the other statement we expected was from the Minister of Defence. He had indicated this yesterday but this morning I received a message that he had a personal problem. I think he lost somebody. Other ministers perhaps are not here but the statement was supposed to be given today, I think on Somalia and another related matter. I have been informed that they are not here so we can move to another business so that tomorrow when he is available, the statement can be made.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, this is a statement on Meningitis and other disease outbreaks in Uganda. Copies of the statement are being distributed. 

The country has been experiencing a Meningitis outbreak since late December 2008. The epidemic started in the districts of Hoima and Arua and has spread to the districts of Masindi, Adjumani and Moyo. 

Meningitis is an infection of the meninges, which is a thin lining that surrounds the brain and the spinal cord. Meningitis is not caused by witchcraft as a number of our people believe. A number of different viruses and bacteria can cause Meningitis. However, Neisseria meningitides is one of the bacteria that commonly cause epidemics. The most commonly affected districts in Uganda lie along the Meningitis belt which stretches from West Africa in Senegal, across the continent to the east in Ethiopia. 

One can get Meningitis through inhaling droplets/bacteria from the nose or throat of another person infected. The pre-disposing factors are close and prolonged contact with an infected person or overcrowding.  

A person suffering from Meningitis will have a sudden onset of fever and any of the following symptoms:
•	Headache 
•	Stiff neck 
•	Mental confusion; and 
•	Vomiting. 

In children, the following signs and symptoms may also be present: 
•	The child may be slow or inactive; 
•	Irritable; 
•	Poor appetite; 
•	Bulging fontanel - that is the soft part of the head.

The following methods should be observed to avoid the spread of the disease:  

1. 	Avoid overcrowding and big gatherings in areas. In areas where Meningitis is suspected or confirmed, avoid overcrowding and big gatherings and this will reduce the risk of spreading the infection.  

2. 	Close proximity to people infected or carrying the bacteria increases the risk of infection. Please note that some of the infected persons may have no symptoms or signs of the disease. 

Treatment 

Meningitis is a curable disease and effective medicines are available such as Chloramphenicol. Delay in seeking treatment has resulted into deaths that could have been avoided. Seeking early treatment helps to prevent further spread of the infection to those in close contact with the affected person. The risk of spreading the infection reduces significantly within 24 hours of starting on the appropriate treatment.

Vaccination

A Meningitis outbreak can be controlled by mass vaccination. However, the vaccine is in limited supply at a global level due to low production. There is an Inter-agency Coordinating Group (ICG) at a global level that sets conditions and rationalises the use of the vaccines before mass vaccination can be carried out by any country.  

Vaccination is decided upon when the speed of the spread of the disease, otherwise known as epidemic attack rate, is more than 10 cases per 100,000 people per week, and the disease cannot be controlled by treatment and other interventions.  

In an ideal situation that pertains in developed countries where a sick person goes early to the health facilities, to vaccinate is okay.  However, for situations like ours where a patient delays in seeking medical care, this criterion is still a problem. Most of the deaths in our situation occur in communities without definite diagnosis and treatment. 

The status of the situation with regard to Meningitis as of yesterday is indicated in Table 2.1 of the statement: 

In Hoima, you have cumulative cases at 49 as of yesterday and cumulative deaths at 13. The Meningitis outbreak in Hoima started on the 21st of December 2008, mainly affecting Kigorobya sub-county. Mass vaccination in that sub-county was carried out on the 25th and 26th of January 2009 and no new cases have been reported since the 26th of January.

In Arua there were 213 cumulative cases and cumulative deaths amount to 19. The outbreak started on the 31st of December 2008, mainly affecting the sub-counties of Oluko and Dadamu.  Mass vaccination was conducted on the 27th and 28th of January 2009 in those two sub-counties and no new case has been reported since the 28th of January 2009.

In Masindi, we have had 25 cumulative cases with eight cumulative deaths. The outbreak started on 4 January 2009 and affected the villages bordering Pakanyi and Kigumba sub-counties.  Vaccination took place on the 27th and 28th of January 2009 and no new cases have been reported since the 26th of January.  

In Adjumani, there were 31 cumulative cases with two cumulative deaths. The outbreak has been reported to have started on 30 December 2008 affecting Sifolo. Case management, surveillance and public education are on-going and no new case has been reported since 26 January 2009.

In Moyo, cumulative cases are 18 - these are only suspicions - and there have not been any deaths. The outbreak has been reported to have started on the 7 January 2009, mainly affecting two parishes in Bufile sub-county. Case investigation, management and public education are on-going. No new case has been reported since 29 January 2009.

The response by the Ministry of Health is as follows:

The Ministry of Health is mandated to build capacity and support local governments to detect and control epidemics. In line with this mandate, the following has been accomplished by the ministry: 

•	Disease surveillance has been strengthened. 
•	Case search/finding has been instituted. 
•	Treatment centres have been established. 
•	Affected districts have been provided with medicines and required health supplies. 
•	Affected districts are receiving financial and technical support from the Ministry of Health and development partners such as World Health Organisation.

Role of hon. Members of Parliament

I appeal to hon. Members of Parliament to work with affected districts to control the outbreak.  I also appeal to honourable colleagues to mobilise the public to comply with the ministry’s advice on the prevention and control of the outbreak. 

My appeal to the public and population in the affected districts is to avoid over-crowding, to report any suspected cases as early as possible to the nearest health facilities, and for the affected people to seek early treatment or care if they suspect the disease.  

Mr Speaker, to this statement, I have attached an annex that summarises other disease outbreaks in the country and these include: 

•	Cholera in a number of districts, although generally Cholera has been controlled;
•	Plague in Arua and Nebbi, which is almost controlled in some of those areas;
•	Ebola and Marburg in Bundibugyo and Bushenyi, which were controlled;  
•	Botulism: we had a case in Mukono at Seeta High School in October last year affecting three students, one of whom died. That was the first confirmed epidemic of Botulism in Uganda. It is also controlled. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What is Botulism?  We are laymen and women.

DR NDUHUURA: Botulism is a kind of poisoning arising out of a bacterium; it is a kind of food poisoning. It is suspected that these three students who were affected at Seeta High School must have eaten tinned food, which had gone bad. We suspect that this is how it arose. The bacteria in the tinned food produced toxins and these toxins are very deadly. So that is how we ended up with one of the students dying. The other cases were hospitalised, treated and they recovered.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the information.

4.35
MS ATIM ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for making this statement.  

When I look through the statement, especially the attached annex, you can see that the major disease outbreaks in Uganda are just routine cycle outbreaks. I would like to mention Cholera. Over 20 districts have suffered from this epidemic including Kampala where this august House is situated. However, the story still remains the same. Every now and then, we experience the outbreak in this city and other parts of the country. 

Early last year, we went on a trip with the Minister of State for Health, Dr Otaala, when there was an announcement that there was an outbreak of Meningitis in West Nile. There was also Cholera in Buliisa and Hepatitis E in Kitgum. We visited all these places with the minister and the health team. We noted that the affected areas remained the same, for example West Nile that had been reported with Meningitis since early last year when we visited there. 

When we talk of Hepatitis E, it was reported in November 2007 but up to now, it is not completely wiped out. As regards Typhoid, this disease is routine in almost all our hospitals. I think we have not got the root cause of all these health problems and government has not addressed this. This is why the cycle is continuous. Whenever this occurs, the ministers come and make statements here and we also chip in but at the end of the day, the solution is not found. What is the real problem, honourable colleagues? 

The report that the minister has given has not indicated other outbreaks. Two weeks ago, I talked to the Minister of Health and reported to him that in Kitgum District, there is a strange disease which makes children sleep as they are having their meals. He gave me a technical health term for the ailment and told me that he was going to contact me and have it contained. I also gave him the contacts of the health officials in Kitgum District. 

As we speak, we have been told that river blindness has hit. The cycle of outbreak of diseases in the country is ongoing. My disappointment is that as we look for solutions, I have heard the honourable minister on radio blaming the local leadership for not sensitising people rather than getting to the root cause and controlling these outbreaks. 

I have also seen the statement indicating the roles of Members of Parliament. I was wondering about this because my people in Okiri in Lamwor sub-county, Kitgum District as well as in another place called Kampala, also in Kitgum move for five kilometres looking for safe drinking water. They go with blankets because they sometimes spend the night and then return with the water. This is a problem, which cannot be solved with sensitisation alone but rather with more sources of water. Instead of pointing fingers on who is supposed to do what, I ask the government to address the root causes of these epidemics. 

Also, government should not engage in mere talk as was the case with Hepatitis E. Even the little facilitation, which is supposed to help the team on the ground to sensitise and do their work, is not delivered. The minister was even told how the money that was supposed to sensitise people was diverted. We do not have the means to help our people arrest such situations. My humble appeal to the minister and his health team is that he should not just mention that treatment centres have been established, affected districts provided with medicines and so on.

In my district had it not been for the development partners, Hepatitis E would not have come under control. The minister was asked to his face where the contribution of government was if even the NGOs are supposed to buy soap for people to wash their hands. I think that we need government to come up precisely and give us tangible things rather than just making sweeping statements of having addressed the issues. If we are to accept such a situation, we shall continue going round in circles in Buliisa, Kitgum, Mbarara, Manafwa and the rest. 

We need to get serious and I want the minister to give us all the details concerning their interventions rather than giving sweeping statements. How far has government reached the affected areas? He should tell us rather than raising issues concerning money that has been allocated only to reach Karuma and it is diverted elsewhere. That is my passionate appeal, which the ministry should take very seriously. We are tired of having these outbreaks and ministries pointing fingers at the local leadership when the minister is not doing the right thing. I thank you.

4.43
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA (NRM, Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement, which is seemingly a success story when it comes to control. The ministry is very good at controlling epidemics and you have earned distinctions there, but when it comes to prevention, this is where you have a zero. 

We know that prevention is better than cure yet we are not putting a lot of emphasis on prevention. Most of these illnesses that we are talking about here are preventable. In fact, about 90 percent of the illnesses that we have in our hospitals and health centres are preventable but we have not paid attention to prevention. 

The ministry has the health education section, I think it is now a department - you have health educators up to the district level and beyond. We have all the village health teams but diseases which are preventable have continued to affect us. I think there is lack of seriousness on the part of the ministry when it comes to prevention of these illnesses. I think that is where the problem is. If we can be able to put a lot of emphasis on prevention, then I can assure you, we will not have these epidemics. 

When you look at all of these diseases, they are preventable and many of them are facilitated by poor hygiene and sanitation and things that rotate around hygiene. Before you praise yourselves for controlling the epidemics, a lot of emphasis should be put on prevention of those epidemics. Thank you very much.

4.46
MS MARGARET ANGUFIRU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the presentation he has given us. I want to thank Ministry of Health for having taken very quick action, for working very hard to treat the people who were sick and those who were not yet sick and were given vaccination. 

The two sub-counties we talk about right now are in my constituency. You can see during this period, for almost three weeks, I was in the constituency. It is quite true that the Meningitis outbreak was acute. We lost not only 19 people but 32 people and those were my reliable voters.

On 15 January 2009, I received a message from my constituency telling me that people were dying of a disease, which people did not know and some of the dead bodies were now being locked up in houses. People would die in one place and residents feared to bury them and so they would just lock them up in a house. I rang the DHO of Arua to inform him that there was a strange disease in Arua and particularly in Ayivu, Oluko and Dadamu sub-counties. I asked the health inspector there to quickly go and find out the type of disease. Unfortunately, they went and discovered that it was Meningitis and they reported to the Minister of Health and the Minister of Education. 

On my part, I wrote a letter to the Ministry of Health informing them about the existence of Meningitis in Ayivu County and the entire Arua District. The minister quickly convened a meeting with the technical people and they included me in the meeting. We planned on how to go and solve that problem. 

I am very grateful to the Ministry of Health because they were very active that time. They quickly went with drugs to treat those who were already attacked and they took enough vaccines - 55,000 - to vaccinate the people. I made sure I monitored and witnessed everything that took place. I request the ministers and the staff of Ministry of Health to continue to act very quickly the way they did so that we can prevent these diseases in our country.

Meningitis is not contracted because of dirt like Cholera; it is an airborne disease and you get it from droplets. If somebody had Meningitis right now and they sat near you and they sneezed, then you would contract it. 

We did a lot of sensitisation among the population telling them not to be in crowded areas, and markets were almost closed. We were getting worried that the schools would not start if Meningitis did not reduce. I am glad to report here now that there is great reduction and by yesterday, there was only one case reported in one of the centres where we have been treating them. 

Hon. Minister, one thing I have to say here is that the Members of Parliament who are not medical personnel may not find it easy to go and sensitise the population about Meningitis. You need to have the knowledge so that you tell people how it is contracted, what the signs and symptoms are, and what they should do and should not do. It is actually difficult for some of my colleagues.

What I still ponder about is that every year we have Meningitis in Arua District at the same time, the same month. I wonder what the problem is. Where does this Meningitis come from? We are talking of the Meningitis belt starting from West Africa through Hoima and Masindi, passing through Arua and going to Sudan. How are we going to get rid of this Meningitis now that we know every year in the months of December and January, we get Meningitis outbreaks? What can we do as a country about this? 

We have already said prevention is better than cure; can we add some little amount of money to the budget for primary health care? We have a whole minister in charge of primary health care but there is no primary health care actively being taught on the ground. People are not being sensitised and that is why at times they get diseases like Cholera. Cholera is purely due to dirt, carelessness, poor hygiene, eating cold food. 

The problem we have with Cholera is that we do not have enough safe drinking water in the whole country. People drink very dirty water. I do not know what the minister in charge of water can do, but you need to plan and see that there is safe water for everybody in the country. Otherwise, wherever you see constant Cholera, there is no safe water and the people themselves need to be sensitised and educated. 

What we need most in this country is to have a ministry responsible only for sensitising the population. We need that. We may think that education is enough but it is not enough - not all the officers reach the communities. Many of the communities do not know what to do for themselves. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.53
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the Minister of Health for the statement he has given us.

I want to inform the minister that there are two types of meningitis confirmed in Yumbe District and more than two people have been affected. The third death took place in Juba but he was a resident of Yumbe District. There was nothing we could do but to bring his body home for burial. So we have already lost three people in Yumbe District.  

Hon. Minister, if it was not for the blessings of God - I say so because it is a rare case in West Nile that we receive rain during the months of December and January. I know God had seen that if he does not intervene, it was going to be worse. That is why currently we are receiving rain in West Nile and through receiving rain the rate of contracting the disease reduces. 

In Yumbe, where the ministry has not intervened and if it has intervened it is not reflected in the report - that is why we have lost only three people otherwise it would have been more than that. I, therefore, just want to inform the minister that Meningitis is already in Yumbe District and I am urging the ministry to intervene. Thank you very much.

4.56
MR WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the report. 

I have a few remarks to make and one of them is that this outbreak of preventable diseases has been with us for some time now. Since 2001 when we had the Ebola outbreak and we lost some people, I think a cue should have been taken from there and the Public Health Department of the Ministry of Health should have been strengthened right from that point. 

I will not call this a success story on the side of the Ministry of Health because according to this report, Uganda has lost over 400 people to preventable diseases. Meningitis has been with us and the belt is known in Uganda; the locations are known and I think the Ministry of Health should not wait until the outbreak. 

The death of one person is important and I think immunization should be put on standby all the time in these areas where meningitis is endemic. 

In cases of further outbreaks, I think the Ministry of Health has a responsibility to put in place mechanisms for prevention. I agree with the Member for Gombe that prevention is better than cure and it is cheaper in the long run. 

Apart from what has been mentioned here, we have outbreaks of sleeping sickness in some parts of Uganda and of course sleeping sickness can be prevented if the vector is controlled. The Ministry of Health knows about this. 

My appeal to the Minister of Health is to strengthen the Public Health Department rather than waiting for an outbreak and rushing there with curative drugs.

In the case of Meningitis, I would suggest that the ministry should actually approach global authority to tell them that this is endemic in Uganda and we cannot wait until people have died.

Lastly, I think it seems we are living in the 19th Century. We are in the 21st Century and the lives of Ugandans should be more important than any other thing. I thank you very much.

5.00
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have observed that when you see the whole ministry descending to carry out interventions, it is enough to tell you that there is no readiness at the level of the health centres to contain some of these treatable diseases. There is no readiness at the community level to ensure that some of these preventable illnesses are contained in terms of health literacy programmes, for instance. That is why the ministry has to intervene as a ministry at the local level in order to contain some of these preventable diseases. 

I think this is very absurd in the 21st Century that people must first die and reports are made to the national assembly by the ministry, which makes budgets; which plans to ensure that people get healthy livelihood. 

Mr Speaker, I have a few questions on this report, which I would want the minister to answer. If it is not answered in the language that people can understand easily, we shall take it for granted. For instance, the ministry’s response (a) is: “Disease surveillance has been strengthened.” What does this mean to the ordinary person; and from what extent to what extent? Can a Member of Parliament take it for granted that the strengthening will therefore reduce the incidences of the disease?

“(b) Case search/finding has been instituted.”  From what extent to what extent?  Does it mean that it has been weak before; and by how much?  

“To make this kind of report comprehensive and to guarantee security of our people from the disease, treatment centres have been established”. Of course this one is a very good intervention, but it is very annoying especially when you have a ministry which is here to stay and of which planning must take place.  

Should a disease outbreak occur in Kawolo Hospital, for instance, I am sure by the time communication is done to the Ministry of Health for an intervention, many people will have perished. What I am saying is that the Ministry of Health needs to pull up their socks to ensure that the health units available are refurbished and are equipped, where always impossible, to ensure that they can contain some of these outbreaks without necessarily informing the ministry even, because these are some of the diseases which can be contained at the health unit level. But the moment you find that the ministry must be informed, that tells you a lot or the extent to which our health delivery system is dilapidated. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.04
MR CHARLES EKEMU (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for this statement, but I would like to make a few remarks on what in his paper he is calling prevention and controlling for specifically meningitis. He says, especially on the treatment aspect, that there is usually a delay that is experienced in seeking treatment. Because of these delays, of course we have had deaths that we could have been avoided.  

I had an experience, about two weeks ago when I visited a health centre IV in my constituency. Hon. Minister, before treatment is usually undertaken, you treat what you know and to know what you want to treat, you must undertake some lab tests, et cetera. But this health centre did not have even equipment to determine, for instance, whether the patients who were dying were dying of Meningitis or any other outbreak.  

In other words, it is a very deplorable situation that even at the health centre levels, the local levels, where we expect speedy treatment to have been accorded to persons who are taken there, this is not possible because it is simply lacking basics like lab equipment, et cetera.  

I would want you to confirm, I am talking of a health centre in Soroti called “Princess Diana”, apart from not having basic drugs, it does not even have a lab detergent and yet outside it costs only Shs 6,000 for a small bottle, say for determining whether somebody is suffering from typhoid or not.  It is as bad as that. So when you talk of delays in seeking treatment that have resulted into deaths that could have been avoided, I really want to agree with you, but to say the problem is with you as a minister.

I am even more scared now when you talk of us being able to meet a certain criteria so that we are able to have the vaccines. What we call the epidemic attack rate, unless we have more than ten cases per 100,000 people per week that means we cannot have the vaccines with us here, and that is terrible. I am referring to what my honourable colleague the professor said here that we have actually reached the epidemic levels and the vaccines should be readily available. We must not wait for people to die; we must not wait to meet this epidemic attack rate that you are talking about so as to be able to have the vaccines that we want.  

I have also seen that in these other annexes you have given us, of the diseases or conditions you listed, Cholera is the most predominant and of course Cholera is largely due to poor sanitation and unsafe water. Specifically, I know about River Manafwa, I know Mbale, I know Tororo. But if you had an idea of what River Manafwa is and you say in this statement that the vector or the organism that spreads or causes Cholera would be transported faster on this flowing water of River Manafwa and of course flowing from the mountains to the plains; you can only say that probably the people in the plains, like during the previous floods, must have survived or lived by chance or by the hand of God. That is because this Cholera causing organism would flow from the mountains just to the plains and yet we do not have effective control mechanisms on the ground and I see that as very serious.

Lastly, I am not really professional in knowing whether the drugs you are talking about here could have easily contained these situations. Drugs like Tetracycline, Ciprofloxacin, Erythromycin; I know they are common drugs in most of the drug stores that you would come across. But I want to assure you hon. Minister that in your health centres, you will not find most of these basic antibiotics that could have easily helped in the first curative phases of diseases.

I want, therefore, to say that you ensure that you have these drugs because in the out shops, the ordinary person cannot easily afford them. In other words they cannot help themselves; they will die because they cannot simply afford to buy these drugs that you call Tetracycline and Ciprofloxacin, and this is unfortunate. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, have we not sufficiently debated this statement, and a statement which came for information? I think we have.

5.11
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the second paper where they listed Cholera and other diseases, actually in the annex, I want to first refer to Tororo District. When there was an outbreak of Cholera in Tororo District, I came in here and made a call to the Ministry of Health to rush to Tororo and help in stamping out this Cholera. By the time I made that statement, one person had died. And I am seeing here that we had 23 cases and zero deaths. I wish to emphasise to the minister –

THE SPEAKER: Did he die in the hospital, health centre or in his home?

MR OKECHO: This is a case reported and the person died. And it affected three of my sub-counties namely: Kirewa, Nagongera, Kisoko and Patta. And the person who died was in Kirewa where the control centre was finally established.

THE SPEAKER: So you want us to adjust the figures? (Laughter)

MR OKECHO: Definitely the figure has to be adjusted, because if it happens that way in that particular case then I doubt whether these other cases are really true. That is my point. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I think you should wind up. 

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank colleagues for the issues, which were raised. Unfortunately, hon. Anywar has already left but we are talking about most of the diseases and saying that they are preventable. Yes, and they are preventable right at the household level. So you really would not expect the Ministry of Health to be at the household level. 

What is very important, and I want to qualify this, what is very important is for the ministry to prepare the right messages so that the media, press and leaders, including Members of Parliament, can be able to internalise these messages and take them to their constituencies so that as they interact with the people they get to know the causes of some of these preventable diseases like Cholera and Typhoid.

Mr Speaker, simple things like washing hands with soap after visiting the latrine; washing hands before taking a meal; washing hands before a mother feeds a baby; these are messages the Ministry of Health can give but the leaders, including us the Members of Parliament, should really assist in conveying messages to the people we lead. Yes, we have health workers in the local government. They can do that but how many are they? And in some of your local governments, you will agree with me that the District Service Commissions have not recruited these people. 

Hon. Anywar also raised an issue that the Ministry of Health and government as such, is not participating in funding some of these programmes in the local governments when there are disease outbreaks. I think this is really not true. The Ministry of Health puts in money, our development partners also put in money and the people who go to the ground, the health workers, are from the Ministry of Health; they are from the local governments. So it is not true that government is just by the side and watching as development partners do the work that should be done by government. 

Hon. Najjemba, I agree with you: prevention is better than cure and this is exactly what I said a few minutes back. We have got a division of health education and health promotion in the Ministry of Health. They are doing their work but they cannot do it without the participation of local governments; without the participation of us the leaders. So let us complement the efforts of this division in the Ministry of Health. 

Let us fight ignorance because as you have heard, when some of these diseases break out, there is a tendency for people to believe that this is witchcraft. So how do we fight this ignorance? We fight this ignorance by sensitising the people that this is not witchcraft. And I think here we have got a very big role to play as leaders.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister. I really did not intend to disrupt the minister’s presentation but on a matter of witchcraft, I do not know how the ministry is relating with witchdoctors. (Laughter) Yes, I am seeking this clarification because it is my experience that when the population gets desperate, when the ailments they are suffering from cannot be easily identified, then they go to the health units and they cannot be helped; they resort to the medicine man. And that happens everywhere. Even if they are suffering from malaria, meningitis, cholera, they want to get remedies from there. 

I think that in the ministry, there has to be some way in which you have to involve these local medicine people – witchdoctors, to try to assist them in order for them not to accept every case that comes before them that seems to be a case of witchcraft. So what is the ministry doing to mitigate this tendency of people to believe in the local medicine? And also what is it doing, in partnership with those people, to ensure that they do not accept a very kind of ailment that manifests itself as witchcraft? Thank you.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Amuriat –(Interjections)– yeah! But still there is something; I want to find out from him whether he referred to traditional healers or witch doctors?

MR AMURIAT: What I was referring to, Mr Speaker, to answer the honourable colleague, was what warrants treatment against witchcraft. Who is that person with the capacity to talk about a case that is related to witchcraft? I am asking this because whether they are traditional healers or witchdoctors, I think they all fall under the same category. (Laughter)

MR OTADA: Thank you, honourable minister for yielding the Floor. My clarification is based on what I would call leadership by example. A neighbouring country has designated every last Saturday of every month as a day for what you would refer to as “Bulungi bwa nsi” of those days. If we are committed to championing that cause, why don’t we lead by example and cause change the way that neighbouring country has done so that it becomes a culture in the country? What is your take on that, Mr Minister?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the strangers’ gallery this afternoon is hon. Mungi Habenzu, the Chairperson, Committee on Health of the Zambia National Assembly. She is welcome. (Applause)

MR NDUHUURA: Thank you once again, Mr Speaker. On the clarification that hon. Amuriat is seeking about our dealing or connection with witch doctors, I would like to say that the Ministry of Health does not have any dealings with witch doctors. Rather we deal with what we call traditional herbalists or traditional medicine people and not witch doctors; there is a difference. 

At an appropriate time, we shall present to this House a policy on traditional and complementary medicine because we believe that some of those herbs and medicines cure. Otherwise, we do not deal with witch doctors because we do not understand their science, if it is science at all.

MS KAMYA: Thank you hon. Minister, for giving way. I do appreciate the sentiments of the modern medicine not to have dealings with the witch doctors as you call them. However, the fact is witch doctors have a big impact on our society, whether you like it or not. In my opinion, you cannot afford to ignore them no matter whether you believe in them or not. The Ministry can only ignore them at the peril of the ordinary person. So the clarification I am –(Interjections)– they are even busier. Anyway, the clarification I am seeking –

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that there should be an officer at the ministry to liaise with the witch doctors? (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I am suggesting that the Ministry of Health should take serious interest in the health hazards or in the fact that a big percentage of our population seek medical support or health advice from witch doctors. Give us a proposal on how the Ministry is going to deal with that.

Finally, Mr Minister, I would like to know – rather let me tell you that I know for a fact that many people spend their Shs 2,000 or 3,000 to take a taxi to Mulago Hospital and seek medical attention but spend a day or two on the floor waiting for doctors or health workers. And these health workers say, and I think they are right, that they get overwhelmed when there are outbreaks. So, have you ever considered the fact that it might be useful for those people to save that transport and pay it to a nearby private health clinic for consultation? Or as a matter of emergence management to put some of those drugs, for the time being, in private clinics and let everybody know that those drugs are available there as long they pay the Shs 1,000 or 2,000? 

I am saying this because private clinics in Lungujja and Nakulabye have people paying Shs 1,200 as consultation fee. I think the health workers there would be happy to help out the ministry on distribution of these drugs if you allow them to collect that money for consultation. And I think this would help on prevention because if a person is going to move to Mulago and spend two days on the floor waiting for a doctor, it does not help. So, has the Ministry considered this? 

And what about travelling? You have not told us about appealing to the public to avoid unnecessary travel for burial, visits and holidays. Is that also not part of the public information, Mr Minister?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House and in particular hon. Beti Kamya that the government has not ignored witch doctors. As a matter of fact government has got a law on witchcraft to fight witch doctors -(Laughter)- and I want to inform the House that the Uganda Law Reform Commission has developed a law on protection and promotion of herbalists that are not witch doctors. Witch doctors are fought and will continue to be fought by this government. (Laughter)

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Deputy Attorney-General. I think that really puts to rest the issue of whether we are working with witch doctors or not. 

With traditional herbalists, yes we are. We have even got a laboratory in Wandegeya to assist those people who have developed products that are potent. Once they come to the laboratory they can be assisted to identify the active principle in the concoction. If they are taught the right things and how to dispense those herbs, or whatever is made from the herbs, it also enhances their income because of course they sell those drugs.

I would like to thank hon. Angufiru who came to my office and reported the outbreak of Meningitis in her county. Now she is disputing the figure of 19 and giving us a figure of 32 but the one we have, technically and officially, is 19. There could have been people dying due to other causes in her constituency other than Meningitis.

The hon. Member for Yumbe is reporting an outbreak of Meningitis in Yumbe. As far as we are concerned, we have not received this report but if there is a delay, definitely my technical people who are here will follow up the matter and find out whether the deaths that have occurred in her constituency are as a result of Meningitis.

Hon. Anokbonggo, the statement is not a success story. Yeah, I did not bring this statement here to praise the Ministry of Health or to praise ourselves that this is a success story. It was just a statement to inform the country and to give the status of Meningitis and other outbreaks in the country. I knew that after all these questions would come up. So, it is not that we are here to say, “We have done very well.” We know there are challenges but we have to inform you what we are doing as the Ministry of Health to face these challenges or to have solutions.

As to whether we should have the vaccines full time and vaccinate everybody and do away with the idea of threshold, certainly that would be okay. In my statement you recall that I said that that would be the ideal situation in the country where everybody who feels unwell goes to a clinic or hospital and the disease is diagnosed. 

But in a situation like ours where people are still thinking of witchcraft when they fall sick, where people are poor and they fear to go to a health centre because they know they will not raise the money, these issues lead to people dying in the community and therefore it becomes very difficult to know whether what they have died of is the disease we are suspecting until we have proven the cases. But I agree with you; we are discussing with WHO with the view to reviewing this matter especially in a situation like ours where we have the problems that I have alluded to. 

Then the Sleeping Sickness, yeah, we are working with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries because they are the ones charged with the fighting of the vector, that is the Tsetse Fly. We are also concerned.

Hon. Lulume, you wanted clarification on what I meant by case search and the statement that surveillance has been strengthened. What I meant by strengthening surveillance is that we have deployed staff to search for early cases so that treatment is instituted early enough. We have also availed funds and logistics to go and sensitise the population on risks and danger signs of the disease. That is part of the strengthening of the surveillance. 

Case search refers to house-to-house search of patients to be given treatment in case of- of course we know, as I have already said, that the majority of them delay to seek health care. So, when there is a suspected outbreak or in the case of an outbreak, we normally send teams to the area for this case search so that patients are identified early and treatment is instituted to avoid spread of the disease and death. 

As for equipping of the health centres, this has been a very big challenge for sometime but I think we are soon getting a solution especially with regard to rehabilitation and re-equipping of the district hospitals or what are known as general hospitals.

As you very well know, honourable colleagues, starting this financial year, we extended funds for development and for rehabilitation of the regional referral hospitals -

THE SPEAKER: Yeah, but let us wind up this statement.

DR NDUHUURA: We would like to do the same for the general hospitals and I think very soon the Minister of Finance will be coming up to tell you about this solution and how we intend to go about it.

Hon. Ekemu, the availability of laboratory reagents at the health centre IV in your area. I think this could partly be a local problem because what I have established is that some health centres and some local governments do not requisition for laboratory reagents, medicines and equipment at the right time. Why they do not do so, because we are using a pool system, we do not push reagents or medicines. We expect orders to be made in time to the National Medical Stores so that the National Medical Stores can deliver the medicines and reagents that have been ordered for. 

Lastly, the issue raised by hon. Okecho about the one person who died of Cholera and yet our records are showing zero: I think I will have to establish this. We cannot just amend this here because I do not know whether that person died of Cholera or something else. So at an appropriate time I think I will respond to his concern after establishing what that person died of. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think what I would advise the ministry is to use local radios to sensitise the people of the areas about this problem. That may also work, instead of making a statement to Parliament here in Kampala in the English language. But if you can use local radio programmes, that may also help us. Thank you very much. 

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, that is already being done. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 89/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

5.36
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): “In each of the financial years 2007/08 and 2008/09, Parliament appropriated Shs 3,000,000 as Land Fund in the budget of the ministry. Can the honourable minister inform the House?
i.	If this fund has been fully utilised?
ii.	How much land was purchased and in which districts?
iii.	What criteria were used for choosing the districts and the beneficiaries?”

5.37
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question is in regard to the appropriation by Parliament of Shs 3 billion as Land Fund in the ministry budget for each of the financial years 2007/2008 and 2008/2009. 

I wish to note that in my Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2007/08, I stated that in order to assist people who are landless or whose land holding is too small to realise an income that is above the poverty line, government had set aside a fund to be used as a land acquisition loan facility. The facility would be disbursed through Post Bank where possible or through SACCOs. The land acquired would be used as security, if the fund has been utilised. 

So far Shs 3.5 billion has been disbursed to Post Bank, it was appointed by government as its agent through an agency agreement. The ministry is in the process of disbursing an additional Shs 2.5 billion to Post Bank for utilisation by beneficiaries. 

“How much land was purchased and in which districts?” It should be made clear that under the Land Fund arrangement, government is not supposed to purchase any land. However, government’s objective for land acquisition is met through the loan facility. Policy guidelines on the scheme have been developed by Post Bank and they should have been released to the public. 

Post Bank is currently marketing the product; they have sensitised at least one SACCO or group in each of the following districts in the Eastern region: Mbale, Soroti Jinja, Mayuge, Iganga, Kapchorwa and Bukedea. In the central region, Kayunga, Mukono, Wakiso, Mpigi and Luweero have been sensitised. In the Western region, there is Mbarara, Rukungiri, Ntungamo and Kiruhura. 

“What criteria were used for choosing the districts and beneficiaries?” The Land Fund has initially targeted 30 districts. The criterion used is the presence of a post Bank branch or outreach. However, allocation of funds is regional and the bank has a standard procedure for loan acquisition to all eligible Ugandans.

I call upon the honourable members to assist the people we represent, especially tourists who have little or no land, to access the facility. Maximum pressure should be exerted on both Post Bank and the SACCOs to administer these funds quickly and competently. I thank you. 

5.40
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, hon. Minister. Mr Speaker, the questions are very specific and I had expected specific answers but the answers given have even made me raise more supplementary questions. 

One, is the minister aware that he has successfully succeeded in avoiding answering all the questions raised?

Two, Mr Speaker, we have Post Bank branches all over Northern Uganda from Moroto to Arua and according to the regions – 

THE SPEAKER: If I were the one to answer your question, I would have done so in two minutes. I would have said that the money was passed to Post Bank for the people to go and borrow. I have not received returns from Post Bank. In my opinion, this is how it should have been answered. 

I see a problem with the person you asked, whether he really has returns from Post Bank, whether the purchase of land falls under the ministry or it goes to another ministry. This is the problem with this question. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: But that is exactly what I wanted. Has the Fund been utilised? I am not talking about disbursement; I am talking about utilisation of the Fund. We are in the second financial year. So, is this money being utilised? 

THE SPEAKER: And that is why I have said that the question would be whether you receive returns of utilisation of this fund from Post Bank, or whether it is your ministry or the ministry of lands.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I hope the minister is listening to you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) The North is completely excluded and yet the criteria as given by the minister are available – the branches of Post Bank. They are all over the place but it is only Western region, Central region and Eastern region. What happened?

Under the Land Act, the Land Fund is provided for and is being administered by the Land Commission. Can the minister give us a good reason why another Land Fund should be elsewhere especially under the Ministry of Finance?

It seems there are no arrangements in place yet to utilise this fund because the minister is talking about sensitisation going on now, but we have already provided –(Interruption) 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I got this information on our desk in the morning and I went through it and found out that Mpigi District was one of those districts, which was supposed to be sensitised and share this facility. When I got it I called the CAO of Mpigi District to let me know whether we have this kind of fund in the district. He said that to the best of his knowledge, he has not even heard about this Fund in the district. I called the LC V Chairperson of Mpigi District and he also denied knowledge of this kind of fund in the district. 

I also want to know whether the minister has contacted Post Bank or whether this information is just from – this is just similar to what we had at the beginning of this session on the DRB. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, this question should have been directed to the minister in charge of lands, to the effect that the budget provided for this amount of money for people to acquire land. Does the minister know how much money has been utilized for the people to acquire land and where? 

Yes, he is the Minister of Finance, but after the money has been voted on it is utilized by the parent ministry. This is a question that should have gone to the minister in charge of lands.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did research on this matter. This money is provided under the budget of the Ministry of Finance and the Minister of Lands has got nothing to do with it. And worse still, Uganda Land Commission, which holds the Land Fund, is each year given less than Shs 1 billion and the Ministry of Finance which has nothing to do with land gets Shs 3 billion each year. So since there are no arrangements in place, is the minister willing to recall this money and give it to Uganda Land Commission to buy land for needy Ugandans. There is no arrangement under the Ministry of Finance, so is he willing to recall the money?

Lastly, the minister speaks of 30 target districts but on the list they are 16 being sensitised, which are the other 14 that are left out to make it 30. Thank you, Sir.

5.47
MS EKWAU FLORENCE (FDC, Woman Representative Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commence by thanking you honourable members for your support. You had the powers yesterday to throw me out. I thank you very much. Thank you so much for the support. 

Directed to the minister, your ministry has failed to bring a policy on “Bonna Bagagawale” to this House. How sure are you that you will effectively handle the management of the land Fund under your ministry? 

Secondly - I am reading from this statement about the fund and its operation: “How would you have expected the Members to know if this question had not been addressed to your office?” 

Thirdly, I am still on the same page, “However, I don’t know how to exert maximum pressure on Post Bank to administer these funds to ensure that they reach the people”. Don’t you think this is negligence on the part of your ministry that you are directing the management to other offices?

Four, we have always heard of the Land Fund and we thought it would address the issues of the people of Kibale District and we expected the Land funds to help buying out the absentee landlords to sort out the long standing problem of Kibale District. Where does Kibale future in the list of the names that you have given here?

Lastly, where does the Ministry of Lands future at this moment now that you seem to be relating directly with Post Bank, where is the Ministry of Lands and how will it supervise the execution of the Land Fund that it is supposed to cater for? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: These are enough questions; let the minister answer. 

5.50
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the Post Bank has not disbursed as rapidly as we had hoped and liked. I have spoken to the Post Bank manager and to the board on a number of occasions urging them to speed up the disbursement of this fund so that the people who are intended to benefit from it, the small landholders, or those who do not have at all and squatters should benefit from this. 

I think that probably the commercial banks may be a poor medium for Prosperity-for-All disbursements because even in other micro-finance funds the funds are not moving as first as we would have wanted. The commercial banks what to go through the process of security, proper application, processing and this is exactly what the beneficiaries do not have. So it seems that there are too slow and we are saying give the money to the SAACOs and let them do the lending and they what the SAACOs to give them security and so forth. 

So I must to confess that I am frustrated. I have disbursed the money but it does not seem to be moving. We need to find an alternative mechanism to move the funds because we what the ordinary people to benefit. I have given these people warning before that if they do not move the money we are going to find some other way to move the money to the beneficially. 

I would like to say that the people intended to benefit are benefiting but the fact of the matter is that Post Bank is very slow in doing this job. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. I have heard what the minister has said and his answer has raised more questions than the ones he was asked to answer. I would like to move that we allow either the Minister of Lands or the Minister of Finance to give us a statement on the issue of the Land Fund. Otherwise, the issue of the land Fund is a very controversial one. 

In his answer the minister is appealing to the honourable members to assist our electorates. But how am I going to assist those in Nakaseke when I do not have the guidelines, and I do not know the criteria? So I believe we need a substantive statement on the Land Fund and how the two in Ministry of Lands and Ministry of Finance are coordinated. I think that will help us, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

DR SURUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a bit unfortunate that we have the same term for two different funds. The Land Fund under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is under a different Act. The money that we appropriated here was a land acquisition facility, meaning loans for poor people who do not have land or have very little land. It is for them to be able to acquire loans through SACCOs so that they can get sufficient land to cultivate and increase their incomes. So it is not a land fund as such. We prefer to call it a land acquisition facility but because it is dealing with land, there is confusion between this and the Land Fund.

THE SPEAKER: Definitely, there is confusion and we cannot expect to get the answers we want from the Ministry of Finance because we expect it in a certain way. I think that it is necessary for us to be guided as regards the policy behind this sum of money. What was it meant for and how is it being utilised? Otherwise, the way that this question was put indicates that this is a question that should have been answered by a different minister and you are asking the Minister of Finance. However, he concedes that he has handled this money. 

We want to be enlightened as regards the purpose and utilisation of this money so that we are in position to advise our constituents how to access it. In the present form, the answers that you are going to get will not help you. I do not know what the minister intends to do for us. You see that people are confused and they do not understand. Can you help us by telling us what you intend to do?

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I will be happy to provide clarification in form of a write-up that will give more details. However, let me say here that in the Prosperity-for-All arrangement, we recognise that the majority of our people are farmers and the average land holding in the 2002 Census was 0.8 of a hectare, which is two acres. That means that half the people are probably below that and another half may be above that. So you have people who have very little land and who we thought could benefit by having a facility to enable them to increase their land holding. 

Some of the community information systems that we collected were shocking. In Wakiso District, we found a very large number of people who did not have any land at all. They were living on someone else’s land and existing there but they owned no land at all. We thought that they could be assisted by having a facility in the SACCOs where they could acquire land, and since the land itself is an asset, it would be the collateral. As long as they were using the land and getting an income, they would slowly pay for the final acquisition of that land. That was the purpose. 

However, we have been let down, I must say. When we disbursed the money, the banking system failed to move it. Therefore, we must find a way to have the money sent to SACCOs so that it does what it is supposed to do. 

THE SPEAKER: It appears that this explanation should come when you were explaining the success of Bonna Bagagawale policy - how the policy has been effected; what it has achieved and so on. I think that is when this matter can come up and we shall understand it better that way under that topic. 

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, Bonna Bagagawale actually falls under the Ministry for the Presidency not under me. I can provide information on this specific issue but I am not the official spokesman for the Prosperity-for-All programme.

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In addition to the explanation given by the Minister of Finance, it is true that the Land Fund mentioned in the question was channelled through Post Bank to be accessed by the SACCOs. Consequently, the difficulty that arose in disbursing these funds by the final beneficiaries was that Post Bank is supervised by the Central Bank and any money that they lend out is subject to supervision and scrutiny by the standards of commercial banking. Since the funds were to be applied for by the SACCOs, the SACCOs had to be credit worthy. 

The savings and credit institutions were to access this money on behalf of their members; the members could not access it directly in Post Bank. They would have to go through the savings and credit institution. However, that credit institution had to be credit worthy and this created a bit of a problem in disbursing these funds. However, the idea was good and it is covered in the Prosperity for All booklet right here. This is true.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, what is the way forward?

MR KAMUNTU: Well, Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance has already hinted that he tried this channel for disbursing these funds to help the peasants with small size land. If this alternative is not working, I am sure that the minister can find an alternative.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I have confessed that I am disappointed because we disbursed funds and we did not disburse them so that they can go and sit in the bank. We want them to assist people. Now that the rate of disbursement is not what we wanted, I think that it is reasonable to say that we need to look for alternative ways of disbursing the additional funds since the first Shs 3.5 billion has not moved as we had hoped. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, the issue of land like I said does not need an ad hoc, uncoordinated and incoherent approach. We need to be very systematic. I am appealing to the minister to tell us when we can get a detailed statement on the Land Fund.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you sensitise us about this Land Fund over which we voted and when can this be?

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I will be happy to put what I have said in a formal statement to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Next week?

DR SURUMA: I will be happy to do that, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us first get the statement next week. The matter is not as clear as you seem to think. Having received the statement, we shall be able to debate it and get the necessary details.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, there are two issues. One is the Land Fund which is housed under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and then there is the Land Acquisition Fund, which is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Honourable members seem to need both. So the minister could bring a statement on the Land Acquisition Fund and then the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development brings a statement on the Land Fund.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us get the statement next week. Thank you very much. This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 February 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
