Tuesday, 3 February 2009

Parliament met at 3.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:
1.	Anifa Kawooya Bangirana 
2.	Badda Fred
3.	Grace Byarugaba

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members of Parliament, it is my pleasure today to welcome the three new members who have just been sworn in to represent their respective constituencies. I congratulate you, honourable members. I assure you that you are most welcome here. You will be facilitated to carry out your functions as Members of Parliament. 

Although I see all of you seated on this side of the House, feel free to interact with any Member from your side or from the other side; they have all welcomed you. I am saying this because I noticed some members from this side accompanying some of you at the swearing in, which shows the friendship we have in this House.

Now that elections are over, you are supposed to serve every person in your constituencies irrespective of whether they voted for you or not. This is your work; do not discriminate. I hope you will not discriminate. Carry out your functions as a Member of Parliament representing everybody in the constituency. You will be allocated various committees on which you will sit and you will be consulted before this is done.

Hon. Members, I am informed we have some special guests in the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon. We have members of the national football team, the Uganda Cranes, led by Mr Asuman Lubowa and team coach, Mr Bob Williams and other officials from FUFA. You are most welcome here. (Applause) They have come in with something glittering; it seems they have scored a victory somewhere. You will be told the details later. (Applause) You are most welcome.

Hon. Members, welcome back from the recess. I hope you had an enjoyable recess. I hope you were able to put in place some development projects in your constituencies. I thank you for the projects that you were able to carry out during the recess. I also wish you a prosperous 2009. We have a lot of business to carry out and I hope you have come with the necessary energy that will enable you clear it before Parliament is prorogued some time in April.

Last year I appealed to you to support me in a charity walk for Buddo Junior School, which had had a problem in April when its buildings were burnt. I am happy to note that you massively supported me. I was able to raise over Shs 7 million in support of this project. (Applause) Thank you very much.

The Business Committee will soon sit to decide on what business will come first. As soon as this is done, the details will be given to you. Thank you very much.

3.39
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a great opportunity as we receive three members who have come to reinforce the strength of this Parliament in its execution of the duties that have been given to it by the nation; that is to enact laws for the better governance of this country. 

On behalf of government I congratulate the three who have taken their places. I assure them of our support from this side and I can hope that the other side will equally reciprocate. The three of you are most welcome and we hope you will have a great time here in this great and very important House. I thank you. (Applause)

3.41
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government Business and honourable colleagues, I rise on behalf of the Opposition to formally welcome our three colleagues who joined us today. (Applause) We know that two of our colleagues were in this House before and that the third colleague joined following circumstances which were very difficult for all of us. We thank God that there is continuity.  

As I said the last time we welcomed a new member to this House, elections are very important. We cannot, therefore, fail to express our concern and disappointment with the Electoral Commission in the way that it has been handling elections in the country. If the electoral commissioners were correctly quoted after the Isingiro elections, it is just incredible that an electoral commissioner said, “At least this one is better than Ssembabule.”(Laughter) 

It does not help us that after one general election, we have elections in constituencies where members have not suffered any fatality. It should not be. Let us find a way of ending this cycle of mischief. It does not help those who win because their victory creates bitterness in their communities. It does not also help those who conduct elections because everyday their credibility is being eroded. 

On our part, we are very glad and I feel very proud of all these members that you have seen. (Applause) Since the beginning of this Parliament, for every by-election that we have contested, those we have lost we lost, but those we have not lost merely added to our number. I am proud that the FDC added to its number, DP added to its number and UPC added to its number. This is how it should be if everything were fine. For the NRM, particularly my good friend, hon. Fred Badda - we used to sit on the same line - and hon. Anifa Kawooya, the challenge remains with you. If there is any contest about your re-election, we can only wish you well. (Laughter) 

I remember our new member because we went for the burial of our late colleague, hon. Kyaaka, and I think you were the lead master of ceremonies. We welcome you to this House. Hon. Kyaaka was a very good lady. She was a very humble lady and when she passed on, we eulogised her here. You have a high standard to sustain so that when they talk about you, they can say, “Yes, at least the replacement of hon. Kyaaka was good.”

We had difficulties in that election. Some of our agents got arrested and at some stage we had to withdraw our agents because we did not think it was useful anymore. (Laughter) But like the song of those school girls which hon. Norbert Mao referred to in Gulu, we say, “All the same we are happy to welcome you.” (Laughter) Thank you very much. 

3.45
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (NRM, Kinkiizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to add my voice to those who spoke before me to welcome the new colleagues who have just joined us. As the hon. Leader of the Opposition said, the two are known. They were just re-affirming their leadership qualities -(Applause)- and demonstrating that what they represent is highly regarded and respected by the people of their constituencies. I would like to use this opportunity to congratulate them on having won the elections. I know they were hard battles but the victories were well deserved. (Applause)  

Mr Speaker, I would like, in the same breath, to congratulate the other contestants who did not win. I would like to tell them, as someone who has been around for some time, that this is not the end of the business. Please be encouraged and next time perhaps, you never know. 

I would like to single out the candidate in Isingiro District who has broken with tradition in the politics of Uganda - that you can only lose if you have been cheated. For the first time, I believe, I heard an honourable member of our society conceding defeat. (Applause) I would like to say to Stella Kyatuhaire Kafureka that she has set standards –(Interjections)- I hope. Mr Speaker, as you know, hon. Odonga Otto is a young brother - (Laughter)- that I have undertaken to share with the many experiences I have gone through in order for him to continue with the prospects he has of playing a leadership role in this country. (Laughter)  

To Stella Kyatuhaire Kafureka, in spite of the noise that was being made here in Kampala by those who were not there, she was the candidate and she had her entire structure and she knew what was going on on the ground. She spoke the truth and conceded defeat. (Applause)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to inform you that as we speak, there is a petition filed by Kafureka in the High Court in Masaka. You can get the details. If Anifa has not been served, I am sure in due course she is going to be served with a notice of presentation of a petition in the High Court at Masaka. I wanted to give you that information to set the record straight. I thank you. 

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, of course my brother and colleague, hon. Erias Lukwago, is new in Parliament (Laughter) I just want to inform him that we are friendly; we exchange information. We inform him that Isingiro cannot file a petition in Masaka. (Applause) Hon. Lukwago, it is okay; we are here to help. I would like to however say that going to court is exercising your constitutional right. You are welcome to go to court and as you know, we have demonstrated that even in court, we have excelled in defending our positions.  

We are happy and we welcome our members. We would like to inform them that as we draw towards the end of this Parliament’s term, we will be doing more and more to demonstrate to our people that they have made the correct choice and they only need to consolidate it. (Applause) Thank you very much.

3.53
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. First of all, I want to thank you for receiving us back in the House. Christmas was well celebrated but in Lango, the New Year was not celebrated fully. We had a serious outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). This is a very contagious viral disease, which swept - I am reliably informed - most of the northern and north-eastern parts of this country. What the government did was to just impose quarantine for four months; that was all. No other action has been taken and we have since been feeding on vegetables.  

It happened at a time when the majority of the parents were looking for money to send their children back to school. Our people had also secured very good markets for our livestock and livestock products in Southern Sudan. We now have no source of income and our people have also been quietly restocking. I would like to know from the Minister of Agriculture what exactly his ministry is doing other than imposing this quarantine. 

I am reliably informed that a similar outbreak occurred in Isingiro, Rakai and Masaka and government quickly rushed with vaccines to eradicate and control the disease. In the North and North-eastern, however, we are just receiving quarantines in the hope that the disease will disappear. Scientifically, I know that even if we use any local means to control it, the virus will not disappear from the meat and from the milk. Even if they have controlled it from those areas, there are chances that there are so many ways by which it can spread. Those who are using vehicles, those who have had contact with affected animals and so on and so forth can still spread the disease. I would like to hear from the minister about the fate of the animals that are perishing at the hands of this disease. Thank you.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that there is an outbreak of Foot and Mouth disease in the Lango sub-region and we have imposed quarantine.  

Since the Christmas holidays the country has been under partial quarantine to safeguard unnecessary movement of cows to spread FMD. A cow which has suffered from FMD and recovered is a carrier for six months but somehow, we relaxed the quarantine to allow animals for slaughter. Unfortunately, our traders are very unscrupulous and they managed to sneak cows into Lango and caused the outbreak in Lango sub-region, just across Kyoga from Kamuli District where this strain was identified. The ministry dispatched veterinary officers to take samples. The samples have been examined and we are in the process of procuring the vaccine.

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, it is not true that we rushed to Isingiro and Rakai when there was an outbreak and that we are therefore turning a blind eye to Lango sub-region. I want to inform members that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is holding 1,200 animals in Maruzi Ranch and therefore cannot do that in the first place. Secondly, it is not only Lango sub-region where we have had an outbreak. During this Christmas season, we had an outbreak in parts of Bulisa and along the Tanzania-Uganda border -(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my senior brother and minister. I would like to get clarification on that commitment which you have made here that you are in the process of securing vaccines. This is an epidemic and I know the red tape in government machinery. I know the fact that even as we talk now, the budget line for vaccines does not lie in your ministry; it is somewhere in Ministry of Finance. Has your ministry and the Ministry of Finance considered this as an emergency and therefore shortened this red tape? 

If these vaccines are going to come after a month or two, you will not have any animals to vaccinate. Have you come up with an arrangement? I know you do not have the money; unless you are telling me that the money is in your docket. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want clarification on the impact this Foot and Mouth Disease has on the parents who used to sell animals to get school fees. The information that I have now is that many students are affected because many parents have failed to sell their animals to take them to school. I wonder what the Ministry of Education and Sports is going to do for these students. Even those who have been going to university have failed to make it. 

From what I heard from the Minister of Agriculture, this process is going to take a long time yet the impact is great. May I know what the parents and the headmasters are going to do? Maybe they should be instructed to let the children go to school and the parents pay the fees later. Thank you very much.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank members for the clarifications sought. On the issue of where the money resides – we have one government. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries has already applied for a supplementary budget and we have discussed the issue. It is going to be tabled in Cabinet tomorrow. 

Secondly, as I did mention, we took samples and we have informed our regular suppliers in Nairobi about the strain. So we now know the strain and we can order for what they want. 

Certainly, this will have an impact on families that do not keep money in banks and who use animals to liquidate them and pay school fees. Under normal circumstances, the headmaster would know, and there is always an understanding between the parents and the schools. I implore the Member of Parliament to go and take a lead role and intervene. He should make sure that students in his constituency go to school because soon after the treatment, we shall open the market. 

I also want to ask for members’ support. The biggest danger that we have had in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries is controlling livestock movement. During the Christmas season, I received numerous calls from Members of Parliament and some of them came to my office asking us to open up during that time. We have two types of quarantines. We have partial quarantines where we only allow sale of animals off farm gates or loading ramps. These animals are taken for slaughter. When we do this, it is misunderstood that we are stopping the sale of animals. Total quarantine is instituted where the disease is active, and according to the Animal Disease Act, animals which are sick are not supposed to go from or move though an infected area. Equally, animal products should not go through or from infected areas. 

As for breeding, we allow a veterinary officer from a district to inform the commissioner of livestock, animal health and entomology where the cows are safe, where they are coming from and where they are going; and we allow transport by vehicle. 

In the meantime, I want honourable members to bear with us and help us in the campaign against the traditional method of moving cows to market at night and moving without permits. We are now commercializing. I am happy to note that the members have noticed that the market for livestock has gone up and animal protein is playing a very big role in our everyday food in the region. 

Mr Speaker, I hope to come here next week and inform the members about the progress of the vaccine. Thank you very much.

CONSTITUTION OF STANDING COMMITTEES

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is possible to deal with this topic because as I was coming, I received a list from the Opposition and I have just received a list from the Government side. When we constitute we should have them together - the list from the Opposition and the list from Government. I think we shall be able to deal with this tomorrow when this is properly done. 

PRESENTATION AND APPROVAL OF NAMES OF PERSONS NOMINATED 
AS PARLIAMENTARY BACKBENCH COMMISSIONERS

THE SPEAKER: What I expect is to receive nominations from the Government side and nominations from the Opposition and then we shall vote. I am talking of voting, but the Rules of Procedure do not refer to voting but they mention “designating”. The principle laws under which the Commission is constituted are the Constitution and the Administration of Parliament Act. The Parliament Act provides for the election. So let me get the nominations and then we proceed. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek your indulgence on this particular matter that you have brought to our attention. We are now two and a half years into the lifespan of the Eighth Parliament and in 2006 when the four Backbench commissioners were designated; it was on the understanding that the two sides of the House will share those slots according to their numerical strength. 

Accordingly, the NRM was supposed to designate three Members and the opposition one Member. What happened that time was that the Opposition, through its own system, would nominate and recommend one person as their commissioner. If it is that same principle, we are ready and we will submit the name. 

I do not know whether the election that is going to take place is going to be on the Floor of the House. It is not that I am afraid of elections. Rather, it is because the system we used in 2006 was not through elections on the Floor of the House. That is the clarification that I am seeking.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to give me the names from the Opposition?

MR WADRI: Yes, I am ready.

THE SPEAKER: Bring them.

MR WADRI: We have hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau, Woman Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido District.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, what I have for NRM Parliamentary Commissioners are three names: hon. Guma Gumisiriza, hon. Kasule Lumumba and hon. Obua Dennis. There are four positions for commissioners. I, therefore, have four candidates nominated. I put the question to those names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: They have been elected. We shall deal with the committees tomorrow.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE UGANDA CRANES FOR WINNING THE EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICAN FOOTBALL CHALLENGE CUP 2008

4.10
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating the Uganda Cranes for winning the East and Central Africa Challenge Cup (CECAFA), 2008. 

THE SPEAKER: It has been supported by hon. Okupa.

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this motion is moved under rules 43 and 47 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 under the provision of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy No. 17, mandates the state to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Article 8(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for governance based on principles of national unity and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

AWARE that on Tuesday, 18 January 2009, through the thrilling performances of Uganda Cranes, Uganda won the East and Central African Senior Challenge Cup, 2008 after trouncing Kenya’s Harambee Stars 1-0 in the final played at Namboole stadium; 

And FURTHER AWARE that Uganda has now won this trophy the tenth time thereby making her the country with the highest wins in the competition so far;

NOTING that this triumphant victory poses a challenge on Uganda Cranes to measure itself on other performances; 

COGNISANT of the fact that the Government of Uganda needs to take an upper hand in enhancing the realisation of Uganda Cranes dream of reaching greater heights, including the Africa Cup of Nations finals and the World Cup qualifiers per se

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

1.	Parliament of Uganda extends its glowing appreciation and congratulations to the Uganda Cranes for winning the prestigious East and Central Africa Senior Challenge Cup, 2008
2.	Government of Uganda increases the annual budget support to the sports sub sector to facilitate development of sports countrywide.”

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move.

I must confidently state that the year 2008 was a year of victory for the black race. While on the political scene, President Barack Obama was elected as the first Black American President of the United States, on the motor racing scene, Lewis Hamilton was the first black man to win the Formula One race. Back at home, our very own Uganda Cranes did us proud by winning the East and Central Africa Senior Challenge Cup, 2008. I want to say congratulations, Uganda Cranes! You have made us proud; we are proud of you.

In a very special way I would also like to thank the Speaker of Parliament. Whereas some of us were upcountry watching and praying for Uganda Cranes, you put aside your busy schedule and watched it live as Guest of honour. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

Hon. Members, I have observed that whenever the Speaker of Parliament is the chief guest, Uganda Cranes has never lost. (Laughter) This is on record. Therefore, this victory by Uganda Cranes is a litmus test, a precursor and a curtain raiser for them to climb higher steps and we need to support them. 

As a country, we should start strategic nation wide development of sports through identification of young talent and construction of a strong, stable and firm foundation. 

I want to make it categorically clear that football knows only one foundation: the young people. That is the foundation it knows. If we are ready to be part of the mainstream football world, there is no shortcut. We have to build it from the grassroots with young people even as young as six years; we start identification and developing the child’s talent. 

In my opinion, Uganda as a country should not only aim at short-term football success like the one we have just had. I think the best is to support and build a strong national team that can compete beyond CECAFA. 

We want to see Cranes making us proud in the Africa Cup of Nations. We want to see Cranes even performing to World Cup qualifiers. The answer lies in our hands. We debate, analyse and we pass a national budget. If we need Cranes to be our marketing football club, then definitely as a Parliament we must make sure - because the biggest challenges has always been facilitation of players and the question of identifying talent from upcountry. These are the challenges. I appeal to you to support this motion.

The spirit in which this motion is moved is meant to give Uganda Cranes more momentum to perform better –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: I thank you, Commissioner Hamson Obua. I want make a small comment on what hon. Obua has just stated. As a former footballer –(Interjections)– oh! Yes, I am a former footballer and I am the only one who can tell you. I was the goalkeeper of Makerere University and I played in the youth team for Uganda. So as a former footballer, this particular matter is of significant importance to me. 

Hon. Obua has alluded to lack of finances. This is very important but where hon. Obua is wrong is to say that the answer lies in our hands. That is not true! We pass budgets here based on estimates which are brought to us by government. I do not remember a single day that government has brought a budgetary vote for purposes of sports in this House. So the matter lies with government. 

It is government, which is letting down sports in this country - nobody else. So long as government does not take an active part and interest in the promotion of sports; whether it is football, athletics, boxing, or badminton; we are not going to do much because sports this day depends on finances and government is the only person who can allocate those finances to the sporting world.

THE SPEAKER: I think the issue here is that we changed the budgeting process and we are aware of Article 93, but because we changed the budgeting process and we have interim procedures before the budget is read, Parliament can now, when it gets these interim procedures, make recommendations should they detect that the Ministry of Finance has not provided for that - because when we conclude the interim budgeting process, we send it to the President indicating our wishes and the reallocation. I think you can use that opportunity to influence the budget by making those suggestions.

MR WACHA: I thank you and I think that is one method of handling it. But, Sir, we have a full department of sports with the minister concerned sitting in Cabinet. Now for such a minister to keep on holding a portfolio in which he is doing practically nothing is shameful.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague, for giving way. I want this House to recognise that the Government of Uganda under the NRM Government has promoted sports. I think the very fact that he is mentioning that there is a desk and Minister of State for Sports is a very good development; because now in Cabinet we have the minister to advise on policy and any other related issues. 

And I want to commend hon. Bakabulindi who has done so well and those before him. Hon. Bakabulindi has already drafted a sports policy which we shall be discussing in this House. He has already put in place a department with a commissioner and the entire structure to make sure that games and sports are developed in this country. So, it is not true that there has been nothing. 

I think the way forward is that we discuss means of mobilising more resources so that we can develop the games and sports department. Probably, I will get another opportunity but I thank the Cranes for holding the flag high. Thank you very much.

MR DENNIS OBUA: As I conclude, I thank the two Members for the information in supporting the principle of the two proposed resolutions of Parliament and I pray that we support sports in Uganda. 

We need to support the Uganda Cranes and I want to end by saying, Uganda Cranes, Congratulations once again! Please, continue performing and continue aiming higher such that one day, Uganda will reach even World Cup qualifier. 

We thank you for your thrilling performance and we pray that the leadership of FUFA and your new coach will continue doing the best for you to have better results. Hon. Members, let us support this motion. It is a motion that is meant to build the sports sub-sector in Uganda. I thank you. (Applause)

4.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I must thank my colleague, hon. Obua and I also congratulate you for the elevation to the position of the commissioner. 

I stand here to second the motion not only as the Member of Parliament for Kasilo County, but also as a manager of the Parliamentary Football team to which the Rt. Hon. Speaker is the patron. So you can see it was not a wrong choice for us to have the Speaker as our patron. We knew he is full of luck. You can see the luck he has exhibits whenever he appears for any matches in Namboole Stadium. I must thank the Speaker for the spirit and for the luck and we pray to the Almighty to give you more luck in the sports arena.

Mr Speaker, I stand here to second this motion and to thank the Members of Parliament who at one time contributed money to support the Cranes. There were some divergent voices, but in its entirety everyone contributed and we gave the Cranes Shs 10 million. So, you can see the fruits of our contribution and other Ugandans. This was from our own resource as members of parliament. 

When hon. Obua raises the issue of finances here, the ball is in the court of the Executive. We need you to support the Cranes and the sports activities in this country in its entirety. 

I was surprised because from the reliable information we have from the hon. Minister for Education, it is only indeed Uganda where the football federation funds the national team in its entirety in the whole world. That is the information that we have. So when hon. Obua raises this matter, it is on the basis that Uganda is the only country in the world where the football federation funds the national team in its entirety -(Interjection)- you will clarify or agree with that assertion.

Mr Speaker, there are issues that –(Mr Bakabulindi rose_)- You will clarify during the time for the debate. Just relax hon. Bakabulindi. We want to help you to perform wonders because we remember very well you were in our Parliament team and you still hold the position of an ex-officio member of the parliamentary team and you have been pushing us to help you to push for more funds. So that is what we are doing. Do not sabotage at this moment when we are trying to help you. 

Hon. Members, there are issues that Parliament together with the Executive must do. One, the football fraternity is still operating under the 1964 Act. This Act needs some amendments. I think that is where Parliament will play its role because the world has gone technologically ahead. There is need to amend some of these laws to take care of that.

This Parliament needs to help FUFA. Kampala zone alone had 66 playgrounds and facilities, but as we speak today, businessmen and corrupt people have sold them and we have less than five grounds. People are grabbing the pitches; they are grabbing the facilities and this Parliament must come up and help the institution here.

Mr Speaker, we can reach the World Cup but there are some limitations. The issue of the duo citizenship: I think we need to expedite this process because we have two Ugandans who would have played with the Cranes, that is, Nsereko Savio who is in Germany and Kitamalike Sserunkuma. They could not play because they hold British and German passports. 

I think we need to expedite the process of having duo citizenship for the sports people. Those are the areas where Parliament can really help such that we are able to have a strong football and sports body in this country.

We are talking about publicity. We were trying to advertise ourselves during CHOGM but football can play a big role in publicity. We do not need the fire brigade to advocate for something. If we had players like Pele, like Maradona in this country there would be no need for us to struggle during the rush hour to publicise Uganda; sports would have done it. So there is need for us to support this. 

Unity is another thing that sports promotes. Regarding political parties, when the Cranes are playing in Namboole or Nakivubo, you see everyone is there. You see Dr Besigye there, the Rt. Hon. Speaker is there, hon. Maj. Gen. Muhwezi is there, Mugisha Muntu is there, hon. Amama Mbabazi is there, we expect to see KK there soon, hon. Kivejinja and the Chief Whip. I know she is our sports person but she has been taken up so much by chief whipping. We need you to still support the sports activities.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am giving information that relates to unity. I am the team captain of the Parliamentary Football Club and I am a football player myself -(Interjection)- I am a current football player not a former football player like my previous colleagues –(Interjections)- of the Parliamentary Football Club and I am the lead striker and lead scorer of the Parliamentary Football team. 

But as relates to unity, the beauty of Ugandan politics is seen in the Parliamentary Football Club. I remember during our last match in the UK, we were overwhelmed. We had Members of FDC and Members of NRM playing. You would not suspect that a Movementist is a goalkeeper and he may give way. I think –(Laughter)- I found myself playing with people like hon. Sejoba, hon. minister Nsambu, in the spirit of one Uganda one people. (Laughter) This kind of unity is very good. Even our female colleagues like hon. Sarah Nyombi, hon. Akol, hon. Kavuma and many other female counterparts and the hon. NRM Chief Whip, including the Speaker of Parliament, were involved and this level of unity should be encouraged. 

I want to take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to request that we have a friendly match with Uganda Cranes. I think I will take on that as our next assignment. Thank you so much.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Otto. Finally, this goes to the administration of FUFA. I remember this is the 10th time Uganda is winning this CECAFA Cup. I also remember in 2000 there were problems in FUFA of mismanagement and the sports came down. 

I want to applaud the current FUFA administration for their seriousness in ensuring that those wrangles are minimised or eliminated. Keep up the spirit without all these wrangles, without corruption; you will get all the necessary support from the Ugandans. Thank you, Mr Speaker and congratulations the Cranes. 

4.35
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to start by congratulating the mover of the motion, our commissioner now -(Applause)- and to thank you for making the generation proud.

I also rise to support this motion and to agree with many colleagues who have spoken here that sports is non-partisan. I agree with hon. Obua that whenever you officiate, Mr Speaker, the Uganda Cranes have always won. There was a very big match between the Super Eagles of Nigeria and the Ugandan Cranes; you officiated and we won. So, we want to thank you for that support to soccer. (Applause)

I also want to congratulate the Uganda Canes for making Uganda proud, for lifting the Ugandan flag. Whenever they win, it enhances Uganda’s image abroad and even locally we move with our heads very high. 

I want to thank the current FUFA administration. They inherited a very fragile situation but today even the morale of the Ugandans in as far as soccer is concerned has increased to tremendous levels.

Actually, at times I feel very honoured and proud when I see Ugandans painting their faces with colours of the national flag. I feel greatly honoured when I watch boda boda cyclists putting flags on their motorcycles, when I see Ugandans putting flags on their cars and on their taxis. This is a sign of patriotism that is actually enhanced because of the role the current administration of sports has played in bringing Ugandans back to the stadium in this country.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of funding, I must also agree with the honourable minister that since the last Parliament there has been some improvement to the extent that the department has moved to the level of a directorate. But I believe that is not enough. There are different ways of raising funding. Whereas we allocate little resources for sports, we get a lot of money from sports as government because whenever they play matches, the money they get is taxed by 18 percent. And I believe this is an area where we have to exempt these people from this 18 percent taxation in order for them to be able to cater for their other services.

And even the educational materials, at times they get them as donations but they have to pay for taxes on donations. Actually, they are even being discouraged from accepting these donations because they have to pay taxes for the same. So, I believe Government should exempt this tax from the sports, particularly soccer in this regard.

I just want to say that we need to support them. Right now, one of their key funders was GTV in this country and it has closed down. They are in a very precarious situation. I know government also helps the national team but it only gives them tickets, and these people have to fund the allowances; they have to fund accommodation. I believe in the next financial year we can only motivate the stakeholders and especially the young players by making a bigger difference to improve sports in this country.

I want to end with what hon. Obua said. We cannot develop football in this country by adhoc funding or piecemeal funding. We need a strategic approach, we go down to the grassroots - the players that are in the European leagues in those other countries came from grassroots sports development. So, government needs to really have a strategic approach to improve sports in this country. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and once again I congratulate the Uganda Cranes.

4.40
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I wish to extend my sincere thanks to our gallant boys here who performed wonders under very difficult circumstances to make us proud and I support the motion.

Having said that, allow me to address this honourable House to the pathetic situation we have in this country as far as sports administration is concerned. 

You will agree with me that sports administration in this country is riddled with conflicts, which threaten the whole sports body. If we are not careful enough to take remedial action, we are likely not to win more trophies or to attain higher horizons.

But most of these conflicts stem from want of a clear legal framework. Hon. Okupa talked about the National Council of Sports Act, which was enacted way back in 1964 and he called for amendment. 

But before we even talk about amendment, hon. Minister you had an obligation, which you have failed to execute under this Act and it is running down the whole administrative mechanism of our sports here. Under section 10 of this Act, the minister was required to come up with a statutory instrument to regulate the establishment and actually management of national associations. 

Today we are talking about FUFA which is a national body but what is its legal status? The Federation of Uganda Football Association; is it a body corporate? Certainly it is not a statutory body. 

There is no Act of Parliament establishing FUFA as a national association or a national body but it is a federation of various associations within the country. And the establishment of these associations was supposed to be regulated by a statutory instrument made by the minister. 

As we talk now, I stand to be corrected; the instrument is not yet in place. This is an Act which was read way back in 1964. We do not have an instrument in place made by the minister. I have raised this question in several fora and the minister tells us, “It is lying on my table; I am about to sign it”. When are we going to have this instrument signed? 

In a nutshell, Mr Speaker, what we have in place are associations which are illegal. The various associations that federate to form FUFA are not established in accordance with the law because we do not have a law. I will ask you today, what is the legal status of –

THE SPEAKER: How do they handle commercial transactions, loans and contracts?

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, what we had previously – I did not want to go into this background because it was quite acrimonious, you recall. But I will tell you briefly, Mr Speaker and the House. 

FUFA had been registered by the previous administration as a limited liability company, with a few individual subscribing as shareholders, just a limited number of individuals. I do not want to mention names here because it will open up old wounds. But it was very pathetic that an association passing off as a federation for national associations was registered in the names of a few individuals managing national soccer!

As I wind up –

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had not intended to come in at this particular time; I wanted to come at the end and make clarifications but I could not tolerate it. 

I know very well that hon. Lukwago is my good supporter. I once interacted with him on the issue of the National Council of Sports Act. I told him the process of repealing the law. We agreed with you and I am surprised with the way you are bringing it up. 

Now at the same time - Interjection)– I will be coming to it when I come to debate. At the same time, FUFA Limited was not an association. FUFA developed a company alongside it, which they called a company limited. And during the time I came in, because of the wrangles, I banned the entire old FUFA and there is no company limited now. So let us be well informed so that we do not misinform our people. 

MR LUKWAGO: That is what I was saying exactly, Mr Speaker -(Laughter)- that the previous administration had registered FUFA Limited; I did not talk about the current one. 

With the current FUFA, what is its legal status if you do not have legislation in place to create it as a statutory body? It must be registered with the Registrar of Companies. How was it registered? And you do not have the instrument I am talking about.

I just want to read out the obligations. The instrument was supposed to cater for the following: “The establishment of national associations and the registration of associations with the Council”, that is the National Council of Sports. 

The functions of national associations were supposed to be stipulated and spelt out in the instrument: “The establishment and composition of national committees including sub committees other than committees of national associations.” 

And finally, “The promotion and encouragement, in consultation with the minister responsible for education and sports, of games in schools and colleges.” This is what the instrument was supposed to stipulate. 

Today we do not have that instrument in place and I maintain, as I am winding up, that we do not have lawful or legal national associations. The current associations we have that federate to create FUFA are illegal because we do not have this instrument in place. And this has caused problems when it comes to elections because we do not know who is who and then what you hear next are wrangles. Now we are going into elections of FUFA leaders, Mr Speaker, and you will see what will happen.

So for us to streamline football so us to reach the highest horizons, to go to the World Cup, we need to streamline the administration of sports in this country and start with legislation. Let us work out a clear legal framework. Hon. Bakkabulindi, I beg you not to be defensive. Please, execute your obligations as required under the law. I thank you.

4.48
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about this important motion. 

I wish to thank the movers of this motion and congratulate the Cranes upon the success. Mr Speaker, quite often when the Cranes or a national team fails, it is normally the administrators that are blamed and when it is successful, normally they are not mentioned. 

I also wish to thank the FUFA Executive, the coaches and all the other technical staff for enabling the Cranes secure such a victory after losing our campaign to play in the Africa Cup of Nations. 

I would not like to repeat what my colleagues have said but Members of Parliament are associating with the Uganda Cranes because we feel that football has been an instrument to join peoples of the world and nations of the world. 

Some issues, including funding, have been raised here by colleagues but I would like to thank government for the support they have given not only the Cranes but even in supporting other events. 

I am aware that in our campaign for the Africa Cup of Nations, the government was solely responsible for paying for air tickets for all our professional players from outside the country. And that was a very big credit but of course like Oliver Twist, we need more from government. 

What I would like to say is that funding sports is a very expensive venture. It requires the sports administrators to make a good package so that the sports events that they have can easily be marketed. 

The facilities that we have, for instance the national stadium at Namboole, it is very expensive to hold a football match in that facility. It has become very expensive for the national team to hold frequent training sessions there. I urge government to intervene and make sure that such national facilities are easily accessible to our national teams.

Mr Speaker, I wish to urge our new couch, Mr Bob Williamson together with the colleagues he is working with to, please, go to the grassroots, identify talent, recruit and train those talents. With that, Uganda will again come onto the continental and world scene in football. We have seen this before and I believe if you do it, Uganda will be redeemed.

I would like to reiterate to FUFA that as long as you remain united; as long as you all work for the common good, the national Cranes will get all the funding that they need. I am saying this because I know there are many corporate bodies that are willing to inject money into sports activities particularly football for as long as you are organised and working as a team. 

I also urge all Ugandans and sports administrators in this country to support FUFA objectives to enable Uganda build a stronger team that will participate in the Africa Cup of Nations, which is to come in the near date. I thank you very much and I congratulate the Cranes upon this success. Thank you.

4.54
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the motion on the Floor of Parliament this afternoon. And while doing that I would like to thank the mover and seconder of the motion, which I fully support.

There is no doubt in my mind that on the 18th Day of January, 2009 young and old people seated in the gallery brought pride to this country. Actually, for me it is only when the Cranes are playing that you will see me in a yellow shirt -(Laughter)- that is the only time I put on a yellow shirt. But I would like to put it clear to my colleagues on the other side of the Floor that when I put on yellow, it does not mean I have crossed to the Movement.

I would like to congratulate the entire team that brought victory to our country. A game of football is not only won by those who physically participate in kicking and catching the ball, it is also won by the administrators who organise the players; the technical people responsible for the technical aspects of the game and couching of the players, the players themselves who, through hardship and commitment, bring victory to their team and the country at large.

Lastly, let me talk about the fans that commit themselves to giving moral support. People like you, Mr Speaker, people like me who only put on yellow shirts when the Cranes are playing and the others who get glued on the screens around the country watching the game of football play an important role in giving morale to our players. 

I particularly would like to thank the players for the resilience that they went through in bringing this hard-won victory to our country, Uganda, and especially in sub doing Harambee Stars who have always been very stubborn whenever they meet our team. Because they always give us hard time, this time my heart was in my mouth as the Cranes tackled them; I am happy that we emerged victorious. 

In a special way I would like to congratulate one player who I really do not know very well, that is Mr Omwony, but who was the top scorer in that tournament and brought victory – at least he scored the decisive goal in the final moment. Mr Omwony – I am not sure whether you are in the gallery, but I would like to express my congratulations and wish you success in your career.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that football is an economic activity. It is something that can bring wealth to a country. This is visible in the way players in the premier get paid; they get huge amounts of money – I am happy to note that if I am not mistaken, we already have the first ever Ugandan playing in the premier league in England. On Saturday I watched a young man called Savio Nsereko playing for West Ham. I think this is a plus in as far as sporting activities in Uganda are concerned.

I am however saddened by the fact that – and this has been talked about on the Floor of the House – there isn’t much attention paid to sports in this country. I wouldn’t like to blame the Minister of Education. I would also be unfair to blame my friend, Charles Bakkabulindi, I think the problem is with the Executive; the entire Executive without exception that is lukewarm when it comes to proposing budgets to Parliament.

Idi Amin who was thought to be an ignorant and stupid leader and a dictator had some credits when it came to football. It was during Idi Amin’s regime – by the way I am not a spokesman of Idi Amin and you cannot erase this, that we achieved the highest level of sporting in this country. In 1978 Uganda went to the Africa Cup of Nations and reached the final match where they lost 2-1 to Ghana. They were given special privileges by the then President of Uganda. They were given a special jet to be flown to and fro and also lots of money in rewards when they returned home. 

When our young people won the East and Central Africa Challenge Cup on 18 January this year, I was shocked when Mr Mulindwa, the President of FUFA, told the press that the reward that was given to these young people to be shared by the entire team - a lot of dollars were actually paid; about US$ 42,000 was the cash reward. They shared this money among the players, and some of the money was used for offsetting hotel bills. This is a shame to the Executive. You should actually cover your faces -(Interjections)- because you let down these people. You should have stood up to the occasion, given these fellows rewards and cleared all the expenses if you are serious about these people bringing glory to our country.

MS NAMAYANJA: Information.

MR AMURIAT: I will take it.

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you honourable member for giving way. The honourable member said that it was only during Amin’s Government that the Uganda Cranes excelled. In 1988, 1989, 1990, Uganda was led by the National Resistance Movement and the Uganda Cranes won in the East and Central Challenge Cup -(Interjections)– I am coming to that. Mr Sam Simbwa and Jackson Mayanja are there and they were part of that. 

And it is because of what government has put in that even this time we only missed the Africa Cup of Nations narrowly; we were almost in. And by us debating this on the Floor of Parliament and taking the whole afternoon to talk about sports and football in particular, I believe it is political and moral support. We only need to add the finances. I thank you so much.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I just want to add some information that even during the Obote II Government -(Laughter)- Yes, the Cranes were successful in the CECAFA finals, not once. Therefore, the issue we are raising here is that actually Gen. Idi Amin Dada excelled more than all these governments, including the current government, in spearheading promotions in sports. That is why he could specially assign the Air force jet to take Ugandans to play in a foreign country. The jet would wait for them and on finishing they would be flown back. Gen. Idi Amin would receive them at the airport, himself, and not any other person. These are the kinds of commitments and morale that our leadership needs to give [Mr Kivejinja: “Information.”] I am giving information and I thought you knew parliamentary procedures. You cannot give information on information. You have to ask my colleague to give you way.

So, the issue that is being raised is that the leadership must not just defend things because they belong to that side. It is true that today we are debating but how much value are we adding to the Cranes in this debate? How much allowance are we giving them? How much morale are we giving them? I think this government, which has stayed longest in power, should be ashamed that even up to now our people suffer and the kind of hotels they stay in while they are preparing to meet these challenges are sub-standard. The kind of upkeep they are given is very challenging and therefore we should be shameful that 23 years down the road, we cannot even qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank my colleagues -

THE SPEAKER: The honourable minister wants to give you information.
 
MR AMURIAT: Is it information or order? He was putting me on order.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much. I thought I would not be giving my position the respect it deserves if people continued to debate in a manner that would derail the spirit of the debate. The essence of the debate was to thank these youngsters for having honoured us; it was not intended to try and show who is doing what -(Interjections)

Secondly, I want to also give more information about Uganda having reached the finals of the Africa Cup of Nations because I was part of it -(Interjections)- just hold on! The team that was really the base of Uganda’s success was Kampala City Council and I am a number one member of that club. I know exactly what we did, the three of us, to make sure that we train that team so that we do something which is national well, because Amin was doing quite a lot of things. So please, do not give the regime the credit and say that it is the one that promoted it. It was a group of nationalists who thought that during that time, our contribution was to create a team that would be a basis for the victory we had. 

So I wanted that information to be known because I am here and I am part of the history. You should not debate as if you are talking about something on Mars. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members hasn’t the consensus evolved on the need to support and fund the Cranes? Isn’t that the consensus? Should we really prolong this debate?

MR AMURIAT: Can I conclude, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: Ok, you conclude and then I will ask the minister to say something and then we end.

MR AMURIAT: I am concluding, Sir. But as I conclude, I am aware that hon. Kirunda Kivejinja still lives in this country. He has said he is a number one personality in KCC and I also know he is the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for National Guidance and I believe in his position. We should not even be talking about the Africa Cup; we should be talking about the World Cup. When are you taking us to the World Cup?

Finally, whereas it is necessary for us as Members of Parliament to expect a lot from government, if government is not forthcoming, I would like to appeal to my colleagues that we individually and collectively continue to support the game of football and other sports. I appreciate that this Parliament has ever contributed towards the welfare of the Uganda Cranes and we should do that again.

I would also like to appeal to colleagues to organise sporting activities in their constituencies. Organising a football tournament would cost you about Shs 6 million at the minimum and I am saying this from experience. We have recently concluded the second edition of the Amuriat Cup played in Kumi and we have identified skills. There is a lot of talent in Kumi and I believe at an appropriate time, I will be handing over those talented young people to Mr Mulindwa and his executive. 

Otherwise, I want to reiterate the fact, Mr Speaker, that you are a man of good omen. When we went to watch Nigeria play the Uganda Cranes, you were the chief guest and we won by two goals to one. We did not expect that. The Baganda say, “Oli muntu wa mukisa.” I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, my Member of Parliament. She represents me. But I think we should conclude, hon. Kamya. 

5.10
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this motion and I stand here to support it. Congratulations, Uganda Cranes; you look victorious in your blue dress. 

In this country, we have a culture which in Luganda we call “okufuwa.” If somebody does well, if they dance well or sing well or if they do something well, whoever is very happy actually gets up and gives them something and I think that the Uganda Cranes need to be “kufuwad” -(Applause) 

I would like to suggest to this House that as we wait for the right policies and the right budgets to come - we contribute so much to many worthy activities - what if each Member contributed Shs 20,000 only per month for a year -(Interjections)- no, that is a suggestion. If we contributed this Shs 20,000, with 300 Members of Parliament that would be Shs 6 million per month to the Uganda Cranes. If you want to do it better, I will be very happy to contribute Shs 100,000 per month to the Uganda Cranes. With 303 Members of Parliament, that should be a good contribution. 

I would like to encourage the parliamentary football association to please lead us in this monthly contribution to the Uganda Cranes. Members of Parliament, I expected to hear thumps on both sides!

Mr Speaker, I would like to address myself to the principle of sportsmanship. In sportsmanship, the cardinal principle is fair play, known agreed rules and regulations and a fair umpire and at the end of the day we have victorious winners and dignified losers. You do not achieve that unless you build these values in the team. 

Team building, endurance and comradeship, time keeping and other values are also key outcomes of sportsmanship. These are values that are inculcated in children when they are young in their formative stages. They are not values that you will pick up when you have lost an election and you go and start doing sports. They are values that you need to build in the formative stages of people. 

I would, therefore, like to encourage sports in schools. Previously when we were younger, sports was a very important component in a school and I never saw a school that did not have a play field. We now have schools mushrooming everywhere in rooms, in residential areas and in shacks. 

I would like the Minister of Sports to tell us how these kinds of schools have the sports component - how such schools include the sports component in their curriculum. Indeed when we were going to school in Buddo it was a requirement – you were forced to participate in at least two sports activities as a school regulation. I do not know how it is –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Kamya, for giving way. Actually about recreational facilities being a component in the academic curricula, this House passed a motion sometime back for the eviction of Shimoni Demonstration School from where it used to be and when it was relocated to East Kololo, there were some makeshift structures that were constructed in the play ground of East Kololo Primary School currently housing Shimoni Demonstration School. So those pupils in East Kololo Primary School have been deprived of this facility. 

As I give information, I would like to know as to when and how it will be removed - because it was a temporary arrangement - so that the pupils of East Kololo can still get their facilities back; so that we can promote soccer in schools. Again –(Interjection)- it is not. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, let us conclude.

MS KAMYA: I am concluding, Mr Speaker, but I think that the intervention was worth the time it took. 

In conclusion, values of honesty and transparency, integrity and fairness and a sense of responsibility are planted in children when they are young. When you see people cheating and eating public funds and rigging elections, it really means that there is a gap that was not filled and it is best filled when people are young. 

People learn best when they enjoy what they are learning. Children enjoy sports, drama and music and these are things that should be encouraged through which values should be passed on to the children. I would really like the Ministry of Education to pay more attention to them. They are even more important than the budget. We can pass a budget today for someone who was not groomed to look after the budget or to be a sportsman with honesty. The budget would probably not be as effective as a team that is held together by those values. 

I wish to once again congratulate the Uganda Cranes. I would like to assure you that this Parliament, through the right channels, will consider the proposal of our kufuwa contribution of the amount of money that will be agreed by all of us. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for the proposal that she has brought up of “okufuwa”. I would imagine that it would be procedurally okay for us to make a one-off contribution and appreciate the current team of Shs 100,000 each as a sign of appreciation for what they have put in. 

THE SPEAKER: It is okay. Now this is the treasurer of FUFA and he is a Member of Parliament. 

5.19
MR JOWALI KYEYAGO (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. It would have been a very bad precedent not to give me an opportunity to contribute on matters of CECAFA. I was the chairperson of the organising committee of CECAFA and at the same time the vice-chairman of CECAFA in charge of finance. 

When I hear Members of Parliament applauding FUFA executives, I feel proud. I wish to thank them for the performance levels that we have reached. Permit me to thank government too for the efforts that they have put in. We have moved a long way. 

Let me begin by appreciating the Ministry of Education and Sports for disbanding the previous FUFA and putting in place a new FUFA which is a little bit transparent. I think government deserves credit for that. 

A lot has been said, but pertaining to CECAFA, I feel it is an opportunity for me to say something. The CECAFA tournament was sponsored by GTV and it came with international standards. Those standards have really helped us, the organising committee. Besides that, we realised there were problems in Namboole National Stadium. I think we need to cause the relevant ministries to ensure that Namboole is renovated. Ever since the departure of the Police from there, so many things have gone wrong and management say they never got any money to renovate the stadium. 

Mr Speaker, we appeal for money but government may not be able to give us all that we what. Surely, government has done a lot. Whenever we play, they have been giving us air tickets. However, qualifying for internationals requires more than that. For instance, how much are we putting into preparations? For the last two qualifying campaigns, we made a one hundred percent record – we won all home marches but we lost almost all away matches. The implication is that we lack external exposure. We do not have the money to fly our teams for international friendlies. If the Ministry of Education can extend its budget a little bit to accommodate such issues, we would be very proud. 

As my colleague said, it is only in a few countries that the national team is not a preserve of the state. Once it is a national team, the state takes over. Here we are gambling for allowances, bringing these professional players, like Nsereko who is in the British Premiere League, bringing him for an international march here calls for some allowances; where do we get the money from?

The other thing is about the policy. I am proud the ministry is going to bring up one. We have consulted with other countries and they tell us that countries normally do not pump in a lot of money into federations but they make policies that are conducive for companies to sponsor clubs. Once a company or corporation sponsors any club, then it benefits from the tax system somewhere. So companies would look for teams to sponsor in order to get tax exemptions. A company that feels like coming in to sponsor does so out of courtesy or corporate responsibility. I think if we get a policy that allows companies that are sponsoring to benefit from the tax system, then we would have done a great deal.

We have got a project – a technical centre - sponsored by FIFA. They have given us money to construct a technical centre. However, from the time between the signing of the contract and the executing, costs have varied and FIFA says they are not adding any single coin. They are saying that since this is a project that will benefit our local teams for development, they do not want to pay any taxes. We have written to the Ministry of Finance but it appears it is still in the balance. What are we going to do? 

It is only in Uganda here where the host country charges visa fees for teams that are coming. When these teams come here, they come with a lot of things besides publicity. We were embarrassed one time. A team from Djibouti rang us wanting to know whether it is also free in Uganda. We rang some member in the ministry and they told us, “No, with CECAFA there are no such requirements”. When the team arrived in Uganda, they confiscated their passports and FUFA had to come in and bail them out just to save the image of the country. 

As I wind up, I want to correct the impression - and it is a shame - that FUFA shared the prize money and the balance to offset debts. I think that in the recent past, there has been no regime that has given prize money to players like FUFA has done. The money that we won was shared among the players, their coaches and the management that very night before they slept. We never got any shilling. If anything, all our debts still stand. I think we should give credit where it is due. If it was any other regime, FUFA would have asked for the finances, determined how much to give the players and this would be done because prize money never has attachments. It was given to us but we made sure that all the money was shared by the players. So, I think that we should appreciate and give them credit for this. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we have sufficiently dealt with this motion. Honourable minister, you have a few remarks? Okay, you can make them and then we close.

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First of all, I would like to join my colleagues, the mover and seconder of the motion, because all that you have contributed is geared towards the improvement of sports in this country. 

Before I proceed, allow me to give you additional good news. As we speak, our national cricket team also qualified in Argentina for the World Cup, which will take place in South Africa. Also, as we celebrate with the Cranes, our She-Cranes, the rugby team in Dubai, qualified for the World Cup competitions. So you can see that sports is coming together.

As I salute our Cranes, I was happy when the mover and seconder informed me about this motion. I said, “I think that this is the right timing.” Little did I know that my colleague, hon. Obua Dennis, would even be a commissioner today! I want to congratulate you and say that we can even take the congratulations of our Cranes further to the Parliament gardens. Why not? I think I will negotiate with the Commission to see that we entertain them for the good that they did for us. We need to honour the Cranes in that spirit -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto has plans for that.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, it is fortunate that you are aware of what I am talking about and I want to appreciate the role you have played. Whenever I approach you, you do not let me down. That is why you are known so well at Namboole and Nakivubo.

As I looked at the motion, I wish they had added one sentence - that much as we beat the Harambee Stars 1-0, before we reached that day, there is another wonderful job that the Cranes did and that was thrashing Rwanda by four goals. If they had not done this, we would not have reached the finals. I want to salute them once again. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports has a mandate in addition to education and it is not to supervise football alone; it supervises over 36 other sports disciplines. When I heard people talking, they were speaking as if it is only football. I entirely agree with Members that in as far as sports is concerned, much as we are getting this support, it is peanuts. Sports needs a lot of money if you are to enjoy it. 

Before the end of September 2009, I need about Shs 300 million for other sports disciplines minus football. You can see what we require in order to develop sports. We have put physical education sports infrastructure in place and it is going down to the grassroots and to the schools but we need money. That is how we can sustain the development of sports in this country. As members were saying, we need to have structures in place for sustainability purposes. 

It is true that the Cranes need a lot of money. They need preparation before you fly them out and they need to feed well so that at the end of it, we can be proud. I am happy that my fellow legislators have come to appreciate this. In the same spirit, that appreciation must be physical. In whatever committee you belong, when we talk about funding for sports, please assist us. 

When we talk about motivation for the players, we do not mean talking alone. We also mean going where they train as well as going to Namboole and Nakivubo. I am happy that the Speaker has been going there as well as a few members. I know them and I encourage the majority to come and enjoy the Cranes as they exhibit their talents. As I said, although it may seem that we are giving little, it is better to say you are giving something little but it is not covering all my problems. 

Briefly, let me remind this House; there was a statement made that there is a rumour that the Cranes are entirely sponsored by the federation. When Uganda played against Niger in May 2008, I spent Shs 37.686 million. Benin v Uganda in June cost Shs 65.6 million. Angola v Uganda in June cost Shs 42.3 million. Niger v Uganda in September cost Shs 120.477 million. Uganda v Benin in April 2008 cost Shs 37 million. Uganda v Libya in an international friendly cost Shs 37 million. Uganda Olympic team to Beijing cost Shs 192.477 million. The Fifth All Africa University Games, which took place at Makerere in Kampala in July 2008, cost Shs 200 million. World Kick Boxing Games in Seoul, South Korea in September 2008 cost millions. Education institutions also cost us a lot. In addition, we have been spending about Shs 5 million each on boxing, netball, volleyball and basketball. We have also spent Shs 3 million on chess, special needs sports -(Interjections)- I am just giving a picture. If you want the actual breakdown, that will be for another day. 

I know that this is not enough but just peanuts compared to the requirements that we need. Cranes alone need more than Shs 2 billion. I wanted to give this picture so that people can understand what little we have been doing and what is required. This does not mean that that is enough; it is peanuts. 

I am happy to mention that ever since I assumed this office, sports expenditure has increased from Shs 400 million to Shs 0.8 billion and now to Shs 1.7 billion minus administrative fees for the staff and what have you. There is still a long journey as I need about Shs 4 billion in order to feel that at least two disciplines have benefited. 

Having said that, there was a pertinent issue that was raised by hon. Lukwago. Of course there is need to have corporations the world over to partner with us. It is unfortunate about GTV because they have been doing a wonderful job for us. Last night I had a talk with Mr Mulindwa, the President of FUFA, on how best we can look for other corporate sponsors so that we bridge that gap as we need them. One member suggested what we are already doing in the ministry - that we should have some policy to deal with the corporate world so that they can continue supporting us. This is business. You must give them something in order for them to support you also. We need to develop it together because we have to bring it and you support it.

As I said, I just wanted to add an extra voice and congratulate the Cranes. My language is purely sports language; I am not politicizing the motion. Hon. Lukwago, I can assure you that the National Council of Sports Act, 1964 is under repeal and I welcome you to come and look at the draft and give your input. So far we have conducted more than two workshops with stakeholders to see that we come up with something that is modern and that we can appreciate. Nevertheless, there is no vacuum at the moment because there is a Physical Education Sports Policy, which we are using at the moment. 

I want to also make it clear that FUFA is not here illegally. If that were the case, FUFA would not be participating in all these competitions. It is legally constituted and is being honoured by international bodies.

Mr Speaker, hon. Kyeyago, the treasurer and former chairman of the organising committee of CECAFA, raised an issue of artificial turf. Less than a week ago, I met his colleagues and some Europeans. They were talking about these issues and we agreed on how they would be approached. In as far as the artificial turf is concerned, we said that we cannot exempt tax but we shall be the ones responsible for that portion of the taxes so that they seem as if they are being exempted. However, when it came to the constructor and businessman, we said we shall separate the two so that we can see how we can negotiate. The door is still open.  

With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I want once again to congratulate the Cranes and to salute all my colleagues who have supported this noble cause. I have not heard any voice contrary to the spirit of this motion. I want to see it being moved even in the process of making the budget. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Hon. Members, you have sufficiently debated the motion by the honourable member and congratulated our national team. Now it is my duty to put the question to the motion -

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Namayanja raised a matter of contributions and I do not know whether it was an amendment to the motion so that we pass it and deductions are made at source. If it was not, I beg to move the motion that an amendment be made to the motion that all of us contribute Shs 100,000 and deductions be made at source and it goes directly to the gallant Cranes.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the background of this suggestion came about in this way: hon. Beti Kamya, in her contribution suggested that we contribute Shs 20,000 per month for a year. She later said let us do it once by contributing Shs 100,000. That was an alternative to what hon. Beti Kamya had said. However, where does it go? Does it go to individuals or to FUFA? 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, FUFA has always has been there but there is a team of Ugandans who really put in their efforts and must be rewarded for that. This also includes the coaches, the management of the team and players themselves.

THE SPEAKER: You see, there could be a difference; is it to FUFA or to individuals?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, the cheque can go to FUFA because we cannot write 50 cheques. Maybe the treasurer of FUFA can advise us but I would imagine we give it to FUFA. The intention is for FUFA to distribute this money to the players.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the spirit of the motion is okay but we will tie the hands of the organisation if we went straight to say it should all go to the players. FUFA is an organisation and there are many clubs under FUFA. We have been told that we have the She-Cranes, the cricket team and others. Sometime back, we passed a similar resolution here to buy vehicles for the police and the vehicles were spread to the whole police force. Let us not tie ourselves. Let us make our pledge and commitment to deduct this Shs 100,000 per member to FUFA. FUFA will know how to distribute it. Thank you.

MR TANNA: Mr Speaker, I like the spirit in which we are agreeing on this. The administration of FUFA is present here. FUFA could be used as a conduit, but the intention of what hon. Beti Kamya brought up and what hon. Rose Namayanja has said was okufuwa - just giving a token of appreciation to the players who achieved this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  FUFA is an organisation and the players are the ones who got the cup for us. To promote motivation in all activities, not only football, you should remunerate people who have done well. In this case, we have heard about FUFA with their problems. They have not paid water bills and they can take this money to pay the water bills. If we agree that this money is supposed to go to the players and the coaches, then when it goes there they would know the amount and they will sit among themselves and distribute according to what we will have given. (Applause) I thank you.

MR BAKABBULINDI: Mr Speaker, I want to give information to my dear colleagues. The spirit is very good but you must be mindful that the administration of FUFA is what has made this happen. When you say that the money is going to the Cranes, I agree with you, but the cheque must be in the names of the administrators. We cannot look as if we do not trust them. You have heard that when CECAFA gave that contribution to FUFA, in its wisdom FUFA distributed the money to the players. That indicates to you that FUFA is very trustworthy. This is not the old FUFA we are talking about.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t we respect the structures that are there? We are talking about the national team and they have structures.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, just a small clarification. This motion that was brought here is also seeking the support of Parliament and directly government to promote sports. The other aspect which came as a by-the-way was an aspect that Members of Parliament, despite all this, appreciate what the Cranes have done and that Members of Parliament are willing to part with Shs 100,000 to the Cranes. The channel really does not matter but the intention and the purpose is quite clear - this contribution from Members of Parliament would go to the players, the team and the coaches as a motivating factor while we in Parliament would do our best through the budget process to see that government gives enough money for sports.

THE SPEAKER: So the money will go to FUFA. I put the question that a contribution be made and the money be given to FUFA.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now I put the question to the entire motion, including that of congratulating the Cranes.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. There is an important statement from hon. Wakikona but I think it should come tomorrow. Also, the Minister of Defence has told me he has a statement to make tomorrow. So tomorrow we shall process the committees plus that business and then other business that will be listed. I think this is the appropriate time to adjourn.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, following correspondences and consultations that have been going on, as the team captain of the Parliamentary Football Club, I would like our guests to wait a little bit. The Speaker of Parliament, through our Chairman of the Parliamentary Football Club, hon. Hood Katuramu, has requested me to request the team coach, the doctors and Uganda Cranes to join other Members of Parliament in the Speaker’s Bar on the third floor of this building before you leave this place. (Laughter) 

I will request the team to take this announcement very seriously and request the coach, Mr Williams, to relax a little because this is Parliament. We want them to be with the Speaker and other Members of Parliament on the third floor of this building. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 February 2009 at 2.30 p.m.)
