Tuesday, 1 February 2011

Parliament met at 11.38 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting and I thank you for finding time to come to attend to parliamentary business despite the fact that you have very busy programmes in your constituencies for the coming elections.

Hon. Members, you appreciate that some time last year, on December 17, Government tabled a Bill No. 24 of 2010 concerning the issue of traditional and cultural leaders and the object of the Bill was to operationalise Article 246 of the Constitution. When the Bill received the first reading, it was committed to two committees of this House; the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Committee on Gender especially as the Bill originated from the Ministry of Gender.

Subsequently, we had a meeting here and some members of the committee had complained that because of the busy programme they had with campaigns, they could not attend to committee work. We suggested that if this were the problem, we should consider the Bill after the elections.

I subsequently received a notification from the committee in writing that they wanted to do the business. It is not the work of the plenary or the Speaker to arrange business of committees. The programmes of committees are arranged by the committees themselves and it is not unusual for committees to sit during recess.  So, I said, “Well, if the committees are ready, I cannot say no.” 

Subsequently and apparently, the committee proceeded considering the Bill. I was away last week and a report was submitted to my office and when I came back, I found my copy. This was followed by the request by Government that this was an urgent matter that should be considered. Article 94(4)(a) of the Constitution provides that Government programmes should be given priority. Why a programme is urgent is not the duty of the Speaker to decide. So, when it is urgent, it is urgent and it is up to you to decide. The House was, therefore, convened today to consider that urgent business. 

It is not true that this House has been convened to pass or to consider and decide what to do with the business. You are free to make any decision. The decision could be that we accept the report of the committee and its recommendation and you proceed as suggested by the committee. The committee was commenting on a Bill – you are free to amend the Bill, you are free to accept the Bill as it is, you are free to say that the Bill should be thrown out. The Minister who submitted the Bill is free to say, “I am withdrawing.” 

But all these options can only be done in the House. These options cannot be done outside. The Minister cannot simply write to the Speaker saying, “I now want to withdraw.” He must make an application here and it is up to you to accept for him to withdraw or not. You are free, if you think the Bill is not okay, to move that the Bill be rejected. 

So, this is to give you an opportunity to take any of those options. Of course you have many positions expressed in the press. When the Bill was tabled, I received a number of presentations from various stakeholders. This included a position from Buganda Kingdom, Toro, Bunyoro and others. Surprisingly, this morning we are late in starting because I received a delegation led by the Kattikiro of Busoga on this same matter. He presented to me a petition on the particular subject this morning. So, I think hon. Members, feel free to handle this business as your conscience tells you. You are welcome.

Hon. Members, in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, we have Mr Tim Manarin, the Political Officer from the United States Embassy. We also have in the public gallery leaders from Makindye West constituency represented by hon. Kyanjo. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

11.49
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take note of your communication but there is a matter of national importance regarding the elections with particular concern to what was exhibited yesterday in the youth elections. With your permission, I would like to submit on that matter as well as a few others that have come up in your communication.

The youth elections that were held yesterday throughout the country put us in a very difficult position, taking note that this was the exercise conducted by the Electoral Commission. We had instances in Lwemiyaga County particularly in Burongo parish where the names of the nominated candidates did not appear when time for voting came up and it caused a lot of violence in Lwemiyaga. Judging by the way the Electoral Commission is handling issues of elections, I thought it should not skip your attention that if they are to proceed with this kind of arrangement, there is likely to be a muddled up exercise in future in regard to the presidential, parliamentary and other elections.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. The information I want to volunteer to my colleague is that these irregularities were experienced not only in Lwemiyaga but also in Makindye West. All youths who went to vote, first of all, found that the areas where they had been registered had been altered and the Electoral Commission took it upon itself to create new electoral areas in Makindye Division and the names of those who were supposed to vote were not tallying with their numbers on the voting cards. It is just a mess! It is an indication that there is no attention paid to some of us when we come here and warn the Commission. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, most surprising is the fact that even the nominated candidates who had been duly nominated - I have a particular case. The vice-chairperson for Rukoma was nominated and he had a copy of his nomination but at the time of voting, he was cancelled; his name was omitted and he was regarded as not being a candidate. When violence erupted, the de-enfranchised voters were the ones who were arrested and taken.

Could this House call the attention of the Electoral Commission to the extent that what we are seeing in the press - if we have the ballot papers being circulated anyhow and found in many hands - in the last by-election in Sembabule, we got ballot papers that were fully printed by the Electoral Commission but in private hands. I am drawing your attention to the fact that if we proceed in this manner, I am afraid this country cannot move any further with the Electoral Commission handling its business like it is. It is victimising the people -

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you my colleague for giving way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to pass over to the House in regard to the issue that my colleague is raising is to the effect that, even the symbols that appeared on the ballot papers yesterday were confusing to the voters.

In my district, for example, the ballot papers that were received had a big key, a small key, fingers almost reflecting the V-sign of the Forum for Democratic Change, the key had the Forum for Democratic Change, the small key - and these symbols were not explained to the voters. We are worried that if this is to be reflected in the main elections, our voters are bound to be misguided and it may cause chaos.

We are worried that the rigging has actually started very early. The rigging is already manifesting itself in the concluded elections that started yesterday. Could we be informed whether the Electoral Commission did really think about the implications of these symbols that appeared on the ballot papers and if these are the real symbols that will appear on the ballot papers of the elections of 18th and the subsequent elections?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, whereas my colleague has brought in the issue of rigging, I would like to regard it as gross mismanagement. Gross mismanagement in the sense that even the officials in Sembabule who were blacklisted and were not supposed to handle elections - and in that particular County of Burongo, the blacklisted officer was the one in charge of Burongo parish; he is called Mr Rwembundu. He had been blacklisted by the Electoral Commission.

To our surprise, those who had been indicted in the rulings of court and had been blacklisted have been posted once again as officials manning the exercise. Can we call the attention of Government to this if we are really to have a serious exercise? If we start by mismanaging mere youth elections, where we cannot allow the youths of this country to manage their own affairs and we have politicians, we have the policemen and we have everybody taking over the role of the Electoral Commission - could we be reassured that this country is in good hands, the Electoral Commission we have is competent, is capable and can move this country in the democratisation process? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, the issues raised are extremely important and I request the Attorney-General to examine them with the Electoral Commission and he is going to report to us tomorrow.

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek for guidance not in regard to the issue raised by hon. Ssekikubo but the matters you have raised in your communication on the question of a resolution that was taken by this august House that the issues concerning the Cultural Institutions Bill should be shelved until after the general elections.

That was a resolution taken by this august House but I gather from your communication that subsequently, your office liaised with the chairpersons of the committees and the proceedings went ahead. The guidance I am seeking is that if a resolution is taken by the august House, would it be appropriate and legally correct to be reversed by a committee in liaison with your office or it would also require a session of this nature to reverse it because that is what is on record, in our Hansard here; that it was a resolution of the entire House? In my opinion, it should have been a session of this nature -

THE SPEAKER: There was no resolution of this House arising out of complaints from members of the committee. It was an issue of the committee and as I have said; it is not this House to arrange programmes of the committee. I said if there is this problem in the committee, you rather deal with it after the elections. That is not a resolution; it was guidance. In any case, if they say the matter is urgent, you can reverse it if it is urgent. Apparently, the committee proceeded and that is why we have the report. So, you cannot say we are not dealing with the report because we had said, “This should go.” I mean, they re-arranged their programmes and I have said it is not the first time for committees to sit while we are on recess and for the committees themselves to arrange their programmes.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker for that guidance. But my opinion –

THE SPEAKER: And apparently, you participated in the proceedings.

MR LUKWAGO: Rt Hon. Speaker, I was expressing my concerns over this matter that when you pronounce yourself on any concerns raised in the House; it becomes the ruling of this House and it is binding on all of us here. That is what is on record. 

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sincerely, I would like to request the Prime Minister to guide us and inform this House why the Executive thinks this particular Bill is so critical and so urgent that without it, we cannot run as a country. I would like the Prime Minister to explain the urgency of this Bill that we have to debate it and possibly come to a conclusion. I would like to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you bring this when we come to that item? I thought we are still dealing with important matters as raised by hon. Ssekikubo and others. I think the item on the report is coming and that is when you will raise what you want to raise. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Attorney-General whether it would be procedurally right, to debate a Bill, which is unconstitutional because debating a Bill -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me!

MR SEBAGGALA: Yes, Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- I need your protection -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you see, following my communication, I think some Members had urgent business which they were raising. The item you are talking about has not been called out by the Clerk. Why don’t you wait?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want some clarification from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. For a while now, some members have been recruited in our villages and have been training. I would not have been bothered by their training but what perturbs me is that last night, in one of the villages in Kasilo County, Kadungulu sub-county, Kabulabula parish, Amoru village, a group of these boys who have been training under the name of crime preventers went in the company of the OC Station of Kabulabula Polling Station and with one notorious thug whom they have incorporated into the group called Aperu Zadok, attacked people in their drinking joints at around 8.00 p.m. and beat them up. Two are badly injured. 

I have been in touch with the GISO of Kadungulu sub-county and he has confirmed to me that they have got them. These people have been moved to the police post. I have talked to the DPC over this matter; but nothing seems to be done to apprehend the people who are involved in this level of torture of the people. 

It is not only in that village; even something that is connected to what hon. Ssekikubo raised is that a similar group in Pingire and Labo sub-counties went and chased the agents of all the other youth candidates in the elections yesterday. 

So, I would like to know from the Ministry of Internal Affairs what is going to happen, come 18th, if these people, the so-called crime preventers, after having just two weeks of training are already involved in this type of torture of the people? I remember, a month ago, one gentleman called Ongaria was killed in cold blood when one soldier with the police went to the same village. The story was covered. Good enough, I raised this with the Inspector-General of Police and the case is under investigation.

The people of Kasilo are concerned, especially at this time, with the level of indiscipline of some police officers and of some of these people who are called vigilantes who have just had that type of training in our villages. I want the Minister of Internal Affairs, to come and explain and tell the nation, tell the people of Kasilo what action is being taken and the motives of these people for torturing the people of Kasilo County and of this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues let me use this opportunity to inform this House how this whole exercise, of recruitment of crime preventers who at the same time will act was Special Police Constables for policing our polling stations when we come to voting on the 18th and thereafter, started. These people were recruited during a joint effort of the LCs and elders as well as the internal security organs within the districts -(Interjections)- I can hear colleagues saying, “No.” It could vary. Maybe we could have exceptions but this is the general rule:

These young men and young women were supposed to have been vetted by the LC Is right from the village as well as the internal security officers -(Interjections)

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. I just want to find out from you the guidelines you gave to the LCs during the recruitment procedure. How were they identifying these people for crime prevention activities? 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, let us get all the clarifications so that you can answer them. 

MR SEBULIBA: I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs. I am surprised he is saying that the LCs are aware and yet they are the same LCs we are running to MPs asking about the presence of strangers in their areas -(Interjections)- yes, it has happened! They have even gone further to say, “Is there curfew in certain areas like in Mulago II parish?” They are concerned; who are these people? What I am telling you is coming from the mouth of these officials and from the residents. Like my friend from Kasilo said, some of them have turned violent. We need an explanation. Where are the guidelines? How come that it is shrouded in mystery? At least we would have heard that certain people are coming in that area. Supposing we say these are terrorists? Because you keep on telling us to be keen in keeping security; and that political parties should not form militias. How different are these from militias in other parties?

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not seeking clarification from the honourable minister but I am only informing him. In some of the areas, like in Makindye Division, these persons were not vetted at all in a joint effort as you have enumerated. They were selected specifically using the office of the RDC, which was hijacked by individuals. I have reported to this House, close to 15 times, on this same matter and I call these people Interahamwe. 

The RDC of Makindye, the one who is now out, Lt Kayondo Mulowooza, is the one who organised these groups. He was conniving with one Movement cadre, the chairperson of one of the cells of the Movement, Mr Vincent Byabagambi, in Makindye West. 

These people are not impartial because they have a belonging and they do not keep it secret. They go around parading themselves and they call themselves, “cadre sharp”. They wear yellow. They talk yellow. They support yellow. If these are the people you are going to depend upon, I want to assure you, we must wait for violence and some of us are not simply going to hide under our beds. 

MRS NABILLAH SEMPALA: I would like clarification from the honourable minister because we have different LC I structures in Kampala - those that are acceptable to the people and those that were put up. So, which LCs were used? For example my zone, Katuuso, has four chairpersons and they were put up by the RDCs and we raised this matter in this House. So now, which number do you have and which one are you referring to?

MR ANGIRO: Thank you. I would like some clarification from the honourable minister in regard to this. In my constituency, I met them while they were undergoing training and when they stopped me, they asked me whether they could continue training and I said, “Yes, you continue training while we find out exactly how you will be passed out.” Three days later, the same group led by a one Otim Murefu rounded up people who were celebrating a marriage ceremony and arrested 13 people and beat one of them up very badly and they took away a bicycle. 

When I checked at the police post, at Ogur sub-county, I found that they were not even released to go out and act in that manner; and even when they returned with some of the six people they had arrested, there was no entry made in the police post book. So, I would like to find out, Mr Minister, because from the information I got and what I saw –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister of Security to convene a different meeting in your presence in the Chamber?

THE SPEAKER: They might be consulting each other. Please, wind up this subject.

MR ANGIRO: I am winding up. So, hon. Minister, when the constituents asked me during campaign time I explained what I saw and how the beating took place and I told the police to investigate. They have also asked me to go and make a statement. You should also remember that I called you when two of them went errant by arresting people who were inside their houses. I have failed to understand the role of these crime fighters. In my constituency, they are crime causers, and I do not know how we are going to curb these crime causers. 

One thing is obvious, when they found some of these people with FDC cards, they beat them up. I do not understand whether they were sent to look for those with cards and beat them up. I have failed to understand the role of these crime fighters in my constituency. The minister should clarify this to us and maybe give guidance as to how they should operate. Otherwise, they are a disaster in my constituency. Thank you.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also have to report a case from Aswa County, neighbouring my constituency, where youth that were mobilised by an FDC candidate from Aswa County raided my constituency in Apiria and beat up our population. They destroyed borehole wells and school property. The police made investigations and three arrests were carried out. 

I pray that you who are candidates do not incite the population against each other. Many of those reports may not be true but my case was reported to police. (Laughter)

12.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, with due respect, I thought the LCs are elected officials. If someone is called a local council chairperson and he is not elected, and you are accepting such a person in your area, then it is very unfortunate. 

If he is not acceptable, then we wait for elections and then boot her or him out and a new leader is elected; it is as simple as that.

I am sorry for Kasilo and other areas; if wrong elements have come through the sieve, it is not because it is intentional but I think it is part of our human failure as all of us leaders. As a ministry, the senior police management would not be able to know who is who at a given place. I would, therefore, request that if you have incidences of that type, let us know about it as quickly as possible so that we can take disciplinary and administrative action. I think that is the best way to solve these problems. 

We would like to have a force that is disciplined; a force that knows what it is supposed to do so that we go through this electoral process smoothly. Should we have indisciplined people in one area, let this not be that there is indiscipline everywhere. As you know, it is difficult to have all officers disciplined. 

My prayer to you colleagues is that where we have – the guidelines are very simple. As I said, the guidelines were very simple. The guidelines were that somebody with good character and within the community. And as I have told you, this was done. It might have varied from place to place but I have told you that at least in my area the LC Is, together with DISOs and the GISOs, were responsible for this exercise. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INSTITUTION OF TRADITIONAL OR CULTURAL LEADERS BILL, 2010

12.19
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Institution of Traditional or Cultural Leaders Bill, 2010” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded.

MR OPIO: Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to operationalise Article 246 of the Constitution on the institution of traditional or cultural leaders. 

The Bill seeks to provide for the existence of traditional or cultural leaders in the areas of Uganda in accordance with the Constitution, provide for their privileges and benefits and the resolution of issues relating to traditional or cultural leaders which have not been resolved in a community and for related matters.

Mr Speaker, the Bill has been thoroughly discussed by Cabinet and the sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and that of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I commend the Bill to the House. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a matter of procedure that before the chairpersons of the two committees to which this Bill was committed present the report, we as Members concerned, particularly, Lukwago as a member of Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I have not been offered any opportunity to participate in the proceedings leading to the drafting of that report.

It is only yesterday, after visiting your office at around 3 p.m., that I managed to access a copy and after going through this, I feel that as a Member, I should prepare a minority report -(Interjections)- and under rule 178 of our Rules of Procedure, any member or members dissenting from the opinion of the majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of the reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee. I need to emphasise this. The statement of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee. 

Sub-clause (2) provides as follows: “The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of the consideration of the committee report.” So, it is at the stage when a report of the committee is being considered that I am offered an opportunity to present a minority report which shall be appended to the parent report.

As I was informing this House, I am aware that the proceedings concerning public hearings which were conducted by the committee took place in three days. It was on 19th, 20th and 21st and thereafter, I was never invited for any meeting to go through the draft and, therefore, I have had no opportunity whatsoever to prepare a minority report. 

It is my humble prayer, Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 178, that I should be given the opportunity as required under the law, to prepare a minority report together with my colleagues who share the same opinions as I that the minority report be appended to the parent report and be read together as the rules require, because we are not aware of the circumstances under which the main report was written. We are not aware of the date and the place where the committee sat to draft that report and, therefore, we should be given that opportunity -(Interjections)- I would like to move a motion that this sitting be adjourned to another day, I should be given an opportunity together with my colleagues who share the same opinion, to prepare a minority report and the main report shall be read at the time when we resume. I do so pray, Mr Speaker. I beg to move. 

MR BALIKUDEMBE: Seconded. 

MR KABUUSU: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Chairman of the Committee, what do you say about what has been said?

12.25
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to give one small historical perspective about what my learned colleague, hon. Lukwago, has said.

Let me say that hon. Lukwago is a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and it is true that we held meetings that he has alluded to. Hon. Lukwago attended the first meeting and he raised some matters. Actually, he wanted us to delay consideration of this Bill. The committee did not agree with my colleague and at that point he chose to walk out of the committee [HON. MEMBERS: “Shame!”] and the committee proceeded to consider the Bill and on the three days he has mentioned when we met, notices were sent to all members to come and attend the meetings to consider the Bill and finally a report was drafted and considered by the committee [MR LUKWAGO: “When?”] On the last day! For hon. Lukwago to come at this stage when he had the opportunity to come to the committee and make his input and he chose -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, my boss the chairman is saying that on the first day of the sitting, that is 19th, I raised issues which were rejected by the committee and I walked out. In the first place, I would wish to set the record straight. [LT COL RWAMIRAMA: “Order.”] I am giving a background to –(Interruptions)

LT COL RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the Member a few minutes ago said he did not know where the meeting was held. It has come out clearly that he actually attended the meeting and made proposals. The Member is now coming back and engaging the House in irrelevancies. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: No, this need not go into an issue of order. He has made a statement that he did not know the venue where the committee sat. Now he has said he attended the meeting and he raised an issue which was not taken up. So, it is up to you to decide on what is what. (Laughter)

MR LUKWAGO: I would like to set the record straight. The day of the sitting was to conduct public hearings. The meeting that I am talking about was about the consideration of the views received to prepare a report. The practice is very clear: after conducting public hearings, the committee convenes a meeting where a draft report is considered. Sometimes we even go for retreats to consider the views and memoranda received. 

THE SPEAKER: Why did you think the venue changed from the original one where you had gone?

MR LUKWAGO: I got a written notice for the first meeting and it specifically indicated two days of 19 and 20th to get the views of the public and cultural institutions. I remember we talked to the ministers of Bunyoro Kingdom, and Tooro Kingdom. We have never received any notice of a meeting thereafter for us to come and consider the views received and prepare a report. So, where was this report prepared from? How was it considered and where was it signed from?

MR TASHOBYA: It is true on some instances the committee has had retreats to consider reports. We did not have the funds to organise those retreats. We worked within the timeframe we had. Hon Lukwago chose to abscond and leave the meeting. The meetings were held for two days and we considered the draft after. I do not know what precedent hon. Lukwago is trying to set where Members choose to absent themselves from committees and come to ask for permission to write minority reports when they had opportunity to present their views in committees.

12.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, you have called Parliament for a specific purpose. What is happening now is that we are sitting at the time when the country is going through the presidential and parliamentary campaigns and so the time we spend here is very politically costly. There are Members in this House who do not want this Bill and they would want to waste time. Let us do what you called us for.

MR KYANJO: A number of Members in this House went through their own party primaries and were successful to represent their parties and others are standing as independents. So, is it in order for a minister to come here and rubbish a whole House that we are wasting time here?

THE SPEAKER: I think the term which the minister used normally means that if somebody wants to derail you, they just talk without ceasing.

12.36
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): This Bill was referred to two committees. Which of the two committees drafted the report? I think your mandate was to handle the Bill in its original form, submissions were made and the minister concerned came up with amendments. Were submissions made considering the changes made by the minister or not? It is now causing a lot of confusion.

THE SPEAKER: I think the best way to handle this is to have the report presented then you can move to have it rejected on those grounds. We have not received the report now.

12.38
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): When I am on this Floor, I look at ladies and gentlemen who are civil in character. I am always dismayed by the sort of character that we display on the Floor of Parliament. With all due respect to hon. Tashobya who is the chairman of the Committee of legal and Parliamentary affairs, he is talking about hon. Lukwago and all his history. Right now, with all his history, we are not here to recollect his history. What we want is to lay before you a bona fide claim. Believe you me, it was clearly highlighted after 6 December that all of us were going to participate in the general elections. And that is the benchmark. Like it was clearly set out in the CHOGM report, where people did not have such a hearing – what we call for right now – let us sit down as a committee. What have we got to lose? It is only civil and appropriate that we be heard. That is the benchmark – what shows that we are different from the people out there? 

We are not here for ego-fights; that is not the trend we should follow as colleagues. It is not all about ego – that the government is going to do this and it has to be done. Let us sit down; we are hon. Members of Parliament so let us carry that class. There is nothing – hon. Aggrey Awori you have been around for all – please, just let me deliberate. Please! All we want right now, my brothers and sisters – legislators of the greater Uganda. It is such a simple thing; let us go back to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, look at the recommendations that were set and like hon. Lukwago has highlighted rule 178, we as Members want to present a minority report, and this minority report has got to be a facet to the report.

Mr Speaker, many Members of Parliament might not know that the hon. Speaker took me to school when I was still a minor. He used to drive me to school. I want to carry that respect before my father because when I sat with him in his office, he told us that he would at one point stay this debate until after the general elections. Believe you me this is exactly what we expected. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is a disjointed debate because what he is saying is different from what was the issue. It is disjointed and I do not know how we can co-ordinate a disjointed debate. The issue was that of hon. Lukwago, who said he wanted to write a minority report but was not able to. That was the matter we were to exhaust but now you are bringing in other things.

Anyway, let me say this: sometimes it becomes a problem when the normal procedure is not followed - when the important issues of the House are thought to be discussed in the corridors or in the press conferences. If you, hon. Lukwago, had a problem of getting the report from the chairperson – and I had already made a ruling in the past; that a member of a committee is entitled to make a minority report and to be facilitated by looking at the report because it is made after disagreeing with the majority report. I said this a long time ago and it is in our Hansard. I can say that I only heard – because I read all the newspapers that are published everyday – that you were saying that you were going to make a minority report.

If you had a problem with accessing – this was in the newspapers –(Interjections) no, no, listen! Hon. Nambooze, you are a new Member here. You should know how to conduct yourself. (Laughter) The way you conduct your rallies is not how we conduct a plenary. (Laughter) Please, take that to your rally, otherwise, I will eject you. If you do not behave, I will eject you from the House! (Laughter) You are new and you should start learning. (Laughter) Hon. Nambooze, please start behaving.

So, what you should have done, hon. Lukwago, is to contact the Office of the Speaker, saying, “I am having a problem accessing the report and yet I want to do something with it.” Then officially the Speaker would contact the chairperson and ask him why he is not giving you access to the report. You only came yesterday and told me you had not seen the report but I had seen the information in the newspapers that you intended to write a minority report about one and a half weeks ago. You should have contacted my office or that of the Clerk and you would have been assisted. But you are entitled to write a minority report.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the chairperson, I only got information that there would be a special sitting to consider this Bill over the weekend. I got an SMS from the PRO office. And yesterday I took trouble to come to your office with hon. Kyanjo and raised my concerns.

THE SPEAKER: What I am saying is that since you had announced this one and half weeks ago that you intended to write a minority report but were unable to get access to the report from the committee, you should have come to me then – because you are entitled to a copy of the report. This is what I am telling you.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I only got to know that there would be a special sitting to consider the report on Saturday – that is when I got the SMS – and Parliament offices were closed. All along I did not know that there was a report. I immediately came to your office to pick a copy and to notify you that in case there are objections I intended to write a minority report. This I brought to your attention in the presence of hon. Kyanjo. I recall you picked the phone and called Mr Bakwega, who indicated that my copy was in the pigeon hole. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, you cannot decide to write a minority report unless you have seen the major report. You cannot. You only do it after reading or considering the report and you have an objection. But without having seen it, what minority report were you going to write? But what you can do is to raise a procedural matter here that the report was written without having given opportunity to members of the committee to participate. That is a different issue.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I earlier on stood on the matter of procedure and moved a motion. I would wish to move it again – that in all fairness, now that I got the report yesterday in the late afternoon, and under the procedures here, a minority report can only be read together with a parent report; it can’t be read separately and I didn’t have enough time since yesterday to prepare that minority report.

Therefore, I beg to move that the House gives me that opportunity under rule 178 of the Rules of Procedures, to prepare a minority report that shall be appended to the parent report and that the House adjourns to another day so that the two reports can be considered. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR RUKUTUNA MWESIGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We formulated these rules to guide the way we conduct business in this House. We do not just conduct business in a haphazard manner. The rules are very clear and must be adhered to. The rule that talks about minority reports is very clear; it is rule 178 of the Rules of Procedures. I want to read it very slowly so that my colleague, the learned Shadow Attorney-General, can listen. It says: “Minority Report: Any Member(s) dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his/her or their dissent and the statements of the reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee ….” 

This rule presupposes that the Members had attended the committee meetings, but had dissented. If you opted to walk – abscond - what reasons are you going to give? On what basis are you going to prepare the minority report?
Mr Speaker, I want us to take an analogy –(Interruptions)– of court proceedings –(Interruptions)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, with due respect to my senior colleague in the profession –(Interjections)– and in age, of course, it is obvious he is alleging that I never participated in the proceedings, but I have said here that in as far the proceedings of conducting – I have said this and I am on record that on 19th I participated in the hearing and I did say that there was no meeting to consider a report. I remember challenging the chairperson of the committee to produce minutes as proof that that meeting ever took place.

So, is the minister in order to say or to insinuate that I boycotted a meeting where a report was considered when actually I am on record having said clearly that there was no notice to call for any meeting to consider that report; when the chairperson has not adduced evidence, by way of a copy of the notice, that he ever convened a meeting to consider that report?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the minister was just reading the rule and trying to explain it to you and that was according to what has been said here that you stormed out of the committee meeting when the issues that you had raised were rejected; that is on record. Hon. Members, there is a motion by hon. Lukwago –(Interjections)– if any one of you wants to make a contribution - yes, hon. Kawanga.

MR KAWANGA: I thank you. Mr Speaker, hon. Lukwago has made a presentation here and indicated that he attended one meeting, but made an allegation that as far he is concerned, there was no meeting called to consider the report that is being presented before House now. So, one would expect that there would be minutes of the proceedings of all the deliberations that took place prior to the authoring of this report. He has said that there was no notice calling him to deliberate on this report and challenged the chairman of the committee to lay a copy of the notice on Table, if it exists.

In light of all that, it would only be prudent that the minutes of the proceedings of this committee up to the time when this report was produced, are made available. I am saying this because I have gone through this report and realised that this is one of the rare reports that bears no date as to when, for example, the deliberations were held, whether they were signed and where it was discussed from. So, they become issues that should be resolved otherwise it will look like we are stampeding this whole House and perhaps the nation at large to consider a matter, which should follow the due process. 

Mr Lukwago should be given an opportunity, like any other members of the committee, to present his minority report. We should have all the indications to show that proper procedures were taken before the decision of having this report was reached. If that is not done, it would look like Mr Lukwago is being blocked from making his presentations and perhaps there are other committee members who would like to add their views to the minority report. So, is it possible, for the chairperson of the committee to make available to this House, the minutes of all the deliberations that took place prior to writing this report?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kawanga, that is why I said that we first let the report be tabled because the minutes are usually tabled after the report has been presented to the House. So, what we should do now is to be patient enough to allow the chairman of the committee to present the report with the minutes before we start criticizing it. Otherwise, as of now, we don’t have the report. But in any case, there is a motion and I think we have to decide on it. So, I put the question – 

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the claim by hon. Lukwago is a matter of rights but the way we are proceedings seems we are going to vote on the right of hon. Lukwago to present a minority report. Are we proceeding properly?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is the one who moved that motion; it is not my motion. He moved a motion for a decision and we have to decide. So I put the question. We are wasting a lot of time – I am putting the question – please no! You have heard hon. Lukwago’s motion. He wants to table a minority report and because of what he has said he wants an adjournment – which procedure? Quote the rule! Listen – no way, Hon. Kikungwe – 

MR KIKUNGWE: We have before set precedents of certain situations. I presented in this House a minority report on the lifting of term limits and the procedure was very clear that the minority report had to be appended to the main report. This has been the procedure and the practice. If we allow - 

THE SPEAKER: Please, sit down. Hon. Lukwago’s motion intends to exactly do that because if you allow him and we adjourn – avail the report then he will go and make his report. That is why it is important we decide in his favour or otherwise. That is the purpose. I am putting the question to the motion that those in favour of hon. Lukwago’s motion for purposes of enabling him - do you want to use hands? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay. 

Now those in favour of hon. Lukwago’s motion to suspend the proceedings to enable him present the minority report, put up your hand. Please, count.

(Members voted by show of hands)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR OKUPA: I know that the Attorney-General is the legal advisor to this country. When you put the question that those in favour of the motion should raise their hands, those in favour raised and those against also did raise but the Attorney-General did not raise his hand and yet he is the author of the Bill. Is he in order to do that?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the results are as follows: abstentions are three, in favour 24 and against 106. Motion lost. 

However, the fact that this motion has been lost does not mean that hon. Lukwago will not be able to express his views on the report. You stand and I will give you an opportunity. Now will you table the report?

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hold on for a while. I think he is raising a procedural point.

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: I am saying something not only as a Member of this House but also as Secretary-General of the Democratic Party where my two members on this committee, hon. Erias Lukwago and hon. Balikuddembe Mutebi who are members of the Democratic Party and the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs have wished to make a minority report in this House and because of the numbers, you have suffocated them. You have denied them the right to make a minority report – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should develop a way of behaving and accept because you see hon. Lukwago is the one who moved the motion and when you move a motion, we have to pronounce ourselves on your motion. Or if you thought that you need not be allowed, it is your right and you do not move the motion. I have heard – are you voting on somebody’s right? No. We are voting on somebody’s motion according to our rules. (Applause) Hon. Tashobya would you move -

1.10
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us give Entebbe Municipality a chance. What is the guidance for?

MR KAWUMA: I thank you. Earlier on in your communication, my colleague made a reaction to your communication where she requested the Prime Minister to explain to this House the urgency of this Bill and why it cannot wait beyond elections and then you said, “Let us go on to the next item, that will be clarified.”

Secondly, before we proceed with the report, hon. Lukwago alleged that the so called committee meeting did not take place and he requested that the chairperson lays on the Table the notice inviting Members for that meeting which he has not. We are likely —

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought you have been following the procedure. The procedure of tendering the minutes of a meeting is that they come when the chairman is presenting or has presented the report. He is doing exactly that. Let us wait. If he misses the point, then we shall find out. Hon. Tashobya, would you take the Floor?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Legal -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: You do not have to agree on everything. You can disagree. Let hon. Tashobya present the report. 

MR TASHOBYA: This is a report -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Present the report.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, this is a report of the committees on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Institutions -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hold on. When you say procedure – hon. Member for Entebbe, if you want a procedure, you spot the Rule of Procedure. Stand up.

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Member for Entebbe has the Floor.

MR KAWUMA: The procedural matter I want to raise is that the practice of this Parliament -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, protect me. The practice of this Parliament is that any Bill introduced in Parliament is circulated in Parliament either in the pigeon holes and where the copies are not enough, we are requested to mention the same at the reception. Now we are working on assumptions that we did receive the first Bill not even the report. I personally did not find it in my pigeon hole and not even at the reception.

THE SPEAKER: Would you present the report, please?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the committees on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders Bill, 2010.

Introduction

The Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders Bill, 2010 was read for the first time -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not use this House as a theatre. We finished the issue, you have decided on it and you see. You will be free after he has presented the report to attack the report. This is not a baraza meeting [MR SEBAGGALA: “Mr Speaker, you told me I would come in at this stage.”] You wait, let him present then you come in. I will give you the first -

MR TASHOBYA: The Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders Bill, 2010 was read for the first time on -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will be free after he has presented the report. If you do not want to debate it, you can again move a motion that give us time to consider- that will be different but let us get the report.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, the Institution of Traditional or Cultural Leaders Bill, 2010 was read for the first time on 17 December 2010 and referred to the Committees on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Gender, Labour and Social Development in accordance with Rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament –

MR KYANJO: Guidance.

THE SPEAKER: There is no substance in your seeking guidance. There is no substance because you do not have it.

MR TASHOBYA: To operationalise Article 246 of the Constitution on the institution -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: I have said, no.

MR TASHOBYA: On the Institution of traditional or cultural leaders. The Bill seeks to provide for the existence of traditional and cultural leaders in any area of Uganda in accordance with the Constitution.

To provide for the recognition of traditional and cultural leaders by the government and their privileges and benefits.

To provide for the resolution of issues relating to traditional or cultural leaders which have not been resolved in any community and for related matters.

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committees discussed the Bill with the following stakeholders:-The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs -(Mr Kyanjo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Has it got any substance? Make it.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we come in this House, we deliberate with a view that if we do not agreed on a matter, you give us your guidance. It looks like we are disagreeing with the way we are proceeding. I am begging that we suspend the proceedings for five minutes so that we sit with you and you give us the guidance.

THE SPEAKER: I give guidance in the House. What guidance do you want?

MR KYANJO: No, Mr Speaker, it is not the first time you have allowed the House to go and consult.

THE SPEAKER: What guidance do you want?

MR KYANJO: On the way we are proceeding.

THE SPEAKER: What guidance do you want?

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, the minority report of the Member is not present as we debate now and it will not be of any relevance -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kyanjo, I have said that after the report has been tabled, you may say that we need time to go and scrutinise - that will be understandable but let the report be officially tabled and then you seek -

MR KYANJO: I concede, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Latif Sebaggala, what is your point?

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The guidance I am inquiring from you is that on 17th November, the Attorney-General hon. Kiddhu Makubuya wrote to His Excellency, the President telling him that the Bill is unconstitutional. I want to quote the letter. Are we procedural right to debate a Bill which is unconstitutional?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Latif Sebaggala, that is irrelevant at the moment. What you will do is listen. After the report has been tabled, you will be free to raise that issue. Maybe the report has covered that. I do not know. Let us receive the report and then later you come in. Do not fear hearing the report.

MR TASHOBYA: The committee also received written memoranda from the following stakeholders: Bishops of the Anglican Church of Uganda in Buganda, Embuga ya Ikumbania (Bagwere Cultural Union), and Buganda Kingdom and other institutions continued to submit their memoranda after the committee had closed public hearings.

Observations

The committee observed that: 
1. 	Article 246 of the Constitution restricts traditional or cultural leaders from joining or participating in -(Interjections)- partisan politics.
2. 	In clause 3(2), the committee observed that the process of establishment of the institution of traditional or cultural leaders in an area should be in accordance with the culture, customs and traditions or wishes and aspirations of the people to whom it applies.
3. 	On the issue of extending benefits to other cabinet members of the traditional or cultural institution, the committee noted that the benefits spelt out under Schedule III of the Bill are for the traditional or cultural leader. However, the proposal of extending these benefits to other officials may have an effect on the Consolidated Fund.
4. 	Disputes regarding the procedure of installation should be handled by a council of elders, clan leaders or a representative body chosen and approved by the community in accordance with traditions, customs and norms of disputes or conflict resolution pertaining to that community and finally, the courts where those mechanisms fail as provided for under clause 16 of the Bill 
5.	The element of vicarious liability should apply to the institutions and not the leader.
6. 	Traditional and cultural leaders shall be gazetted by the minister before they can receive the benefits provided for under the Bill.
7. 	In some of the traditional or cultural institutions, the overall leaders, such as the paramount chief are elected from amongst the many clan heads on a rotational basis. Hence, whoever is elected enjoys the benefits and privileges accorded to traditional or cultural leaders.
8. 	The Bill does not prohibit traditional or cultural leaders from interacting with or travelling to foreign countries but they should operate within the guidelines provided by the Government. 

Finally, the committee recommends that the Institution of the Traditional or Cultural Leaders Bill, 2010, be passed into law subject to the following amendments.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. You asked for the minutes.

MR TASHOBYA: Rt Hon. Speaker, I have the pleasure of tabling the minutes, the document of the meetings and the documents that were submitted to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Members, the committee has submitted its report and the minutes of the meetings that gave rise to the report.

1.22
MR HUSSIEN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker for guiding us through this rather stormy meeting. The report of the chairperson does not mention the letter of the Attorney-General of Uganda. In the letter of the Attorney-General of Uganda to the President, he warned of a danger of attempting to amend Article 246 by an ordinary Bill. The Constitution is clear that if you amended Article 246 of the Constitution just using a Bill, we are committing treason.

We were informed that there were amendments, which were smuggled into the parent Bill as proposed. The report has not indicated whether this was a false or accurate allegation.

We continue to think that the timing of this Bill is inappropriate and this is galvanised by the fact that the author of the original Bill changed his mind and redrafted this Bill, altering it substantially. Now, it looks like we are debating or dealing with two Bills at the same time. 

We went and consulted our people regarding the original Bill. We have not been able to go and consult them on this new Bill. We heard a rumour that many of the contents of the new Bill originated from the President. We were not given the opportunity in a private form or in a public way to comprehend these amendments to the original Bill, both of which were generated from the same source.

Besides, it is difficult for us to continue with the debate right now as has been the practice since the report came just yesterday. Many of us are not lawyers and it is not easy for us to comprehend these issues in such a short span of time. This House has for a long time, been able, under your guidance, to allow Members to go and first comprehend the reports and two, consult further on new ingredients incorporated into the Bill.

I also heard in the report that Buganda Kingdom submitted views. I am not here on behalf of Buganda; I am here in the name of understanding what happened and saying, it is not true that Buganda formally tendered any document to the committee. 

One, I beg that you allow us time to go and comprehend this Bill, the new Bill and two, you allow us time to go and consult our people whom we had consulted on the old Bill. Since it has substantially been changed, it will only be prudent and in order, to give us that time.

Lastly, I wish to plead with you, under the rules of natural justice, that hon. Lukwago be given the opportunity to write his minority report. When you summon us the next time, it could be a day after tomorrow, he comes along with that minority report and we come with our consultations to contribute positively. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS NAMABIDDE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance on rule 177(1)-

THE SPEAKER: Rule what?

MS NAMABIDDE: Rule 177(1) in our Rules of Procedure-(Interjections)- it reads: “Debate on a report of a Committee shall take place at least three days after it has been laid on the Table by the Chairperson or the Deputy Chairperson or a Member nominated by the Committee or by the Speaker.” 

THE SPEAKER: Now, what guidance do you want from me?

MS NAMABIDDE: Mr Speaker, I propose that you give us time to internalise the report and we debate after three days as stated in the Rules of Procedure -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: You quote the rule. (Laughter) 

PROF. APOLO NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, as you know this is a period when Members are campaigning. I am, therefore, suggesting that we suspend that rule –(Interjections)- yes, because hon. Members of Parliament are campaigning. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is asking us to suspend the rule but he is not quoting it. Which rule is he using for suspending the rule that has been quoted clearly by my sister, hon. Namabidde? Is he in order to ask us to suspend without quoting any rule? I think we should go by the rules. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the rule has been read, that is rule 177(1), that debate on a report comes after three days. The hon. Leader of Government Business, I think, is quoting the rule – he has to move a motion for a suspension of a rule and when you do that you have to give reasons why there has to be a suspension.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: I wish to be guided before the motion is put. At the beginning of the debate I did ask and I wanted to be helped by the Prime Minister to guide this House on the matter of urgency relating to this Bill. Mr Speaker, you did guide that I should be patient and wait until the report has been tabled. I patiently sat there waiting; the report was tabled and I thought you would request the Prime Minister to brief the House on how urgent this Bill is to the extent that we should even be forced to suspend some Rules of Procedure of this House so that we Table the Bill. Can I still be guided on the urgency of this Bill to the extent that we cannot wait and discuss it after consultations? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the first place hon. Namabidde has pointed out a rule in our procedure that debate comes after three days. That means if we have to debate this report, it has to come next week. Now, what do you say about this?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, when you are answering that also take into account what has been said that Members want to consult their people about the new developments in the law. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I wanted first of all, to mention that we can suspend rule 177(1) by rule 14. Now the question is: what is the urgency? The urgency is that during elections some people are misusing the traditional leaders. For example, hon. Bidandi Ssali, a presidential candidate advised Mulwanyamuli ajje Kabaka mu campaigni to remove the –(Interjection) - wait a minute, I am still clarifying. He said –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: I can see the Prime Minister, a professor who has been in this House for a long time, bringing something – I don’t know whether it is a newspaper or a leaflet but he has not told us; all of a sudden he mentions the name Bidandi Ssali, Mulwanyamuli, in manner which is not connected at all. Is the Prime Minister in order to read something which is anonymous and mentioning names of individuals who are not here; and to bring that leaflet as if it is authentic? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to tell us the document from which you are making the quotation and tender it?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you. I refer to Bukedde of Sunday, 07 November 2010 and I read page 2 where he said and I quote – I shall translate it in English: “Tuwulidde wano omukulu oyo byeyasinzidde e Buddu n’ategeeza nga bwewaliwo omuntu omukulu ennyo atasobola kulinnya kadaala kabyabufuzi eyamusindise anonyeze Besigye obululu. Bidandi -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, we all know the language of this House is English and if anyone is to read anything in a language other than English, it must carry a translation and not for him to translate. We cannot rely on his translation because he is not an expert in linguistics. So, is the minister in order to read something in a different language when the language of debate in this House is English with no text from experts translated into the language of this House? Is the minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think he has said he has a translation which he is going to make. Do not suffocate information. Let us get it and he should give us the English version.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you -(Interjections)- No! “Bidandi yabadde mu distrikiti eya Lwengo nga anonya obuwagizi.” What hon. Bidandi Ssali was saying was this, that the former Kattikiro of Buganda had said, “I have come to convey to you a major message of a person who cannot appear to convey the message,” and then hon. Bidandi Ssali -(Interjections)- urged Mulwanyamuli not to involve the Kabaka in politics. I lay it on the Table. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, rule 177(1) was read to us. Do you have a reason to depart from it? That is the question. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament are busy campaigning and therefore I move that we use rule 14 to suspend 177(5) so that we may proceed with the Bill. I beg to move. 

1.42
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, National Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had stood earlier on a procedural note when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister presented and read news in this House yet under our rule 62, newspapers are not allowed in this House. So, I would like to move that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister withdraws that newspaper -(Interjections)- because it is not a public document. And with due respect to the motion that has been moved to continue with the debate, we do not have rule 177 as a formality that we just use it but it is for a purpose to orient members of the process that we are going through to internalise the laws that we are passing. 

This is a very important law in this country and we do not need to rush it at all. Three days are not so many. Mr Speaker, we are Members of Parliament until May this year and we can even sit here for a month to debate issues that concern our nation! We are paid mileage for that very work. Mr Speaker, let us do our work as Members of Parliament. Three days are not very many. Let us abide by the rules this Parliament has pronounced itself on. Let us set a precedent that will be good for all the lawmakers in this country. I would like to say, with due respect, whether it is urgent or not urgent, let us follow the procedure that we have set in this Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, as I have said, three days would take us to next week. 

1.44
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was listening attentively to the arguments raised by hon. Erias Lukwago. I personally was not convinced that we were ready to proceed with the Bill but now I would like to urge my colleagues on this side and also the Leader of Government Business, yes there is this urgency but then we should have the leeway within which we can explain ourselves. Now, why are we even suspending the three days rule which we can effectively do if we have the commitment that we are exhibiting right now? So, I would plead with the Leader of Government Business to reconsider the motion and if it were in good faith, consultation is prime in our legislation process. 

That is one aside: let us not appear to be having a bad motive in this law. Let us come with open hands and once the rule has been brought to our attention it is incumbent upon this House to retain some modicum of decency and - 

THE SPEAKER: What would be the convenient date next week to comply with the rule?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Tuesday, Mr Speaker, would be okay. It would even put hon. Lukwago on board. 

1.45
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Mr speaker, I think we are also concurring with motions and counter motions but what is coming out of the debate is that we need time and I think we can allow time for us to consult and for the chairperson to go and put his minutes in order because that was an issue that was raised here. Also, we will then have the due process of our rules of procedure followed. 

So, I think we can agree on the time that we can give ourselves so that we can go back and consult and also our colleague can have ample time to make his minority report. I think that would be good, Mr Speaker, for this House and for the Bill. Thank you.

1 .46
MR MOSES KABUUSU (Independent, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether this would be a motion. You will still guide me. Hon. Lukwago had earlier on intimated that the report - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are no longer on that matter. We are on a matter raised by hon. Namabidde which is our rule. We are not talking about what is here and so making reference to another motion which had been disposed of earlier is not relevant here. Although of course if we allow this it will give him time but let us deal with the rule here. 

MR KABUUSU: Mr Speaker, I had wanted to throw out that report of the committee basing on rule –

THE SPEAKER: You see now, hon. Member, we do it by debating. You will throw it out because you will debate and say you will throw it out. Hon. Namabidde is saying that you sleep on this and then after three days you come to debate and that is when you will raise what you want to raise. Is it okay?

1.48
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me record admiration for your patience and for your resilience. Those of us who have lived in this country and have seen this country go down the drain get concerned when we are about to make mistakes again. You see, we have a saying in my language that a bull which has not seen it, licks the axe. I can hear you heckling the destiny of a country which cannot be heckled. Sometimes I wonder whether the quality of some of us deserves to be here.

MRS SEMPALA: Is it in order for the hon. Minister to start analysing the quality of the Members of Parliament and question it when he is part of us?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members I think that some of these things should be overlooked and we proceed with the substance.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I appeal to hon. Members that we look at what is at stake and we handle it with the urgency it deserves. The Prime Minister has quoted a rule and it is supported by another rule that when the conditions demand a suspension to enable a House to do business, that happens. There are some of us in this House who are looking for every opportunity for this Bill not be discussed and yet they are free to walk out of the House and leave us to do business. I think although we are all here, we are not the same quality.

1.53
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): This House is on record to have set a precedent on how we have always handled reports despite rule 171 where We have always tabled reports and proceeded to debate the immediately after. Taking into account what the hon. Prime Minister has said, I think that we should proceed with the motion that has been tabled.

1.53
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, I have no doubt that you are the chief custodian of our rules which many of us are quoting. The rule to suspend so many of the rules is known, as quoted by the Prime Minister. This is a Government Bill and we have been called at critical and crucial time to come here and discuss this Bill. For some of our colleagues to play gymnastics and we succumb to them is not prudent. I do not think that we should lose the opportunity when Members have already sacrificed their time. Imagine a Member who has driven from Kaabong to come here and is being delayed by people who come from the vicinity of this Parliament. I want to call upon your indulgence and we discuss this Bill. The Bill can even be amended after passing it.

MR KYANJO: It is not the fault of some of us who come from constituencies nearby Parliament. The Government of the Republic of Uganda sponsored this Bill at a time when we were involved in campaigns. It is hypocrisy of the highest order to stand and parade that as a legitimate excuse. Is hon. Guma in order to parade those rather useless arguments before you, Mr Speaker, for consideration?

1.50
MS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): I think this Bill should be important for all of us and I think the time factor should also be important for all of us. The Prime Minister has just told us why there is urgency to debate this Bill. It is important for this nation to have stable campaigns. There are some people who are using traditional institutions to destabilise the campaigns. We have not even given ourselves an opportunity to try to debate this report. Some Members of this House have chosen to start saying that this report should not be debated. If members in this House care about what is happening in this country then we should agree to debate this Bill such that we can then go back to the campaigns.

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the Prime Minister – you know these are some of the issues that raise other people’s sentiments – the newspaper he read was saying the Kabaka is being dragged into politics. Is this Bill, therefore, targeting the Kabaka of Buganda? This is the clarification I want to get from you, Mr Prime Minister. You plainly put it that it is the reason you are rushing to have this Bill debated and passed today. Is this Bill targeting the Kabaka of Buganda?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: This Bill covers the entire country; it is not targeting any traditional leader. The example I gave was an example which was mentioned by one of the presidential candidates. We are not targeting any traditional leader and you know it.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, earlier on, hon. Mariam Nalubega, raised an issue of this document which was laid on the Table and under our rules, it is not acceptable. And you made a ruling that it should be withdrawn. Is it in order for us to continue debating when this document has not been withdrawn by the Prime Minister? Is it in order – when the document is still on the Table here, contrary to our rules?

2.01
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I think Members should know that we care about the country that is why we have come here. I have heard some say or imply that we do not care about the country. I do not come from the vicinity of Kampala, as hon. Guma says. But we came here and I am ready to sacrifice and come back here next week. (Applause) That shows the level of our care and that we can sacrifice for the good of the country. 

Statements have been made here that some cultural institutions – I belong to one – are destabilising the campaigns. I need a clarification, which cultural institution is that? Is it the one of Emorimor, Kyabazinga or Kabaka? Can the Government clarify who is destabilising the campaigns more than the so-called crime preventers that we had debated on earlier here?

We have also heard – I wish the Prime Minister had quoted the New Vision which had stated that the Prime Minister of one of the institutions in Western Uganda was campaigning for the NRM and President Museveni. But he selectively decided to quote hon. Bidandi Ssali. I think we must be objective in debating these matters. We had a case here which was more important, to me, than this Bill – the issue of the Supplementary budget, but we suspended and we were called back here and we passed it. What is more important than not having money for Government to run? Isn’t that more important than this Bill? Here we are asking for only three days and we are ready to sacrifice.

So, Mr Speaker, as the rules state, and you have come to a conclusion that we can come back here on Tuesday, let us adjourn; we go and catch up and on Tuesday we come back here. I drove five hours to reach here; I have sacrificed and am ready to sacrifice again. Thank you.

2.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank my colleagues for their submissions. My name is Ruth Nankabirwa, Member of Parliament representing Kiboga District. I am a former member of the Constituent Assembly and therefore I participated in whatever is contained in the Constitution of Uganda.

I remember the debate then which made us put Article 246 in the Constitution of Uganda. Therefore, I have been taking this Bill very seriously. It is unfortunate that we have been caught up by time. As a member of Cabinet, I know that Government has been confronted with a lot of important matters to discuss in Parliament. Therefore, this would not have been the time to table this Bill – it would have been yesterday because the reason why we put Article 246(3)(e) is to make sure that we caution those traditional leaders who thought about joining or participating in partisan politics.

History repeats itself and Article 246(3)(e), if I may read it –(Interjection)– Christians always read the Bible and politicians should always read the provisions in the Constitution – Article 246(3) reads:” The following provisions shall apply in relation to tradition leaders or cultural leaders: (e) a person shall not, while remaining a traditional leader or a cultural leader, join or participate in partisan politics” (Mr Kyanjo rose_)- can you allow me at least finish a sentence because I am building my contribution and yet I have been quiet since morning.

Mr Speaker, Article 246(3)(e) is timely now and we should put a provision that can guide Government in implementation of this important article. Since debate started, which has made us see the Bill introduced, there has been a lot of propaganda. I am not surprised that we are still where we are since morning because we have been seeing groups – those who are saying that Bill must be passed and those who have been saying that, “This Bill will only be passed over my dead body”. A lot of hostile propaganda has been going on –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, on 17 November 2010, the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda wrote an opinion to Government – 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, no, no. That is irrelevant to the issue here. What we are dealing with is the rule 177 – that has nothing to do with the Attorney-General. Let us resolve that one first then we shall come to other issues.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. (Mr Kyanjo rose_) If you could, please, respect a lady MP and sit down, Sir!

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague, the minister is evoking constitutional provisions emphasising to proceed and I am saying the Attorney-General of Uganda warned Government that Article 246 is having problems – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Kyanjo, you will bring it up later, but as of now we are only considering whether to or not to suspend the rule. That is all and when we suspend, we shall set a date. If we don’t suspend, we shall continue, but that means there will be the time for you to raise those constitutional issues. Otherwise, now they are irrelevant. Maybe you need – can I suspend the proceedings for some time – you think you need it? Oh! You are saying we resolve it now, okay.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, as I was saying there has been hostile propaganda that has been going around insinuating that this Bill is going to ban traditional institutions. Pamphlets have been produced and circulated in our constituencies indicating that there are some ministers that are conniving to ban traditional institutions; this is really hostile. And that is the reason I would like this Bill to pass before 18 February to let the truth come out. And I would like to beg hon. Namabidde and the colleagues to accept that we debate this report today and see if we will be able to finish it tomorrow morning. Otherwise, to suspend, we will be inconsiderate bearing in mind that we are all in our constituencies looking for votes.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, for your information, banning a traditional institution is not an easy thing. When the Odoki Commission put this report and its draft constitution, it did not put a chapter for traditional leaders. But when we were in the Constituent Assembly, we agreed to have these leaders recognised because they are important; that is how we got to have a chapter for them. Also that chapter was entrenched in the Constitution so that one does not just come up and ban a traditional leader or institution. That is the meaning of the entrenchment of Chapter 16 if the Constitution. But this is just for a limited period – you can’t because if you have to change or ban, you need to go into a referendum. People just don’t read the Constitution, but because I was there, I know what it means. So, don’t rightly think that somebody can come and – no, no, but let us be relevant to the subject on the Floor, which is his motion and the rule that was read to us. Maybe I think we should put a question now – yes, hon. Kawanga.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, I think we have taken quite a bit of time discussing this issue. The issue of urgency has been raised and the only reason given by the Prime Minister is that we are involved in the campaigns. However, I would like to urge the House that the issue of our being in the campaigns is not that important because this is a national issue. The reason we were given three days to consider this debate was to allow us take off time, reflect and take a considered decision. The fact that we are in campaigns is personal to us.

So, I would like to urge Members to think of national issues much more than what really concerns us. I think we can take the necessary sacrifice for the good of this nation to take off time, consider this issue and debate it. This Article 246 has been in the Constitution for more than 10 years now. And in any case even if you debated and passed this Bill, it is not going to act retrospectively. So, the urgency really is not there for us to have this Bill passed today; it is not a matter of life and death. It is a matter that we can think about and consider. I urge Members to forget about the inconvenience of interrupting your campaigns for the sake of a considered legislation. If you don’t do that, you may pass a legislation that will cause more problems than it will solve.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the position is this: if we go with the rule, it means we have to fix a date sometime next week. If we suspend, it means we should continue. So, it is just a question of this and next week. Should I now put the question in respect of the motion or you still want some time? Do you need some time so that I suspend the proceedings say, for 30 minutes? Do you still want some break until after lunch? Should I put the question now? 

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of Government Business is citing the urgency of suspending the rule quoted and said that a certain entity is being used. Thank God he did not name that person; it could be God –(Interjections)- because he quoted someone who is using an entity in the campaigns, but did not name that person. He could have been talking about God – we are still speculating about that person who hon. Bidandi was referring to. In all this, I think we can suspend proceedings for us to go for lunch to allow people consult.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. There is a motion on the Floor moved by the Prime Minister, but we have not yet voted on that motion. Can we make a decision on that motion about the suspension of the rule? Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to you to use rule 6, which gives you authority to rule on issues of practice and so forth. I have looked at the report in support of rule 177, which allows us to give a report time. The committee on page 2 –(Interjections)– no, I am only citing examples on why I support rule 177 because the committee and other institutions continue to submit memorandum.

Last night as I watched NTV programmes, Busoga Kingdom was complaining that they have not submitted their views. Also in the annex, I have seen –(Interjections)– no, no, I am not taking information. But like I was saying, in the annex, while the committee states that they have memorandum attached; these are not memorandums but summary of what each of these people submitted. For example, on annex page 2, the committee gives only four paragraphs from Lango. I have a written memorandum from Lango, which is not what is here. So can we be given the memorandum, time and the memorandums from each of these kingdoms so that we comprehend? Otherwise what is here are not memorandums but summary of the committee and that is why I support that we be given time.

2.20
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): I thank you, Mr Speaker. When the committee was called to come and hear views from the public, Members of Parliament who are Members of the Legal and Gender committees did sacrifice time, came here and listened to whoever wanted to come and submit their views. The people who wanted to submit their views had opportune time then to do so. I remember that hon. Lukwago was part of that committee. He attended on the first day with hon. Njuba and put up a very spirited fight to prevent the committee from hearing the public. I am, therefore, very surprised that today we are being told that one of the reasons why we should not proceed with the debate of this report is because hon. Lukwago wants time to write a minority report. Really, that is very unfair to this House and to people who have committed time to come and deal with this important matter.

Whereas it is true that there are Members who do not wish this debate to proceed, I am from the Kingdom of Lango and my Won Nyaci did send a delegation which appeared before the committee and ably presented the views of Lango. That delegation has no problems at all with this law and therefore I stand here to say that on behalf of the people of Lango, whose views were presented, that we proceed with this debate. We found that law in place and we would like the elections to go on when there is some law to guide everyone including all traditional leaders to save us and our children. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is there a motion?

2.22
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I beg to move that you put the question to the motion moved by the Prime Minister. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion that I put the question. Those in favour say aye, and to the contrary nay.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I am now going to put the question to the motion by the Prime Minister of suspending the rule. As I recollect, the arguments are that we suspend the rule and therefore we proceed or we hold on for three days.

MR KYANJO: I do not know whether business has been running so rapidly. A Member, hon. Mariam Nalubega, challenged the evidence produced by the Prime Minister and so we cannot base on that information to proceed with the motion. Mr Speaker, you should be able to guide this House under the circumstances.

THE SPEAKER: You see, there is a motion and a motion has been carried that I put the question. Do you want a break?

MR LUKWAGO: A motion was moved by the Prime Minister and the motion must be seconded. I have not heard any justification from the hon. Member seconding the motion. There was no justification whatsoever. So, how do we carry a motion? How do we put to debate a motion that has not been justified?

THE SPEAKER: The practice is that when a motion is put, a mover justifies followed by the seconder if she or he wishes. The fact that a seconder has not made a justification, it does not mean that he or she is not a seconder. Therefore, I am now putting the question on the motion of the Prime Minister of suspending. Those in favour put up your hands. 

(Members voted by show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the position is as follows: six abstentions, 20 against and 106 in favour. Motion carried -(Applause)- now let us proceed with the debate.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If we go by the rules of the game that the majority take it all, we accept that we debate the report but we wish to request that we be allowed to adjourn for lunch and debate later when we come back from lunch.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, in the circumstances, we resume at 3.30 p.m. The proceedings are suspended.

(The House was suspended at 2.30 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 4.20 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we suspended the proceedings after the report had been tabled and there was a debate then we agreed that in spite of rule 177(1), which requires three days – there was a serious debate and the rule was suspended! Therefore, we can debate the report now. The debate is open.  

4.22
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to make reference to page 4 of the Bill, which defines partisan politics. Earlier, I had indicated that I am in possession of a memorandum from Lango and in Lango, one of the issues that was raised in partisan politics (e) and (f) where the Bill is defining partisan politics to include (a), (b) (c) (d) (e), I read: “Making statements against Government policies or programmes” and (f) “Making statements or comments on bills or motions under consideration by Parliament with a view of influencing their outcome.”

I do not agree with this and at an appropriate stage, I will move for the deletion of (e) and (f). That is it. It is on the definition clause, page 4 if you have the Bill.

First of all, in Parliament, we are supposed to receive views of all groups. In most of the issues, especially those that involve cultural or even the people because when the people like the Constitution spells out that these cultural institutions are recognised and accepted by the people and the aspirations of the people - in other words, there are certain issues that we feel they are best placed to file views on. Let me give an example. For us in Lango, there are many instances where there are motions or Bills that we take to cultural institutions to give their opinions like the one on marriage and divorce. When a clause was talking of turning bride price into a gift and other clauses related to that, we had to go to them, since they are the custodians of our customs, to give their views. They made public their views on that particular Bill.

On the issue of land; when we were here on the Mortgage Bill, there was the issue of customary ownership of land and the cultural institutions made their input. They are many. Even during the Constitution amendment of 2005; there were many incidences when we had to come and represent views that were given from the cultural institutions. 

So, to say that partisan politics includes or to ban these cultural institutions from making statements or comments on bills or motions – I think we are even contravening Article 29. Article 29 of the Constitution is about protection of freedom of conscience, expression, movement, religion, assembly and association: “Every person shall have the right to -
(a) Freedom of speech and expression, which shall include freedom of the press and other media; 
(b) Freedom of thought, conscience and belief which shall include academic freedom in institutions of learning;
(c) Freedom to practise any religion and manifest such practice which shall include the right to belong to and participate in the practices of any religious body or organisation in a manner consistent ….” and so on and so on.

I will later propose that the issue of making statements against government policies does not constitute being partisan. Making statements or comments on bills or motions under consideration by Parliament is an open thing that here, we invite - even in this particular Bill, the committee indicated that they had to invite all the kingdoms: Buganda, Lango and so on to come and make their input. So if we put this, it means we are banning them from any participation or making comments on any Bill.

Secondly, I am happy and glad that – I hope the committee has also rightly proposed that we delete 5. I do not know whether I am correct. On the question of recognition, I want to support the committee and I appeal to this House that Section 5, that is recognition of traditional and cultural leaders, should be deleted because already recognition is by the Constitution and the Constitution explicitly gives the power of recognition as per the customs, cultures and traditions based on the wishes and aspirations of the people. So, it is the community to recognise according to the customs. If the Bill is to go and again say recognition should be by Government, it would contradict the Constitution and the very basis of what we stand for. 

So, Mr Speaker, I want the House to support the committee on the matter of deletion of 5 and any other issues related to Government recognising traditional or cultural leaders. Otherwise, there are provisions which are good like provisions relating to emoluments, relating to the role of traditional and cultural leaders in the community, which are okay and I support them. I hope that when we go to the Committee Stage, I will propose some of these amendments which I have articulated. 

I beg we compromise on some of the fundamental issues that would, in other words, again undermine the Constitution and freedom of these cultural leaders to make their views and expressions in this Parliament. Thank you.

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much indeed. I have two comments in relation to hon. Betty Amongi’s comments regarding partisan politics. 

The purpose of making cultural and traditional institutions non-partisan is to make them neutral. Neutrality requires that a cultural or traditional leader must strictly be protected from the vagaries of politics and they should be, if you want, politically-neutral. It should be embodying the character – call it national character if you can – or ethnicity character of his area of concern, providing continuity against elected politicians.

Consequently, the moment you allow an institution or traditional cultural leader to make statements on Government programmes, as well as political programmes, you will have exposed him to the very dangers you are trying to protect him against. I, therefore, quite seriously think that those who love cultural and traditional leaders should support this Bill because it is in their selfish interest. Without this law being passed, the institution of traditional and cultural leaders would be at the good sense of whoever is in the executive political leadership. 

I am, therefore, surprised that people who were really appearing to be for the traditional leaders, the kings, are absent from the House. Let me put it firmly, Mr Speaker, this Bill is intended to protect the existence of cultural and traditional institutions in this land. Therefore, those who really love them should be here to pass this law. 

Secondly, a very critical element in the observation that has been made –(Interjection)- time is money. If you can imagine the rate of each one of these earning, times the number of people, spending the whole morning debating on procedurals taking time –

THE SPEAKER: The former speaker was talking about definition of partisan policies and suggested that paragraph (e) and (f) should be deleted. What do you say about that?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, to delete paragraph (e) and (f) is precisely to expose the cultural and traditional leader to the very hazards you are trying to protect him against. If you allowed the institutional and cultural leader to make statements against Government, clearly, his non-partisanship would have ceased. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, it is about making statements against government policies or programmes. If a bridge has broken, say the dam in Jinja, and there isn’t access, children cannot go to school either to Busoga or Buganda, and he comments on that saying our children are no longer going to school because of this broken bridge, is that being partisan?

PROF. KAMUNTU: If I go by the experiences of other countries, my understanding is that a constitutional monarch as opposed to the absolute monarch – the absolute monarch has ultimate governing authority as a head of state and is not bound by any law. But on the other hand, this constitutional monarch, the one where he is strictly regulated, is ceremonial. It is just like the Queen of England. She is the head of the Commonwealth. Even here, I have never seen the queen commenting on whether this government programme is good or bad or whether the Opposition is bad or good. 

THE SPEAKER: Assuming there are health centres in his area but there are no doctors, nurses, midwives or medicine and people are suffering. Suppose such a leader comments on that. Is that being partisan?

PROF. KAMUNTU: My understanding of against – the statement reads: “Making statements against government policies; making statements or comments on Bills or motions under consideration by Parliament with a view to influencing the outcome.” 

THE SPEAKER: So that you construct the bridge and children can go to school.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am not debating the alternative. All I am saying is that my understanding of the statement as it is, is that the moment I make a statement against a government programme and the moment I make a statement with a view to influencing the outcome on Bills on the Floor of the House, my side is determined, and that is my understanding of partisan. You have already decided.  

My own understanding, which I want to share with you -

THE SPEAKER: Why didn’t you include criticising opposition policies? (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: It is silent on that. It is not defined here. For purposes of argument, if they want to add another statement that “against Government or Opposition”, let it be but it should not cancel this statement. 

This is a substantive point. In fact, the whole of this morning, in my own assessment, has been taken because we have not made a difference between a traditional or cultural leader who is absolute. On one hand, you would want a traditional or cultural leader to be regulated and the moment he is regulated, he becomes equal before law to make the law. But if you want him to be absolute, then we do not need to have this law. That is why there is confusion. On one hand, honourable members will argue as if the Constitution and the rights of everybody – (Interjection)- yes the rights protected under the Constitution, which she has read, every Ugandan – but these cultural leaders are not every Ugandan and that is why they are being regulated. If they were like every Ugandan, then the existing laws would have applied to us equally. That is why I want to plead with you that once we make a constitutional institution of traditional or cultural leader regulated; then he ceases to be absolute. Because you are not equal, you can see a person moving in reverse order when he is greeting a cultural leader precisely because a cultural leader is not common, and he must be regulated. In regulating, you are preserving him. The self preservation of the traditional kings and traditional leaders lies in passing this law and those who want their king should come and pass this law. Thank you very much. (Interjection) No, I don’t believe in kings. That’s all. 

4.39
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the suggestion that in the definition under partisan politics, (e) and (f) should be deleted. I think the main ground given is that it denies the traditional leader the rights and freedoms enshrined in Article 29 of the Constitution. 

As we all know, Article 29, the enjoyment of those rights is in accordance with the Constitution and the Constitution stipulates very clearly that these are some of the rights that can be derogated. In fact, in Article 246, it is very clear that a traditional leader must not participate or join partisan politics. This is an absolute prohibition in the Constitution itself and yet in Article 29 it talks of freedom to assemble, freedom to demonstrate, freedom to associate which shall include the freedom to form and join associations or unions including trade unions and political and other civic organisations. Clearly 246 contradicts 29 in that respect of freedom to associate, freedom to have political and other civic organisations. So, why would you pick this and not the other? Why? What is the basis? 

In (e), yes it is true, Mr Speaker, as you said this morning, I wanted to come and support you fully on what you stated. I was a full and active Member of the Constituent Assembly and I fully debated in the formulation of 246 and 29. I know it even by heart. 

So, as hon. Kamuntu says, the purpose of 246 is to shield a traditional leader or a cultural leader from, you know, the normal ordinary human debate because - (Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable minister. Hon. Minister, it is quite true as you stated - 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you had finished your contribution.

MS AMONGI: I am asking clarification. He stated that Article 246(3)(e) which says, “A person shall not, while remaining a  traditional leader or cultural leader, join or participate in partisan politics.” The operational words here are “join or participate in partisan politics.” When I go to the partisan politics, because (e) and (f) are in effect trying to define partisan politics, I want you to clarify to me to what extent making statements or comments on bills or motions under consideration by  Parliament with a view to influencing their outcome constitute participating in partisan politics. Because when you call somebody to make an opinion before Parliament, the person will make either a positive or negative opinion. You do not know what he or she is going to say. Like I stated in the case of Lango, when there was the Marriage and Divorce Bill, they made a statement; they made their input to that Bill. On the question of customary land, they made their input to that Bill. In this particular Bill we are considering, the committee report is very clear that they invited Buganda, Teso and Lango and they made comments on this Bill. So, does making statements on the Bill constitute participating in partisan politics?

Two, when you make statements against government policy - not Government but a policy or programme - does that constitute being partisan? So the issue here is partisan politics being defined. I do not see (e) and (f) constituting being partisan because the definition of being partisan is very clear. It is being devoted to, being biased in support of a party or group or cause and I do not see (e) or (f) making someone be biased in participating or supporting a party. So, to me the question is, do those two constitute participating in partisan politics? To me they do not. 

MR MBABAZI: Well, thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My honourable friend simply repeated what she said before. There was nothing new. And it was what I was responding to and I was saying that our understanding of kings is what we put in (6) of Article 246 and it defines traditional or cultural leaders. It means a king or similar traditional leader or cultural leader, by whatever name called, who derives allegiance from the fact of birth or descent not in accordance with the democratic process - this is a very well known principle that kings are ordained by God - they have divine rights. Yes, in fact, in some practices, kings can never be wrong. So what business does a king who cannot be wrong have to do with the debate of ordinary mortals who are disagreeing on a matter and such disagreement is democratically resolved by voting? How would a king like that really be involved in that kind of debate?

So the simple point one is making here is that the whole purpose of 246 is to shield - and this is the correct terminology we should all use - traditional or cultural leaders who derive their allegiance from the fact of birth and from their blood which is a God-given thing, from engaging in activities of lower or lesser mortals.

It is not true that in (e) making statements against - Mr Speaker, for instance, the example you gave that if the bridge to Jinja collapsed, that cannot be possibly government policy - 

THE SPEAKER: Government policy of not repairing a bridge so that children cannot go to school. Government policy of having health centres without nurses, without drugs and people go there. That is a Government policy in the negative manner. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I think there may be a government with such policies. I certainly know that in Uganda we have built healthcare centres and we do not have enough personnel and we do not have enough drugs. But the policy was not to build and deny them staff and drugs. No. We are just incrementally providing a service to the people, establishing the infrastructural unit and then making it possible to be utilised by the people as the government intended. So, it is not the intention of Government to deny the people that medical care.

When we are debating Bills here like you saw this morning, you could see the differences; the acrimony. You can imagine now if the traditional leader was to make a pronouncement, some of us in this House would not even debate it because from a traditional leader that is like God’s law. 

So, the whole idea of leaving these people out of partisan politics is to shield them from the dangers of partisan politics and I wanted to say this morning that really we should not speak as if we do not know our history of turmoil of this country has a great deal to do with traditional leaders participating in partisan politics. In fact, this is what was at the back of our minds when we made Article 246. The importance of this Article was to protect our traditional leaders from the debate where there is no agreement among us in a democratic process.

We the elected leaders are accountable to our electors. Traditional leaders are an entirely a different thing and they should not be involved in what the common people do. Therefore (e) and (f) talk about where Bills are still under debate and there is no unanimity, they end up becoming partisan, why would you want a traditional leader to be involved in such kind of debate? Drawing from the past we have had, in defining partisan politics, we must try and protect our traditional leaders from issues that require accountability to ordinary people who have power as provided for in the Constitution.

I, therefore, do not see any reason why (e) and (f) should be left out as if we want to give the traditional leaders the leeway to talk against government policies or programmes or to make statements on bills and motions. The fact that the traditional leader of Lango may have talked about it cannot be justification for supporting that.

4.54
MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): This Bill raised a lot of controversy both in procedure and content. It is the first Bill in my 10 years in Parliament that I received through window 2. We all know that when a Bill is being tabled here for first reading, many of us receive our copies in the pigeon hole but this was not the case now. 

It is also true that we have received the report today and I was hesitant to support the debate on the Bill when we had just received the report today.

I have looked at the amendments and I think (f) should be deleted. I find the proposed insertion when they delete clause 9 is contradicting (f). When you say that the role of a cultural leader shall be to promote the development, preservation and enrichment of all the people in the community where he is recognised as such - the laws we make are to help in enrichment of our people so if the traditional leader is given that role as the insertion suggests, I find it imprudent for us to say that he cannot make comments on such a motion.

I will put an amendment at the right where we are saying that a traditional institution can be created provided it is not from existing ones –(Interruption)
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The information I want to give to my honourable friend is that that will not be necessary because the Constitution in 246 already caters for that. One of the reasons why we amended some of the contents of the Bill was to bring it in conformity with this particular clause. That is why Schedule II is being deleted.

MS KIIZA: I want to seek clarification from the hon. Minister who has just been holding the Floor to the effect that he says that what hon. Namayanja was talking about is really not necessary. I also wish to know, therefore, that for the case of the Rwenzururu Kingdom which appears in the report as having been one of the institutions that were consulted – one that was pronounced two years ago by Government as having been recognised – can I sufficiently say that it is among the institutions this law is catering for in a situation where the institution has not been gazetted? Because under clause 5, the Bill is saying – and actually the law – that for the institution to be deemed one, it must appear in the Gazette. Ours has been established for two years now but it has never been gazetted. I would like to be informed on where the Rwenzururu Kingdom lies.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, in response to that, the clarification I would give is that those traditional or cultural institutions that came about after the promulgation of the Constitution would be catered for if we passed this Bill as has been proposed in the amendment. By removing Schedule II, what remains is the power of the minister, after a community, in accordance with its customs and traditions, have declared the existence of a traditional or cultural institution, then the minister would gazette that.

The presumption is that in the case of Rwenzururu, for example, the minister would take cognizance of the fact that they are in existence, and hopefully, they have come about in accordance with the traditions and customs of the people concerned and therefore go ahead and gazette them so that you achieve the same effect. Thank you.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am reliably informed that Schedule II in this Bill is not part of what we are going to discuss today. If I am assured that it is what we are going to discuss then I will rest my case. But if we are to say that we shall discuss Schedule II in the future then I still stand to ask whether these provisions will tie my king.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Members for their input but the reason why I was moving to amend clause 3(i) – hon. Mbabazi you know very well that the kingdom of Buganda came into existence before the Constitution. But we have had other kingdoms – they call them chiefdoms here but I do not know the difference: we have had the Ssabaruuli coming from Buganda Kingdom, the Ssabanyala from the same kingdom – at one time there was Ssabamooli.

So the reason I was raising this was to be assured that we shall not have other chiefdoms coming up within the same kingdom of Buganda that existed before the coming into force of this Constitution. As long as those other small kingdoms are stemming up from the one that existed before –(Interruption) 

MS TUBWITA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on point of order because hon. Namayanja has kept on insisting on the issue of small kingdoms and those rising out of other traditional institutions. And yet it is a constitutional right for any community to enjoy its culture. She is only talking about sub-clause (i) of clause 3 without reading the sub-clauses below.

For one to become a cultural leader there are steps to follow but she is ignoring them. And yet in a region, there might be more than one tribe and each of them has a right to enjoy its culture. Saying the Ssabaruuli is a small kingdom yet it has followers all over the country, I do not find it fair. (Laughter) Is it in order for hon. Namayanja to insinuate that the culture of the Baruuli is a small one and so they should not enjoy their rights? Does she want to say that there is no culture at all in the Baruuli kingdom? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I do not know but there was a period of 1994/95 and the Constitution solved the problem of those which existed in 1994/5. They existed because of the laws that had been made before and the Constitution automatically recognised their existence. But those which came after the promulgation of the Constitution in 1994/5 had to come under Article 246(2) in that Parliament, after the promulgation of the Constitution, had to set up the procedure of putting them in place.

I think the question that is being asked is when did these others come into existence? Did they follow the procedure laid out by Parliament? That is the question and it is not mine to answer. I am just telling you what is happening.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. But to allay the fears of my colleague – I was not talking about tribal kingdoms because even within the kingdom of Buganda, there are very many tribes. When I said “small” I was actually talking in terms of size because you know Buruuli is one of the counties in Buganda. So I was talking about “small” in terms of geographical area but not in terms of the tribe.

MS TUBWITA: Mr Speaker, I rise on the point of order. My colleague has kept on insisting on the point of undermining the cultural leader in Buruuli kingdom. And yet you know that regardless of how big the tribe you are leading, all cultural leaders are equal before the law. Is she in order to start undermining the cultural leader of the Baruuli, whom we treasure?

THE SPEAKER: I think we are expected to respect any human being. So he should be respected. But I think she is talking about the Constitution aspect of it. But as I have told you there is a problem in that – yes.

MR RUKUTUNA MWESIGWA: Mr Speaker, I rise to make some clarification on the proposal by hon. Namayanja to add something onto clause 3(1). This clause is a direct transplant of clause 246(1) of the Constitution because when you look at the two, they are exactly the same. So, if you add on it in line with the suggestions made by hon. Namayanja, you will be delimiting on the scope of Article 146(1) of the Constitution. You will also be amending it by additions, which amendment would be unconstitutional. 

So, I would like to advise that much as hon. Namayanja may have reasons to propose what she is doing, she cannot amend the Constitution by just this Act of Parliament. Such an amendment would be contrary to the Constitution and secondly, it would not be allowed to amend the clause of the Constitution. That is what I wanted to inform the honourable colleagues about.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, honourable member, but when I said this, I actually did not consider the Kingdom of Buganda per se; I have a copy of a memorandum by the Kingdom of Busoga and I just realised that their first comment was that subject to the Constitution, the institution of a traditional or cultural leader may exist in any area of Uganda, but added that provided that they are not created from the existing ones. 

And because the Speaker highlighted that traditional leaders who were in place before the coming into force of this Constitution are not covered under 3(1) so, I rest my case on that. Otherwise, I want to say that I support the report of the committee especially in as far as deleting clause 5 on recognition is concerned; that one was unconstitutional. Then also subsequently the deletion of clause 7 on the withdrawal of recognition; clause 8 on the jurisdiction of traditional leaders, which was also unconstitutional and clause 9 on rotational, which was not only unconstitutional but also very provocative to some kingdoms and I would like to thank the committee for entirely deleting that clause.

I also support the deletion of clause 17, which deals with the publication of a list. On clause 18, after I read it from the original Bill, I wondered whether they had been any lawyers to look at that provision – to say that a principal can be criminally liable for the acts of an agent, to me, was very unbecoming and unthinkable. However, I also would like to agree with the position of the committee on civil wrongs, where it said that it should be the institution to be vicariously liable and not the cultural leader of a particular area.

THE SPEAKER: I think if you have read the report that is exactly what the committee did; they have deleted criminal liability and made the institution rather than the individual civilly liable.

MS NAMAYANJA: I also support the complete deletion of Schedule 2 of the Bill because it was also contrary to the cultures and norms of the people in the Buganda Kingdom for putting the Kamuswaga –

THE SPEAKER: They have done so; they have deleted Schedule II.

MS NAMAYANJA: I now rest my case by thanking you very much.

5.16
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make general comments in regard to this Bill because we are not yet at the Committee Stage where we should be proposing amendments.
 
It is my opinion that this Bill should not have come at this time –(Interjections)– yes, that is my opinion. It is 17 days to presidential and parliamentary elections and 20 days to the mayoral elections. We have had Article 246 for the last 15 years. We have been in Parliament for the last four and a half years with issues emerging, but with nothing being done. The mood under which you are discussing this Bill is not a sober one –(Interjections)– yes, because I know what I am talking about and I don’t think we can deal substantively with the critical questions that this Bill intends to cure in such circumstances.

I am of the opinion that Uganda actually needs a wider and a more involving debate on the direction of traditional leaders in this country. Actually what we are trying to do is to just patch up a bit of the provisions in the law to handle what I may think is an emergence. Otherwise, in the actual sense Uganda needs to rethink, recollect and have a national dialogue on the future of traditional institutions in this country.

What is emerging from the debate is only the issue of partisan involvement of traditional leaders, but we should know and ask ourselves who, in the first instance involved traditional leaders into politics? All of us know that it is on record that Uganda is the only country in Africa that abolished and restored traditional institutions. But in restoring traditional institutions in 1993, we needed to be clearer on the role of these cultural leaders, which was not done. The Chinese have got a saying that you may sin for a long time, but at one point your sins will catch up with you. What we are seeing today is that the sins of the NRM are catching up with them –(Interjections)– yes!

Traditional institutions, as far as I have been following the events in Uganda, were restored to consolidate the NRM –(Interjection)- yes, they were. At the time traditional institutions were restored, it is on record that in Gulu the Army Council objected. We had a Constitution making process ensuing at the time where if not to be for political experience, these matters should have been left to the Constitution making process to resolve amicably –(Interjection)- no, I do not need information. I am one of the most informed MPs in East and Central Africa. (Laughter)

We had a Constituent Assembly that should have been left to determine the course of events at the time. Today, reference has been made to a letter the Attorney-General addressed to Cabinet and His Excellency making very serious advice on this Bill and here we are proceeding to debate the contents of this Bill -(Interruption)

COL. KATIRIMA: Thank you very much hon. Mabikke for allowing me to give you information because I was in that council when a decision was taken by the Army Council that the traditional institutions could be considered for restoration by the relevant organs of state which was done in 1993. The Army Council was very mindful of our history and that is why you see it in the preamble to this Constitution. 

The Army Council was very mindful that we had traditional and cultural leaders in Uganda in the 19th Century and maybe earlier and those cultural and traditional leaders of that time could correctly be described as five in one: they had legislative, executive, judicial, religious and cultural powers. We considered the times that that was 1993 and we had covered a long journey as a country.

The traditional institutions and cultural leaders we wanted to restore were not to have those cultural leaders and institutions that would have executive, legislative, judicial and also cultural powers. We wanted cultural institutions that would have cultural powers and those are not contestable even today and for the future where we are going. We want them to remain like that.

Today you find cultural and traditional institutions fighting or struggling for judicial, executive, legislative and religious powers which have since long been taken over by many other authorities, then you need to put a full stop and check your step. The legislative powers have long been taken over by this Parliament –(Interjection)- yes, by Article 79 of this Constitution, this Parliament has the mandate of making law on any issue for the peace, order and good governance of this country.

The judicial powers are today placed with the judiciary. The executive powers rest with the President of Uganda under Article 98 of the Constitution who is also the Fountain of Honour and Commander-In-Chief of the UPDF.

The religious powers have since been claimed by many authorities: the Catholic Church have curved out their power, the Protestant Church have curved out theirs, the Muslims have curved out theirs, the Pentecostals have curved out theirs, the Orthodox Church have curved out theirs. The Pentecostal churches have taken part of that power and it is no longer available exclusively for the cultural and traditional institutions. The power which remains uncontested today hon. Mabikke is cultural power and that is where we should limit our traditional institutions for the peace -

THE SPEAKER: Is that information?

COL. KATIRIMA: It was the information I wanted to give hon. Mabikke. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR MABIKKE: The revolutionary Col. Katirima could not speak like that in 1993. You would not speak like that in ’93 because your baby, the NRM was still a young institution and needed to be nurtured and consolidated. In actual sense, kingdoms were restored to serve the political interest of the NRM –(Interjections)- protect me from the fingers. We need to be clear on whether we are a republic or monarch or both. We cannot be a republic and at the same time with monarchs –(Interjection)- that is obvious. What we are having now is a set up like a republican monarch. We are actually setting more confusion that we should and that is why I say that most of the provisions of this Bill are actually flaring tempers because they touch sentimentally on some feelings of sections of Ugandans and some leaders. 

To be very clear, I am a Muganda –(Interjections)- yes. Now for the sake of the Buganda Kingdom, all of us know the history of this nation. Milton Obote abolished the monarchy in 1966. The monarchy went into abeyance for 44 years. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni came and in 1993, he restored it. 

Now the ordinary Baganda still have a feeling of the ex-King, the late Fredrick who was actually the first President of the Republic of Uganda who had political power and who exercised authority. And because of politics, clarification has not been made that we are now living in a modern era and you cannot have a political king –(Interjections)- oh, yes! This does not cure the problem we have but actually flares it up. 

My solution would be that we shelf this Bill -(Interjections)- we shelf this Bill; go through elections; have a sober debating environment; involve all key stakeholders in Uganda and re-open debate on Article 246 of the Constitution. We need to re-open debate and we need to refocus on the direction of this country. This just serves the interests of one man. We need to involve the institution of Parliament. We need to involve political leaders in Uganda in order for us to have a lasting solution to the issues in here. If I am to make reference to the Buganda question, the Buganda question has been with us for many years and this in no way can be an attempt to resolve it except again for political expediency as the case has always been.

I want to wind up my submission by saying that we must be true to ourselves. We must not have double standards. We have made many mistakes in this country and we should be able to learn from these mistakes and have an opportunity to correct them. With this Bill, we are not correcting the previous mistakes and I want to warn you that you are actually escalating a situation that would have been amicably normalised –(Interjections)- you may object but as I have said before, your sins are going to catch up with you.

I want to wind up by saying, I am opposed to almost all the provisions in this Bill because they have not been developed and written with cool heads, a sober mind and national interest at heart. I want to thank you.

5.34
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBAZANGA (FDC, Busongora South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Kibazanga Christopher is my name; the prince and a Member of Parliament for Busongora South. I started travelling from Kasese yesterday with the hope that this Bill would give the Rwenzururu Kingdom its legal existence. I did not know that I was very mistaken.

Two years ago, my kingdom was recognised by the Government of Uganda. There was no executive instrument. It was not gazetted as the Bill proposes. I had thought that it was included on the Schedule so that this Bill gives its legal existence only to reach here that it was deleted from the Schedule. (Laughter) I have tried to consult those responsible only to be told that after passing this, we shall be given legal existence and therefore the Act will protect us. What business am I doing here therefore? (Laughter)

But as a national leader, let me make my submission -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want to thank the Member for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am holding the Bill here and I am looking at Schedule II -(Interjections)- this is the very one we are debating. We have got only one Bill and on page 14, it reads, “Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu, Omusinga Charles Wesley Mumbere Iremangoma.” It is on the Schedule. So, why is the Member saying it is not on the Schedule?

MR KIBAZANGA: Mr Speaker, if you read the report, the Schedule the Member is reading was deleted -(Interjections)- okay, now I propose that you restore the Schedule -(Applause)- because if you restore it, you give my kingdom its legal existence and therefore, I have business here. (Laughter) On that basis, I support the Bill because it gives my kingdom its legal existence but that does not mean that I will not propose the deletion of other obnoxious provisions within the Bill. (Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_) What is it my colleague? (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank hon. Kibazanga for giving way for the information I want to give him. Article 246 reads as follows in clause 1 [MR KIBAZANGA: “Of the Constitution?”] Yes, of the Constitution:

“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the institution of a traditional leader or cultural leader may exist in any area of Uganda in accordance with the culture, customs and traditions or wishes and aspirations of the people to whom it applies.” It is important to read “full stop” because some people tried to add things here. (Laughter)

What this means is this: what is required for a cultural or traditional institution to be in place is for it to be in accordance with culture, customs and traditions of the people or wishes and aspirations of the people to whom it applies. You do not need a Schedule; you do not need a declaration for the traditional leaders to exist -(Interjections)- just a second. What we were talking about are two things. First, what the Speaker raised in clause 2 that Parliament was required to prescribe a method by which issues of the existence of the traditional leader can be sorted out. 

Secondly, in 3(c) about privileges and benefits that may be conferred by the government for the government to take cognisance of its existence in order for these to exist. So, with those three combined, I am happy that actually you are supporting the Bill because I think, that is for Rwenzururu to which I know you belong, required and that is what we have provided. Thank you. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much my brother. You have tried to shed light on the constitutional provision but I have been around for quite a long time and I have seen governments in Africa trashing the wishes and aspirations of the people to the dustbin –(Interjections)- and they do not have recourse. It can even happen today because Africa remains Africa.

In the absence of an Executive instrument and gazetting of my kingdom - I am happy that my friends have agreed to restore the schedule to this Bill -(Interjections)- let me proceed to discuss other provisions of the Bill. I want to agree with Betty Amongi that we delete (e) and (f) –(Interjections)- and delete Article 13 of this Bill. Why? (Interjections) I am proposing. Leadership is too serious a business to be left to ordinary men who do not have a stake in the country they are leading. We need the cultural leaders, the traditional leaders, the natural leaders of this country to guide the country. When you restrict them in (e) -(Interjections)- and (f) and then you bring an obnoxious provision in 13, we keep on wondering, what is politics? Do we understand what we are discussing when we talk about politics? How does politics come about? In other countries which started this modern politics you are talking about, it is already a culture and a tradition. And here you are separating culture from politics. Are you being fair to yourself? To those who know community psycho, this politics started as a mere idea. It became a word, it became an action, it became a practice, it became a norm, it became a habit, it became a character, it became a culture, it became a tradition; so what is culture? What is politics -(Interjections)

Traditional leaders are respectable people; we respect ourselves and we respect the status that our communities have conferred upon us. There is no way a respected traditional leader is going to wave a yellow card and say, “NRM oyee” and there is no way a respected traditional leader is going to have a blue card and wave it and say, “FDC oyee.” -(Interjections)- Why don’t we leave the issue to the kings? [MS MUHANGA: “What about the blue key?”] I am winding up; be patient. We are very few remaining here discussing with you. Do not chase us -(Laughter)- respect our views. If you read the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the UN, if you read Chapter 4 of our Constitution, the AU Charter; political rights are inherent. These inalienable rights cannot be wished away by anybody on the basis of the privileges that have been conferred upon me by my community, by my family. The fact that my children call me daddy is not a right for government to strip me of my political rights.

First of all, we are citizens of this country. It is very easy to restrict organisations but very difficult to restrict an individual who is a citizen of your country; to strip him of his political rights -(Interjections)- within the next five years, you will say Kibanzanga said so in this House. This may be my last submission in this House but consider my views -(Interjections)- I thank you very much. 

5.46
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. I stand to support the Bill because I feel the motive of the Bill is good for this country. Preventing the traditional leaders or the cultural leaders from getting involved in politics is healthy because they serve all categories of people whether no matter the party they belong to. Preventing them from participating in politics will help unify the people they lead. 

However, I have a few suggestions or recommendations to this Bill. Section 4 where a person to be installed as a traditional or cultural leader in any area of Uganda if that person derives allegiance from birth or descent; I beg to make a proposal on section c to cater for the factor of that person who derives allegiance from consent of the people concerned. I am bringing in this because there are some cultural leaders who are elected through their people -(Interjections)- it is not like descent or birth like in Busoga and the Ssabaruuli institution. I beg that we add clause (c) for the consent of the people who are concerned and where that cultural leader is going to serve.

Still on Section 4, clause 3, where it says, “A person shall not be compelled to pay allegiance to any person installed as a traditional or cultural leader,” I am proposing that also, “Any person shall not decampaign a traditional or cultural leader much as he is not compelled to pay allegiance to him or her.” I am requesting that this person be penalised because we have seen circumstances where some few people who undermine others have come up to decampaign their cultural leaders yet those who believe in that cultural leader feel they are happy with that leader and they feel their cultures are endowed through that cultural leader. So, I beg to move that we make that amendment so that no person decampaigns a cultural leader -(Interjections)- this is subject to Article 246 of the Constitution which says that, “Subject to the Constitution, the institution of traditional or cultural leader may exist in any area of Uganda in accordance with the culture, customs and traditions or wishes and aspirations of the people to whom it applies.” So, I beg that we make that amendment so that cultural leaders are all respected equally and those who do not believe in a particular cultural leader should not undermine him or decampaign him. 

On Section 5, I am informed - I am not taking any information - Section 5 talks about the recognition of the traditional or cultural leaders and clause 1 talks about publishing in the Gazette; I am requesting and I want to say on this note that the community that so wishes to have a traditional or cultural leader – the districts and the sub-counties after bringing in their resolutions in support of the existence of that traditional leader - I request that the government recognises that traditional leader automatically other than going into the procedures of the Gazette because we have seen cases where some cultural leaders were already recognised, installed in the presence of the President and now you are talking about gazetting. So provided there are resolutions from the district and sub-counties in support of the existence of a cultural leader, the government should recognise this cultural leader automatically. 

With Schedule II, I would like to support hon. Kibanzanga’s view that it should be reinstated but I do request to amend his proposal that the names should not be included. Let them talk about the kingdoms or queendoms but without names because we shall not be making amendments whenever a traditional leader either passes away or is not there or if anything happens to a traditional leader. So, let us just put the schedule but without the names. 

I want to make my last submission on the jurisdiction of traditional or cultural leaders. Clause 1 of section 8 says, “The jurisdiction of a traditional or cultural leader is limited to the person within the community or area of Uganda who consents to pay allegiance to the traditional or cultural leader. 

I do agree with this provision but I would like to request that for any traditional or cultural leader wishing to meet his people in another area where there is a traditional or cultural leader, he should inform him in writing about the visit and no traditional or cultural leader or his agents will decampaign another. I am requesting that when they are visiting other kingdoms, they should communicate. It is a matter of communicating to another traditional leader that I am coming to meet my people in that area. Communication will help avoid any contradictions that might be caused by the two cultural leaders. I support the Bill. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I see that there are a lot of contributions, which could come at the Committee Stage. Do Members want to go to the Committee Stage? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”) So, I put the question that the Bill entitled “The Institution of Traditional or Cultural Leaders Bill, 2010” be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INSTITUTION OF TRADITIONAL OR CULTURAL LEADERS BILL, 2010

Clause 1

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much. Before clause 1, the committee has a proposal in respect of the long title –

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall deal with the long title later because the long title can change depending on the amendments.

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: In clause 2, the committee proposes to delete the definition of the word, “constitutionalism” and the justification is that the word “constitutionalism” is not used in the Bill. 

In the definition of the word, “partisan politics”, the committee proposes deletion of paragraph (a) and insertion of the following: “(a) Promoting or supporting a political party, political organisation or an individual in respect of political activities.”

The committee proposes to delete paragraph (b), (c) and (d). 

The justification is:
(i)	To include “individuals” who may not ascribe to the views of any political party or organisation, say, independent Members but who are involved in partisan politics. 
(ii)	Paragraphs (b), (c) and (d), the committee feels, are sufficiently covered under (a).

In the definition of the word, “privilege”, delete the words, “belonging to” and insert the words, “conferred on”. And the justification is that a privilege is something conferred on a person and cannot be said to belong to a person. 

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to propose the deletion of (e) and (f). The justification is that those two do not constitute being partisan. 

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a proposal of deletion of (e) and (f). 

MR BUKENI: Thank you. On 2(e), when we say, making statements against government policies or programmes, the meaning here is that the traditional leader is making those statements publicly. You go to address your people and you make a statement against government policy publicly. But there are cases where even a person in government can make a comment on government policy with a view of improving it – the traditional leader may want to communicate a message positively – he might have noticed that NAADS is a very good government programme but is being managed badly and wants some improvement. My suggestion here is that making a statement per se is not wrong but making it in public and criticising government is what is wrong. I am suggesting that we put it in such a way that the communication should not be made publicly. Traditional leaders have their councils where they meet and discuss these issues. They may discuss it there in their councils but without appearing in public to criticise the programme.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Member suggested deletion but you are talking of amending. Can we start with deletion because if we delete, the question of amending will not arise? 

MR RUKUTANA MWESIGWA: Mr Chairman, I am on (e), if you say, you delete (e) that means that you are putting the traditional leader on a collision course with Government. “… Making statements against…” necessarily means opposing Government policies or programmes. Do we really want to go that way? Do we want to allow a traditional leader - considering our government policies and programmes are formulated after lengthy, elaborate and inclusive consultative procedures? 

For example, when we come here to formulate policies and to approve programmes, we are speaking on behalf of the people. Once we have made those programmes, formulated them and put them in place, should we then allow a traditional leader to make opposing statements? Because the word “against” means opposing government policies or programmes. That would surely put the traditional leader on a collision course with the government. So, it is important that we maintain (e). 

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I am in support of deletion of (e) and the reason is simple. Here it states, “… making statements against government policies or programmes.” We are talking of these traditional leaders being partisan and I think partisan refers to either Government or the opposition. But here we are limiting ourselves to the Government. Suppose the traditional leader makes comments against the alternative policies of the opposition, isn’t that also partisan? So, let us not limit it to just Government. If we are to retain it, then let us have both government and opposition. But that cannot help either. So the right thing is to have it deleted because we are talking about “partisan”. Once you make statements then it becomes partisan and I think, Mr Chairman, you had intimated this earlier asking what happens when it is against opposition policies? 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what you are suggesting is “government/opposition” because when you talk about being partisan, you are talking about two parties and therefore to balance this provision we agree to put “opposition” because really the thing was not balanced. The original formulation as it is, is not balanced. It is just tilting to Government when you are talking about partisan. Partisan must have more than one party. But you see, let us start with the proposal for deletion. 

There is another proposal of amending by putting “Government/Opposition”. I put the question to the amendment to include “Opposition”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, I put the question on the proposed amendments by the committee which were not dealing with this. They were stopping at (d). (Ms Amongi rose_)

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, what are you saying?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I moved for the deletion of (e) and (f) so I want it clarified whether the vote was on both or on (e).

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question on the deletion of (f).

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 2, as amended, stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. On clause 3, the committee proposes to delete sub-clauses (2) and (3) and the justification is that there is a consequential amendment arising from insertion of a new clause after clause 3 on institution of the traditional or cultural leader. The proposed insertion 4, after clause 3 reads as follows: “(4) the institution” - 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think then what you would say is, “Delete the original 3” because if you delete 3 and you put another one it will be 3 again. So, you delete the existing 3 and substitute it with the other. I think that is the proposal.

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes deletion of the original 3 and we propose to institute a new clause to read as follows: “The traditional or cultural leader may be instituted in the following ways: 
a) In accordance with the culture, customs and traditions of the people to whom it applies; 
(b) In accordance with the wishes and aspirations of the people to whom it applies through a resolution of not less than two thirds of all members of the district local councils and sub-county local government councils respectively in the area.” 
(2) The institution under sub-clause (1) shall be communicated in writing to the minister.”

The justification is:
1.	To comply with Article 246(1) of the Constitution.
2.	To determine the wishes and aspirations of the people to whom the institution of traditional or cultural leader applies.
3.	To make the minister know the existence of a traditional or cultural leader.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.
   
Clause 4

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (1) the committee proposes deletion of the words “… where that person is recognised as a traditional or cultural leader” and insertion of the words “… led by that traditional or cultural leader.” 

b) Delete sub-clause (3) and insert the following: “(3) subject to Article 246(3)(d), a person shall not be compelled to pay allegiance or contribute to the cost of maintaining a traditional or cultural leader.”

The justification is to comply with the constitutional provision in Article 246(3)(d).

THE CHAIRMAN: Then you should put 246(3)(d) of the Constitution.

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Mr Chairman. To comply with Article 246(3)(d) of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes deletion of clause 5 and insertion of the following: “(5) Publication of declaration of traditional or cultural leader: where a traditional or cultural leader has been declared to exist in any area of Uganda in accordance with the culture, customs and traditions or wishes and aspirations of the people, the minister shall cause the declaration to be published in the gazette and the justification is to require the minister to publish the declaration of a traditional leader.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that we delete clause 7 and insert the following: “Publication of abdication or secession of a cultural leader; where a traditional or cultural leader; 
a)	Abdicates the institution of a cultural leader or lawfully ceases to be a traditional cultural leader, the minister shall cause the abdication or secession to be published in the gazette.” 

The justification is to require the government to publish in the gazette the abdication of a traditional cultural leader or the lawful removal of a traditional cultural leader.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes to delete clause 8, and the justification that people who pay allegiance to a traditional leader are not necessarily confined to a particular community or area of Uganda and consequential amendment to clause 5.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, deleted.

Clause 9

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes that clause 9 be deleted and we insert the following; “Role of a traditional or cultural leader, a traditional or cultural leader shall be to:
a)	Promote and preserve the cultural values norms and practices which enhance the dignity and the wellbeing of the people where he is recognised as such.
b)	Promote the development, preservation and enrichment of all the people in the community where he is recognised as such.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: I propose an amendment to add “she” on the “he”.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have not used the term “king” we have used a traditional leader. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR TASHOBYA: The committee proposes to delete the word “recognised” appearing in line one and delete sub-clauses (2) and (3) to insert the following; “A traditional or cultural leader shall enjoy such privileges and benefits as may be conferred by the government and local government or as may be entitled under culture, custom or traditions which are not inconsistent with the constitution or this Act or any other law.” 

In sub-clause 4, delete the words “is recognised” and insert the word “exists”.

Delete sub-clause (5) and the justification is the consequential amendment of clause 5 and to require government and local government to provide privileges and benefits to the traditional or cultural leader. It is a consequential amendment of sub-clause 10(2) above.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR TASHOBYA: In sub-clause (3), the committee proposes deletion of paragraph (b) and insert the following; “Allows a member of a political party or political organisation or individual for purposes of political activities to articulate views, aspirations and interests of that political party or political organisation or individual.”

In paragraph c and d, insert the word “knowingly” at the beginning of both paragraphs and on (c) delete sub-clause (3)(d) and delete sub-clause (4) and insert the following; “A person who knowingly involves a traditional cultural leader in partisan politics commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 12 months or both”, and the justification is to better express what constitutes joining or participating in partisan politics under paragraph b and to provide for situations where a traditional or a cultural leader attends a debate or gathering where, unknown to him or her, views and aspirations of a political party or organisations, will be articulated.

Sub-clause 3(d) is covered under clause 3(b) and the justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of the amendment to Clause 5 and to provide a penal provision for politicians who knowingly involve traditional or cultural leaders in partisan politics.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR TASHOBYA: Clause 15, in respect of relationships with foreign governments, the committee proposes deletion of sub-clause (i) and insertion of the following: “A traditional or cultural leader shall not deal with foreign governments except with concurrence of the government.” The justification is that it is the function and responsibility of government to deal with foreign relations as provided for under Article 191 and the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR TASHOBYA: In clause 16 on resolution of disputes, in sub-clause 3, immediately after paragraph (b), the committee proposes to insert the following paragraph: “Whether or not the proper procedure for installation of a traditional or cultural leader has been followed.” The justification is to allow the community and the courts to adjudicate disputes relating to procedure of instituting a traditional or cultural leader.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR TASHOBYA: Clause 17: Publication of a list of traditional or cultural leaders. [THE SPEAKER: “Annual publication.”] The committee proposes to delete clause 17 and the justification is to remove the requirement of annual publication of a list of traditional or cultural leaders since the declaration is published in the Gazette.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 18

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, clause 18(i): Liability of traditional or cultural leaders. In sub-clause (i) the committee proposes deletion of the words “or criminal offences” in line two and the justification to remove the element of vicarious liability for criminal acts.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR TASHOBYA: Clause 19: Symbols and seals of institutions of traditional or cultural leaders.
(a)	In sub-clause (i), insert the words “royal regalia, motto” after the words “anthems” and “seal”.
(b)	In sub-clause (ii) insert the words “royal regalia, motto” after the words “anthems” and “seal”.

And the justification is that royal regalia and motto form and are part of the symbols and instruments of traditional or cultural institutions. And this is a consequential amendment.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, normally we protect the national flag and the anthem and so on. Isn’t there need to do the same here?

THE CHAIRMAN: The royal regalia of the traditional leaders I think includes that.

I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

MS TUBWITA: Mr Chairman, on clause 20, where he is giving powers to the Minister to amend the schedules, I propose that instead the power be given to Parliament.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On Schedule 2, the committee proposes its deletion and the justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of the amendment of clause 5.

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Chairman, I wish to propose that we reinstate Schedule 2 and we mention “kingdoms” instead of their names.

MS TUBWITA: Mr Chairman, I beg to support hon. Kibanzanga’s proposal and I beg to emphasise that the schedule should be reinstated without mentioning the names. On the “Baruuli chiefdom”, the amendment should replace it with “Obukama bwa Buruuli” (Laughter) we came up with this name through a thorough consultation by the institution of the Ssabaruuli. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I think you realise that originally they had talked about Government recognising and the schedule came because of recognition by Government. But the issue of Government recognition was deleted. And that is why even the schedule that came under a clause which mentioned that had to go. Now what you will remain with are the gazetted ones. But then when you remove Schedule 2 then you have to re-number Schedule 3 to become Schedule 2.

MS TUBWITA: Mr Chairman, I have not heard the justification on this point, but I would like to say that I am not withdrawing. I am also requesting honourable colleagues to accept that we amend “Buruuli Chiefdom” to read: “Obukama Bwa Buruuli.”

THE CHAIRMAN: What I was explaining is that whenever you draw a schedule, you have to indicate the section for the Act under which it is prepared. Schedule 2, which you are talking about, according to the original Bill, was drawn because of clause 5, which was introducing recognition by Government. But the idea of Government recognising cultural leaders was dropped and, therefore, if the source is destroyed, then you cannot have that schedule.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Mr Chairman, the reason the people of the “Obukama Bwa Buruuli” and those of the Rwenzururu kingdom are insisting on this is clause 5 in relation to the issues that were mentioned in the report – publication of the declaration of traditional or cultural leaders, where they are saying that the issue should be gazetted –

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, they will be published in the Uganda Gazette.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: That is fine, but I just want to know when gazetting will take place.

THE CHAIRMAN: That will be after the Act has come into effect. So, chairperson of the committee, since you have deleted schedule 2, you have to renumber Schedule 3. That means the current schedule 3 becomes 2 in numbering.

MR OPIO: Mr Chairman, after the Bill has been accented to, I will announce the list. That is when I will have the gazette.

THE CHAIRMAN: Agreed, but we are talking about the numbering of the schedules because you had three, but schedule two has been deleted; we have to renumber.

MR OPIO: Okay, Schedule 2 becomes Schedule 3.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the change in the numbering of the schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Long Title

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In the long title, in line five, the committee proposes a deletion of the phrase “to provide for the recognition of traditional and cultural leaders by Government.” The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of the deletion of clause 5 because previously recognition by government was a condition necessary for one to become a traditional or cultural leader contrary to Article 246 of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairman of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.35
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion for the House to resume.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.35
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered a Bill entitled “The Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders’ Bill, 2010" and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.36
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the Whole House on the Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders’ Bill, 2010. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INSTITUTION OF TRADITIONAL AND CULTURAL LEADERS’ BILL, 2010

6.36
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders’ Bill, 2010" be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled “Institution of Traditional and Cultural Leaders’ Bill, 2010" be read the third time and do pass. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE INSTITUTION OF TRADITIONAL AND CULTURAL LEADERS’ ACT, 2011.”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, but I think for those concerned, it is necessary to publish the Bill as it is now so that people get to know – I am just suggesting that this Bill be published to help members of the public know the kind of Bill you have passed. Otherwise, they may be still thinking of the other objectionable Bill. Okay, there is some request that the Prime Minister has. Let us listen to it before we decide on what to do.

6.38
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, first of all, I would like to thank you for the contributions made today. 

Secondly, I would like to inform you that I have just learnt that we have not passed regulations for special interest groups yet the Chairman of the Electoral Commission needs them. The Attorney-General was requesting that we meet tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. –(Interjections)–  “ngoja kidogo” but the Speaker is saying that he will not be available to chair the House and you know that under the Constitution, I cannot chair Parliament. I request that we meet at 11 a.m. and I am directing the Attorney-General to make sure that he is ready tomorrow at 11 a.m. and we pass those regulations. They are required urgently by the Electoral Commission.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I have heard the problem at hand and that we need to handle this matter so that the commission can conduct proper elections for the members of those groups. In the circumstances, the House is adjourned to 10.00 a.m. tomorrow to consider the business. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 February 2011 at 10.00 a.m.)


