Wednesday 7th February, 2001

Parliament met at 2.58p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am seeking some guidance from you on a procedural matter regarding the nature of business that this House transacts. Quite often, this House transacts business, passes resolutions and sometimes sends back some business with a definitive pronouncement that by a certain date, certain things should have been done. Some of them were touched upon yesterday; for instance, the Defence Bill but it is not that one I am referring to. 

I would like to refer particularly to a resolution of Parliament which we passed last year and gave the Executive, particularly, the Minister of Finance and the Leader of Government Business guidelines to resolve the Members’ Motor Vehicle Scheme within a month. I expected that report on the progress of implementation to have come here before we went for Christmas recess. 

Last week, I asked the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to enlighten the House on the extent to which that resolution has been implemented. Unfortunately, I was replied in very flowery words and there was no substance in that reply. So we got nothing out of it. 

We also know Parliament is about to come to an end and this is the fifth year but also the fourth year by which we should have exhausted or retired these loans. Due to some anomalies that you very well know, it has been not able for most Members to retire the loans. Now I am at a loss, I do not know what we should do.  

Yesterday you indicated that we would be leaving here maybe for a short while till the second week of March, but we cannot be sure of that. We are not very sure about the future between now and July. How do we intend to leave with this burden on our back and yet we passed a resolution here? Please guide me, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think you would like to have a proper answer to the query raised by the hon. Member. But I think I will be deceiving you if I try to answer the query. I am disadvantaged that the hon. Rt. Prime Minister is not here who is in the know of what is going on. But because an answer has to be given, my suggestion is that we wait until tomorrow. I will get in touch with the Prime Minister so that he gives you a detailed reply or any other person to whom he will assign the duty of making a reply.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, further on the principle raised by hon. Akika Othieno about pending matters, it is obvious to us that our term is about to expire and in between, there are these very important matters of general elections coming. Therefore, one would be grateful if the Speaker’s or the Clerk’s office could come out with all resolutions passed, which up to now the Executive has not responded to. My fear is that if we expire, then it may just die and in July we may start afresh with other issues. 

Two things are upper most in my mind. One of them is the resolution or the deadline given on the comprehensive Armed Forces Bill, which was promised and this one is affecting the lives of so many of our gallant soldiers. It affects their welfare, it affects their benefits, so many things and the Minister of State for Defence comes here and says give me one month, give me two weeks and he thinks that because we are busy, we are forgetful and therefore it will just die away.  

The second one is the report on the helicopter. I thought that this report was going to be presented and debated before the presidential elections so that it can assist in the way we guide the general public. I am wondering whether the Speaker could use his good office and ensure that the Executive fulfils the promise they made to this House.  

I ask the Clerk’s office to dig out all pending resolutions so that we are not taken for granted that we forget what we have decided.  Thank you.

DR.OKULO EPAK: I thank you Mr. Speaker. In addition, and probably to assist you to appreciate the magnitude of this neglect, the Minister responsible for pensions, when we discussed the report here, was supposed to report to us about the status of the pension beneficiaries and the payment of computed pensions by November last year. This has not been done. 

We also have the Planning Authority Statute, which was promised to be here. In fact, it was on the basis of that commitment that we approved very serious issues here. It appears as if we were hoodwinked into supporting that decision simply to be forgotten. 

I support what hon. Omara Atubo is saying. That you, Mr. Speaker, perhaps together with the Business Committee, should dig into the resolutions, which have not been responded to. Because each Committee, particularly when they report here on the Budget discussions, is aware of the resolutions which were made and which have not been fulfilled up to now. I think the chairpersons would assist you very much to identify those positions. I thank you.

MR.TOSKIN: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just want to remind the chairman of the Committee on Government Assurances. All these matters should have been handled already by his Committee; he should be alerting us on all these resolutions. We have the Committee but the Committee has never reported anything here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I can promise is that I have heard what the Members have said about this issue. I will get in touch with the Clerk so that we get all the details and maybe draw the attention of the Rt. Hon Prime Minister to these resolutions and get an explanation where certain things have not been done. This will be done.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

(Debate continued)

MR.OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the amendment of the Local Governments Act, but allow me to make some brief remarks. 

First, I appreciate that the Local Governments Act, 1997 gave a general framework within which the policy of decentralisation has largely succeeded. And today we are happy that governance has gone to the grassroot and particularly in districts, such as mine, that is, Nebbi district. I am very happy that the decentralisation programme has brought in a tremendous change in local governance, in development of infrastructures and generally creating awareness of the people that it is they who hold power and not people from the centre.  

The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2000 basically tackles four points, and these are mainly to strengthen the governance at the local level. The first one is to improve on capacity of human resource by ensuring that the people who should be elected to manage the local governance particularly, at the LC 3 level are people with basic qualifications. And I would like to support the report of the Committee, which has proposed that the LC 3 chairperson should be somebody with a minimum qualification of “O” Level School Certificate. Many people have argued against this, but allow me to say that there is nothing equal to education. Education is crucial. The “O” level standard being required now is a level where somebody will have gained some basic knowledge from which cumulative experiences and other exposures would allow such a person to perform. As you know, a lot of resources are going down to the Local Government from the district council level to LC 3. So, I support this recommendation.  

Again there is need for us to look at the position where Councillors should also be given certain basic qualification requirement. When we were debating this Bill in 1997, there were many issues raised, one of which was to have a qualification tag to those standing, both for chairperson and councillors. But to my surprise, or to the surprise of many, when the House pronounced itself on the position of qualification later on, I think due to some pressure from some quarters, the Executive turned it down. I am sure now with a lot of resources going down to the district, the Executive will see it fit not to veto this provision.   

The second point, which is crucial and which is embedded in the amendment, is with regard to a provision where districts considered and bodies corporate or subjected to harassment by people who may have claims against the districts. The principal Act did not protect the Local Governments and were often subjected to having their properties attached by court bailiffs even on flimsy claims. Therefore, I am glad that the amendment to the Local Governments Act will give some protection. But again this does not mean that Local Governments should abuse this cover and incur debts and refuse to pay them.  This does not mean that local governments should commit acts, which should aggravate the position of wananchi.  So, this provision will protect the interest of the local authorities.  

The third one, Mr. Speaker –(Interruption)

MR.WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Okumu Ringa for giving way. I do not think I follow what hon. Ringa is saying. He is saying the provision should not be seen to be encouraging local authorities to commit acts, but I think he is talking about torturous acts against individuals and to commit or maybe to break contracts and so on and so forth. But supposing they do, and there is that provision that their properties cannot be attached in recovering of whatever judgement might have been passed in court, what would be the remedy for the individual?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Well, it is precisely against that background that I made my remark to the effect that this provision will protect the local authorities and they should not misuse it. And the only way for them not to misuse it is to have leaders who will exercise prudent judgement, prudent management –(Interruption)

MR.LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Member for giving way. You have said that this provision protects the local councils and that they should not misuse this authority that is being given by the proposal. How are you going to make sure that they do not misuse it?

MR.DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to be clarified because the creation of local authorities was a devolution of powers from the Central Government. I know that private businessmen transact with the Central Government. How are they protected in the event that when they transact business with the Central Government they cannot confiscate Government properties? But at the same time they do business with Government and they get protected. How will this one be reconciled? I would wish to be clarified.  

DR.CHEBROT: Mr. Speaker, I would like clarification from hon. Okumu Ringa. If this provision remains as it is, in effect it will mean that local authorities are above the law. If I went to court and I won a case against the local authority, how will the local authorities implement that court decision? If the provision remains as it is now, it will mean that local authorities will be above the law and you will have no recourse as an individual to go to the courts of law because they cannot implement it.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Well, I would like to thank my hon. colleagues for raising those issues. I think they should be well answered by the Minister responsible for this Bill. Mine has been an argument, which is valid in a sense that going by the current experiences, most Local Governments have had their properties attached, which should not actually be the case so long as there is a commitment for settlement. For example, I am one of those who have suffered in the hands of the Central Government, which never paid its debts to a company in which I had an interest leading to total loss of my life long family savings, family residence and loss of investments elsewhere.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. Several Members have queried the subject matter that hon. Okumu Ringa is talking about and it is obvious that he, as a backbencher, does not have the answer. Is it procedurally right for the Minister to let this anguish build up without responding? Would he not try to clarify on this issue?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister was going to defend the position as it is, but I think the backbencher, hon. Okumu Ringa, was expressing his views. Apparently, he could not provide a solution to points raised and it is appreciated that he was unable to. I think we leave it at that. Maybe at an appropriate time when the Minister responds, this is one of the points he will consider.  Instead of coming on and off, I think we rather note down the observations or the queries and then he can answer later.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling. I am sure the hon. Minister responsible for this Bill at an appropriate time will answer this. I am glad I raised it because it is an issue, which should not be allowed to go silently.  

The third point, Mr. Speaker, is with regard to -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have gone beyond five minutes, it is actually over ten minutes so you are taking -(Interruption)

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I have been interrupted but I have only two points to wind up.  

My third point regards the importance of this amendment whereby, for example, we have the statutory authorities like the District Service Commission, the District Public Accounts Committee, and the District Tender Board. These are important statutory bodies, which must be manned by people with adequate qualifications. I am glad that this Bill is addressing it. 

The other aspect is the funding of these bodies. As of now, it has been difficult for the districts themselves to finance these very important Commissions. The Bill is providing that they should be funded from the Consolidated Fund and this is a very important development.  

I would like to reiterate the importance of choosing people on merit, particularly with regard to people on the District Service Commission. There has always been an argument that you do not need people with adequate education. Education is important and I would like to admit that the position of the District Chairperson, which is equivalent to that of a Member of Parliament, be upheld and the position of the Chairperson of Local Council III to be somebody with at least Ordinary Level School Certificate be maintained. Because it is on the basis of these cumulative experiences with basic education that we are going to have good leaders.  

Lastly, I wish to state that the issue raised by my colleague, hon. Wambuzi yesterday, were irrelevant and I will treat it as an utterance out of ignorance and I will just leave it at that. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we should close this issue which the hon. Member opened. I ruled hon. Wambuzi out of order and I think let us end it there.

MR.KAGGWA MED (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want also to thank the Committee for the report. I, however, have some observations to make and the first one is in regard to MPs being members of the District Council. I was one of those who opposed it but experience has shown that we lose a lot. I would, therefore, support having them back. 

The second point regards the creation of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker at LC III level. While I am not opposed to having a Speaker, I am very uncomfortable about having a Deputy Speaker. I note in the report that they are supposed to be part-time, but again experience has shown that there is nothing free here whether you are part-time or not, somebody will still ask for allowances. When I look at the City Council here in Kampala, I do not recall a day when the Deputy Speaker actually ever presided over a Council meeting. So, I would request that we allow the Speaker but we do away with the Deputy Speaker. In the unlikely event that the Speaker is not there, the Councils should choose one of their numbers to preside over that particular session. Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, while the situation in Kampala may be like our colleague has said, the situation in Iganga, where the Speaker and the Chairman for a long time were not seeing eye to eye, it was the Deputy Speaker who steered the business of the Council.  

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you very much. We are talking about LC III level, not district level. I have no quarrel with the district level. I am talking about the LC III level. 

I am happy that we are now introducing “O” level at LC III level but I am personally disturbed by this equivalent business. I am really getting further disturbed that we are trying to make exceptions to be the general rules. I would recommend that either one has “O” level or one does not have, but this idea of equivalent then you start getting into trouble, I think we should do away with this, particularly, at those lower levels. 

I have also been reliably informed that in some councils some chairpersons also allocate themselves portfolios.  Somebody is Chairman and Secretary of Finance. I do not know what we can do to stop this sort of thing because I do not think the Local Governments Act, 1997 ever anticipated this.  

The other issue I want to talk about, and which I would like the Minister to clarify, is why he has unconstitutionally scrapped the divisions of Makerere University and Kyambogo. Under the 1989 Statute the Resistance Council statute these divisions were created and Statutory Instrument No.77 of 1987 established these two divisions. In the Local Governments Act these divisions were scrapped. The divisions concerned raised the issue with President’s Office, and I should say State House sought legal opinion. And in the letter to the Principal Private Secretary to the President, the Solicitor General advised that it was unconstitutional to scrap these two divisions and they continued not to be in existence and it has brought me at least some problems in my constituency since Makerere University is there. I want to be educated why the Minister of Local Government has opted to act unconstitutionally.

MR.BIDANDA SSALI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I do not accept that I acted unconstitutionally in anyway. If I did, the hon. Member on the Floor is part of me in acting unconstitutionally because the Local Governments Act was passed by all of us here. 

Two, yes, the Solicitor General gave that interpretation but I wrote back to seek another interpretation where the Act governing Makerere University gives the responsibilities that the Local Governments Act gives to the Local Government to Makerere University. For example, the responsibility for security in the Local Governments Act is under the Local Council. In the University Act, it is under the University administrations, the roads and so on. 

As I speak now, I think the office of the Solicitor General is trying to synchronise and if need be maybe come here to amend one of the two Acts. Otherwise, I did not act unconstitutionally (Interruption).

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, he has referred to these institutions of high learning, Makerere and Kyambogo. May I know what would happen in the event of Nkozi University, Mbarara or Mbale University? Does the same situation prevail or are these exceptions? He sought further clarification from the Attorney General or from the Solicitor General on the two that my colleague is asking, but we would like to have a holistic guidance in this matter. Does it apply also to other institutions of higher learning like Mbarara, Nkozi, Mbale, Nkumba and many others?

MR.BIDANDA SSALI: Mr. Speaker, this situation was created by an oversight, which the Ministry regrets very much, I think when we were passing the Local Governments Act. First, we were supposed to annul the instrument, which was gazetted in 1987, which recognised Makerere and Kyambogo as divisions within the context of the LCs of the day, not as Governments. And they were never Governments, but administrative units to take care of the speciality of Kyambogo and Makerere within the then divisions of Nakawa and Kawempe. When we passed this new Local Governments Act, the Minister of Local Government was supposed to repeal that instrument. It was just an instrument and not part of the original LC Statute and it was meant, as I said, for administrative purposes. 

Because of the failure to repeal the constitutionally legalised Local Government divisions, here is Kyambogo and Makerere saying, ‘we were also divisions’. So, those were the complications and that is why we had to refer the matter to the Solicitor General. And that is one of the reasons why we were wondering whether to recognise these as full fledged Local Governments because of their being institutions of higher learning. Indeed what the hon. Member is raising is what we raised. We said, ‘what about Mbarara, what about Mbale, what about Nkumba and so on. But the point was, as the hon. Member has submitted, that according to the Constitution, these were supposed to be divisions. So, maybe, after the Solicitor General has clarified the relationship between the two Acts in respect of the services, these could be divisions if this Parliament endorsed it in their own right as an accident of history. Otherwise, I do not have a legal interpretation.

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for that clarification and I am satisfied with the process being taken. 

My other issue is about a document that was circulated. I think it was written to the Speaker, Uganda National Urban Divisions Association, and this goes to the Chairperson of the Committee. According to that document, it is alleged that they were denied audience and they talk about a subject that concerns me as a representative of a city; that is, the scraping of the divisions. 

I want more and better particulars about what this entails because if it is scraping divisions including city divisions, which, at least population-wise, are much bigger than many districts, I would seek to move a motion for a deletion of the proposal at an appropriate time.  

On page three of the report, I note that they have substituted Justice for Chief Magistrate. Why do we really put Chief Magistrate? I know many areas do not have Chief Magistrates yet it is possible to have a Grade One Magistrate. I wish the House could consider this also.  

I also want the Committee to clarify to me why they deemed it appropriate to change the definition of Urban Council to Urban Authority. I also want to know what this entails. 

I am also disturbed by Clause 6, which says the Executive should not exceed a third of the Council. Surely, already with six members of the Executive Committee there are problems. I can anticipate how, say Kawempe, where there are 45 councillors and 15 of them elected as Executive Committee members. I want the Committee to clarify on this. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I support all the amendments made by the Minister. As far as I am concerned, they are in order and will improve the efficiency of the Local Governments. But I do have a little bit of a problem with the report from the Committee of the House.  Most of it is very good except in certain areas where the concepts of decentralisation have been touched.  

The concept of decentralisation, from my understanding, is that the service should be taken nearest to the people, and therefore, there are different levels of Local Governments. In the districts, the problems are very few. There are Local Governments like the sub-county, which is very well known and the demarcations are very clear. In the cities and municipalities, however, we have a little bit of a problem because the demarcations are new. Therefore, in a metropolis like Kampala, there are five divisions. These divisions are large, heavily populated for example, Makindye Division has 200,000 people who are residents, Rubaga is approximately 180,000 now, Kawempe is about 170,000 people, Nakawa is 150,000 and Kampala Central Division has a population of 140,000 people. As you can see, just by population alone, these divisions are bigger than most municipalities, and therefore, their authorities need more support. And this was done in the Local Governments Act. 

If you look at the Local Governments Act in Part 5, Second Schedule, Part B, it says functions and services to be devolved by the city or municipal council to divisions. This is where they separate the two. Whilst the city council gives us the policies, the divisions implement most of these policies and therefore, they clearly demarcate their functions in the law. 

What disturbed me here is when a city division was removed as an urban authority, which meant it was no longer part of the urban councils. This became a little bit difficult for us to accept those who represent these councils. We, therefore, request that this should be reviewed and if possible, they should be left as urban councils. Therefore, in the definition, which was brought, I intend to move an amendment that urban authorities will include a city council, a city divisional council, municipal councils and town councils. 

What has brought this about? There have been some legal wrangles between one of our divisions here in Kampala and the centre, and that wrangle is on a Tender Board. The argument is that the Tender Board is defined differently in the Local Governments Act. I have no problem with the Tender Board being at the centre. In fact, I do not agree that we should have too many Tender Boards. I think one Tender Board is okay at the centre as long as it is representative of the whole city. I would like, therefore, to request that because of this small wrangle, we should correct the Tender Board affair and not remove the division as an urban authority. It will be unfortunate because the urban authority has done very well in Kampala City. In some instances, the divisional authorities have even worked better than the city council. 

The other bit that brings problems and which I agree, is a big area, I want you to imagine Kampala City Council borrowing money to build a market like Owino. This money is borrowed from the World Bank and the City Council has to pay it back. I agree entirely that a formula should be found where to get that money. I have no problem with using the money collected out of this market to pay the loan and what remains is what they divide. My problem has been that it has not been given a chance to work. The Local Government Finance Commission was set up a few months ago and in one of its functions is to look at conflicts of this nature within the Local Government authority.  I, therefore, request that when there is a problem with the divisions of finances between the upper councils and the lower councils or when you have problems like these ones, this Local Government Finance Commission be given a function to arbitrate. It will be able to tell us who is having what and who should have what. To me, this is the way it should work in our conceptual framework. We must set up these institutions; but to amend the law simply because there is a conflict, it is believed today in modern management that conflicts improves management; but it must be resolved and  - institution should do so.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from my colleague on the Floor. The Local Government as it stands today, I assume, has the supervisory role over all local authorities including urban authorities. Does it play the arbitration role in the event that such matters arose not only in the area of finance, it could be in other areas of demarcations in districts boundaries and so on. Because now if it is limited to finance, I can see many other possibilities of dispute, which I think the Minister of Local Government would have the overall responsibility of intervening, not only in urban centres but also throughout the country.

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Speaker, I agree entirely with the information given to me. I think the Minister should be included as the second apparent. In case of finance, they go to the Finance Commission and if that fails, the Minister becomes the final man. I think the idea of going to court to exercise our legal rights should be reduced in this law. We should try and solve our problems in the House and then when it is really completely out of hand, then it goes to court; but otherwise, yes, I agree entirely. I think the Minister should be the final man in this particular case.

I would like to disagree with one of my Friends who –(Interruption)

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Speaker, I am raising this clarification not so much as to answer the hon. Member, but rather to explain more so that all Members should be able to see the amendment he intends to move in this context. amendment 6 seeks to remove the title of urban authority from the city division; but the hon. Member is saying that in municipalities the division should be different from the city division. So, he is saying that the city council, the municipality, a city division, a town council can be an urban authority, but the municipal division should not be in that bracket. Is that what you are saying, the municipal division? Okay then.

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Chairman, on the point of “O” level, I thought I would bring this one up having been the Minister of Education. We have different institutions in this country; technical schools, craft schools, and other institutions that give certain certificates that are equivalent to “O” Level. Therefore, I want Members to look at this technically and they can get the Minister of Education to advise us on this.

I have a problem with pegging education on political elections. It is the voters’ right to decide what sort of person should lead them. And there is a very strong belief that our people do not know. I would be the first one to disagree; the reason is that when we were in the Constituent Assembly (CA), the population of Uganda elected people there to make the Constitution; there was no such law and the people elected. There were very few that could not manage to represent those people. In most countries in the world, there is no such law. We are just introducing them ourselves and eventually, they tie us up. Let the voters be given civic education on what sort of a person they should elect. I disagree entirely that we should make laws for voters to take their rights away. Let the voters have their rights. The onus is on this Parliament and Government and all the people to teach Ugandans what sort of candidates they should choose. 

I therefore, find it a little bit difficult and taking short cuts to try and put credentialism in political elections. Credentialism has become a sickness and if we are not careful, we will find ourselves tied up in our own credentialism dreams. I therefore, request that we should be very careful; Local Government should put in place a law that civic education becomes a must, not only during elections but even in the schools.  

I would like to end by requesting that when the time is appropriate we should be allowed to move a motion against some of these amendments that were moved by the Committee. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.BUTELE ANTHONY (Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Bill because it is in line with No.1 of the 15 Point Programme which says; “Consolidating of democracy and constitutional governance”.  

I thank the Minister for bringing this Bill even though it is long overdue and also the Committee for doing a very good job. I would also like to thank the Ministry of Local Government for doing a good job in Arua district.  However, the people of Madi-Okollo say that the Minister should revisit the resolutions passed by Arua District Council year after year for the last 10 years to divide Madi-Okollo County into two counties. Madi-Okollo is a large county in Arua district which used to be a sub-district in the past Governments, but this new era of ours has no place for sub-district. The District Council year after year, for about 10 years, has asked the NRM Government to make Madi-Okollo two counties so that services are taken nearer to the people.   

The Constitution says power belongs to the people and the people of Arua district are represented by the District Council. The District Council has passed these resolutions to the Ministry. How come that nothing has been done? So, now that we are getting nearer to the end of our term, I appeal to the Minister to revisit this issue. That is the only thing the people of Madi-Okollo have asked me to tell the Minister. It is only new sub-counties, which have been created. So, if it is true that power belongs to the people, let us take action on what people have resolved. 

I do not want to waste more time; I am just making this appeal. I hope in the next few months we are left with the Minister will revisit this resolution. Maybe there are other districts, which might also want new counties to be created. So, I hope this will be done and Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But did you address yourself on the issue of increasing the size of Parliament because if you create a county, you are asking for another Member of Parliament in that particular county. Will that be the result?

MR.BUTELE: Mr. Speaker, if it is difficult to have the county, at least an administrative unit, because in Madi-Okollo now, if you want to do anything to reach the people, you have to do it in two. You have to talk to the Lower Madi and Upper Madi; you cannot do it in one day.  That is why they are saying in their wise decision that if not now, maybe for the future. I thank you.

HAJJI.SEMBAJJA SULAIMAN (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have just a few comments on this Local Governments Act (amendment) Bill. First, I want to impress upon the Minister of Local Government to conduct more seminars to the district councillors and the chairmen. After decentralising Government activities, most of these people came in without properly being sensitised. They came in as a result of being elected.  They were overwhelmed by so many projects and programmes of Government that have gone down without proper guidance. For example, the Ministry of Works has been sending money to the districts for rural feeder programmes. But when we go to these districts, you do not see the impact of this money. The money has been diverted simply because the councillors are not aware, it is only the Chairman and the CAO who are aware of how much has come; and people are not aware of these Government programmes. 

If seminars were carried out, each councillor would know his duties rather than being called to pass budgets and when the budgets are over they go home. As a result, even these councillors at the district have no impact on the Government programmes.  

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Speaker, I want to give some information to hon. Sembajja. There is a very good example. The councillors sit several times without getting paid and when they are approaching the budget day that is when they get their allowances. After passing the budget, they go outside and get their allowances. It is very unfortunate and we need to find a way to stop this because they are actually sacrificing these councillors and the poor fellows do not even debate these budgets.  Thank you.

HAJJI.SEMBAJJA: Thank you very much. If this is Kampala, which has got the most highly educated people, what about other districts like Katakwi, for example, or even Sebambule? (Laughter)

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Speaker, I wish to give some information that the Ministry of Local Government every month puts in the newspapers all transfers from the centre to each district. I think subject to collection, copies are sent to the Resident District Commissioners every month. So the councillors should be able to follow this. First of all, to know that the transfers are advertised by the Ministry of Local Government and therefore, be able to monitor. So when you say it is only the Chairman and the Chief Administrative Officer who know of the transfers, it is not strictly the position. 

HAJJI.SEMBAJJA: I thank you for that information. Yes, it is true that this –(interruption)-

MR.ORYOKOT: Mr. Speaker, Katakwi has better-qualified and schooled people. In fact, we do not have a problem with these qualifications. “O” level maybe a minimum of persons qualified in Katakwi, the rest are better than that. So, is it in order for my hon. Friend to give Katakwi as an example of persons with least qualifications, and yet he has never been there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the problem was lack of information. Now that you have given the information there is no problem.

MR.SEMBAJJA: Thank you Mr. Speaker, now that I have got the information, I think Katakwi is okay. But what I was saying is that I appreciated that the money sent to the district is put in Government newspapers. Members will agree with me that LC 5 chairmen have hijacked these programmes. They have personalised these programmes so much so that even if there is impact on the ground it is not attributed to the Government of the day, but the sitting Chairman of LC 5. 

And that is why even now you see the presidential candidates going all the way to explain what they have done instead of these people explaining to the electorate that they are only implementing Government programmes. They have hijacked everything so much so that even if you are a Member of Parliament they think you have done nothing in the district. And yet we sit here, we vote for this money, it goes to the district and we are not even recognised that we have made any contribution. We are the ones, instead of being thanked for passing a good budget for them to implement, they go behind our backs and fight to unseat us, and say that we have done nothing. This is where I appeal to the Government to actually explain to these people that the chairmen of LC V should not hijack Government programmes.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Speaker, I apologise for keeping on interrupting, but I think it is relevant information. Yesterday there was a meeting in a constituency adjacent to the constituency of the Member holding the Floor and one of the speakers was giving out the programmes brought down by the Government. And then the chairman LCV in his district stood up and said, ‘this water and these schools were done by the LC V. Did you not see me here with my councillors, bringing these technical people?’ The people said, ‘Yes’. So I would like to fortify your point that some of my chairmen have really taken over so that the credit goes to them rather than all of us collectively.  Members of Parliament, who debate the funds, cox the Non-Governmental Organisations and donors and them who implement. I was just fortifying your point hon. Member.

MR.SEMBAJJA: Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Minister for this observance and I think it is true in other areas. Since the bell has gone, I would like also to find out from the Chairperson of the Committee why they did not consider the qualification of the sub-county chiefs in this exercise. Because, as you know, 65 per cent of the revenue remains at the sub-county and it is this sub-county chief who assesses the taxes to be paid, collects it, banks it and spends it. Now they have left a vacuum that for him you do not need to tug the qualification. You only need to tug the qualification on the chairman LC.111 and others, and yet this is the accounting officer of the Revenue that remained at the sub-county.  So I would like the Committee to think about that, or the Ministry at least to impress on the Public Service Committees in the district to ensure that the sub-county chiefs are not hand picked by the chairmen or by the people of the day. A lot of embezzlements of funds have taken place and instead of taking the culprits to book, they transfer them there by making the cycle go on and on. So I think that element should be observed.  

Otherwise, I think it is correct for the chairperson LC.111 to be an “0” level person. When we were debating this very particular Bill, certain districts were cited that they did not even have anybody of “A” level. A case in point was Sembabule, but now that Sembabule has got –(Interruption)

MR.RWAKOOJO: I have kept quiet about the insinuations of hon. Sembajja who should know better considering that he is our neighbour, considering that our current LC.V chairman was Masaka’s accounting officer. Is it really in order for hon. Sembajja to continue referring to people of Sembabule lacking in education?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe he did not know that you have a new chairman. I do not know. Now he knows.

HAJJI.SEMBAJJA: Mr. Speaker, I agree with my colleague that the Members of Parliament should be ex-officio of the districts. A lot of things have gone wrong when we are just watching because we are not part and parcel of the problems in the districts and yet we are blamed for not guiding the districts. We are even blamed for not even being in the district council meetings. Why should I drive my vehicle to go simply to be called upon by the speaker to greet the councillors? That is all. You are only told, ‘oh, we have a Member of Parliament in our midst, let him greet you.’ Why should I drive my vehicle to go and simply greet the people? (Interruption)

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like the hon. Member on the Floor to clarify to me. If Members of Parliament are made ex-officio members of the district council, they are expected to occasionally attend the district councils and yet here in this very House we have a lot of problems in forming a quorum. What will happen when you start going to sit down there at the district level as members of the district council and when very often you cannot even form a quorum here? 

MR.DOMBO: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I wish to inform the hon. Member and this House that in some districts, it is actually very bad to the extent that some districts have specifically passed a resolution barring a Member of Parliament to speak in the local councils. I will give the example of Tororo District Council.  They specifically passed a resolution that even if the Member of Parliament attends council, he will only attend it and sit and listen and move away. He cannot even give information. This is very crazy and I think something must be done so that this trend is changed. Thank you very much.

MR.KINTU MUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, taking the advantage of my having been around for a long time, I would like to advise by giving information to hon. Sembajja that this question of being called upon to greet the people is an occasion for him to say what he has on his mind. And he should make full use of it whenever he is called upon.

MR.KYEMBA: Mr. Speaker, I would like also to dissociate myself from the suggestion by the hon. Member that Members of Parliament should be ex-officio members of local council. It is on the contrary a safety valve for Members of Parliament not to be associated with mismanagement that goes on at various levels. Many Members of Parliament here, including me, are invited to our local councils and are given an opportunity to address them or greet them as the former Prime Minister has said. I think this is perfectly in order and I think we should use that method. Thank you.

HAJJI.SEMBAJJA: Finally, greeting people without making an impact, one can as well stay home.

I want also to answer hon. Ongom. District councils are not sitting everyday as the Parliament does. You are only called upon once in a month or three months to attend the district council. Surely that cannot cause chaos in the quorum of this House. I think it is in order that you contribute as an elder, as an experienced legislator to guide those who need your experience. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, so far fourteen Members of Parliament have contributed to this Debate. I am now inclined to call upon the chairperson to wind up.

THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Rwabita Deo): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I am standing in for the chairperson who is sick. I will respond to some of the questions and comments made by the Members. Many people commented on about five or six subjects, therefore, I do not need to read everybody’s contribution but to summarise.

I will start with hon. John Kazoora about qualification for LC.111 chairpersons. The Committee is in agreement that at this time in the new century and millennium, Uganda should have some people at the LC.111 who can internalise Government policies and explain them to the people. Therefore, the Committee supports the question of qualification.  

Today the Central Government sends a lot of funds to the sub-counties as development funds. At the same time Government has started employing graduates at sub-counties; veterinary officers, agricultural officers, fishery people and what have you; people who are highly educated. If we leave it that the LC III chairman can be anybody in that community, you will get a problem in administration. You can imagine a chairman who studied up to P.3 or senior two or three and he has to supervise all these highly qualified people. We think it is high time the LC III chairpersons should at least have a qualification of “O” level so that they can speak English and interpret Government policies.  

Mr. Kazoora also raised the question of the Chairman LCV getting paid from the centre or the Consolidated Fund. Although he had a very sound argument, that it is unfortunate that the district chairperson gets less than chairperson of the District Service Commission or Tender Board. But the problem is that if you allow the chairperson to get money from the centre, there is a danger that he may even abdicate his chairmanship. He will think that as long as he can get his salary and other allowances from the centre, he does not have to care to see that his district develops as fast as it should. So by keeping him at the district, this Chairperson should make sure that his district develops very fast so that the tax base increases and the district gets more income and, therefore, his income also will be increased.  

At the same time, what could be done to alleviate the problem of LCV Chairperson since Government is sending a lot of money to the districts for development, roads, health, education and what have you. That there should be an element of administration cost at the districts because the Executive Committee does a lot of work to supervise these projects on health, education and what have you. Therefore, to alleviate the problem of the executive of the district, when money is sent from the centre, some percentage should be given to the district council so that they can supervise those projects. But to say that the chairperson is paid from the centre, the danger will be that you may not be an effective Chairperson because he is always taken care of by the centre. That was the argument by the Committee.

Hon. Nkuuhe was criticising the creation of new small districts. But I want to inform hon. Nkuuhe that from my experience in our Committee, we have visited a lot of districts in the north, in the middle west, western and part of the east. The small districts are proving to do a better job than the large ones. That is a fact. They are fulfilling the decentralisation policy of bringing services nearer to the people. 

Take the example of Kibaale. It started as a weak district, but with the resources that have been put there, Kibaale is doing well. A district like Ntungamo is doing well; even Kisoro has come up very well. So, when you say that small districts are not viable, I am sorry to say that from experience, and from the facts on the ground, those small districts can be more viable than the big ones and give better service delivery to their people.  

Hon. Lukumu was talking of MPs being ex-officios and many Members have talked about that one. At first I had also supported that idea but when you go deep into it, if you are an MP and you are heavily involved in the activities of the District Council, the problem will be that when there is a crisis you will be part and parcel of it. And instead of going there to advise, then you will be caught between the horns. You might even take sides within the squabble in the district. Then who will be the adviser?  When you go back to your district, you will even be accused of having caused a split in that district. So, I think, as Members said, it is wiser that MPs are not part of the district councils but for the sake of courtesy, the chairperson to the district council should invite MPs to attend their meetings, especially budgets and any other meetings, but I leave this to the House. You can discuss it in details.  

Hon. Lukumu was also suggesting that the district councillors should also have some qualifications since they are also going to help the chairman to handle these big projects in the district. I will leave that to the House to advise us on what levels they want for a district councillor. But to advise that an LC III councillor should be of “O” Level standard is pretty difficult because we have more than 900 sub-counties in this country. In some areas you may not get enough members at LCII to qualify for “O” Level to come to the sub-county as councillors. So, I advise that we leave that at the merit of a councillor and his capacity to be a good Councillor at the sub-county. But councillors at districts, we could put some minimum standards.  

Hon. Okulo Epak was criticising the contribution of town councils to the county and then municipalities to district councils. Why the Committee considered this and Ministry of Local Government was that at the moment there is no linkage between these urban councils with the district. We thought that if the municipalities gave some little money to the district, some of the common services like grading of roads or epidemics could be done together with no district council saying we have no control over you, or the municipality saying the district council is not helping us because of a, b, c, and d. But if there is some linkage, the relationship between the district and the municipalities, and between the county and the town council will improve. Although a county is an administrative unit, it is still useful. That is where there is a seat of the Assistant CAO and he or she needs to co-ordinate the sub-counties in that county.  

MR.KYEMBA: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. I appreciate the need to link up the municipalities with the district councils but one of the biggest problems facing municipal councils is finance - the distribution of small resources. Even as we talk now, many municipal councils are having financial problems. And to ask them to contribute another one per cent to the district council without ensuring the facilitation of the municipal councils; I have some problems with that. 

Another question I would like some clarification about is the one per cent suggested. Is it one per cent of the previous year’s budget or the current budget? In any case much of the provisions in any budget are not fully collected either. There is need to clarify this matter, Mr. Speaker.

MR.RWABITA: Thank you very much, hon. Kyemba. It is not one per cent. The Committee revised that figure because one per cent can be big monies. For example, you may get a division of Kampala collecting one billion and one per cent will be 100 million shillings; that will be too much. So, we reduced it to 0.1 per cent. As to which budget, definitely when you are budgeting, that 0.1 will be part of the budget of your municipality so that whatever you collect, 0.1 is given to the district. I think that should be the way it should be done.

Hon. Okulo Epak also insisted, and he was talking about the importance of improving the relationship between the politicians and civil servants at the district. I agree with him because we have had a lot of problems pertaining from the differences between the politicians in the districts and the civil servants. The problem is on both sides. Some chairpersons are very stubborn and think they can over rule every body. On the other side, you may get some stubborn CAOs saying that, “I am a civil servant, I came here to work and I must do that”. But I think there should be a two-way traffic so that the administrators and the politicians work together in harmony so that the district does not disintegrate as has happened in some districts.

Hon. Bigirwa talked of a lot of money going to the sub-counties, therefore, we need some minimum qualifications for our L.C.3 Chairmen. I think I have talked about that. 

About the Speakers on the lower councils, the Ministry of Local Government and our Committee found it fit to introduce the office of the Speaker and a Deputy Speaker at the sub-county levels. We have found out that a sub-county may spend a whole year without a council meeting because the chairperson is very stubborn. Or if he has done something wrong, he does not want to be pinned down by the council. Therefore, he is always giving excuses every other month and the council will be stagnant. But if there is a Speaker, then the chairman is no longer handling the council’s meeting. He can always be invited to attend. But then the speaker should work with other councillors to call meetings whenever necessary. That is why we have introduced the office of the speaker and deputy speaker. Incidentally, they will be elected from among the other councillors and they will be acting on part-time, not full-time basis. So they will be getting some allowances, but not full monthly pay.  

Hon. Wambuzi was against having minimum qualifications and he said people should be elected on merit. But I want to inform him that somebody can be a good chairperson L.C.3 but the poor man or lady may not have the capacity to analyse Government policies, or the capacity to handle thousands and millions of shillings that will come under his or her control. Therefore, although he is a good man or woman, he is going to be in trouble when things go wrong because some of the smart councillors can mess him or her up. So, I think let us have some minimum qualifications so that apart from merit, somebody should be qualified with “O” level standards.

Hon. Baba Diri was worried about persons with disabilities not appearing on some of the committees. I want to inform her that in the amendments, we have made sure that on the Statutory Bodies like District Service Commission and Tender Board, at least one person will be a person with disabilities. So, that one is being handled.

On the other hand, when you said that the disabled people have been eliminated because of retrenchment, I think that is a question of Public Service. I do not see why a disabled person should be dismissed when he or she can perform very well. So that one should be taken care of by Public Service; that even a disabled person can do a good job as long as he or she is able to do it.

Hon. Toskin talked about victimisation of civil servants by politicians. Yes, we have talked about that. This should be eliminated from politics; otherwise the districts cannot develop when the two sides do not work together.  

He also mentioned that many of the people on the Boards are influenced by politics. It is true, but now we are trying to mitigate that by bringing in the question of qualification, that you do not just pick anybody. For somebody to be on the Statutory Bodies he or she should have at least “A” level qualification. I think that will improve the situation. But definitely some of these politicians, especially the Executive, when they are campaigning, whoever is helping is promised a job, and when the people come, the council tries to see how they can manoeuvre and get their supporters these bigger jobs, which is unfortunate. This, I think, needs a lot of sensitisation by Central Government so that people who are put on these Boards are able and are recruited on merit.

Hon. Okumu Ringa, I want to inform you that the Statutory Body is now going to be funded from the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, it should not be a problem now with the districts having regular meetings for Tender Boards and District Service Commission.

Hon. Kaggwa approved of having a Speaker on L.C.3, but not a deputy speaker. Well, just as we were saying that at the district level, the deputy speaker of course is paid, but the deputy speaker at the Sub-county level can only get an allowance when he sits. So, we shall keep him as a deputy speaker, and when he works, he can get an allowance. But we will not give him an allowance because he is a deputy speaker. I think it does no harm really.  In case the speaker is not present then the deputy speaker can take the office and call meetings, and then he will get an allowance.

Capt. Babu talked about the urban authority and the divisions. The idea behind the urban authority is this: We are not stopping divisions from becoming Local Governments, no! The divisions will still be Local Governments. But what we are trying to say is that a city should be seen to be a city with one general authority and, therefore, work with the divisions to administer that city on planning, social services like education, health, roads so that planning is properly co-ordinated. That is the idea behind it. It is not malicious as some members from the division think that we have scrapped them off. No! Take a municipality, it also has got divisions. But unless a municipality has got a central authority where to guide the divisions about development, you may find that at one stage only two divisions will develop and the others will not. But when you have an authority of a municipality or a city, then planning is done properly with one authority guiding and development being evenly distributed. And, of course, the town council on its own is an authority also (Interruption).

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Speaker I am sorry to disturb the chairperson but I want to inform him that in the Local Governments Act, planning is the preserve of the district council and in Kampala, planning is the preserve of Kampala City Council. The divisions only implement.  Thank you.

MR.RWABITA: Thank you very much hon. Babu. That is fine, but why are you against having an urban authority? I have not got the reasons you have given for denying us to have an organised urban authority to take charge of the city, or municipality or town council? I would like to have serious reasons why you do not want that authority.    

On Tender Boards, they are going to be financed from the Consolidated Funds. I think it will be a duplication of resources if the central government has to send money to every division to have its own Tender Board, then to the city and the municipalities. In the past these divisions, even town councils, had a case because the districts said they did not have money for Tender Boards meetings and their jobs would be delayed unnecessarily. But now that this body is going to be financed from the centre, there should be enough funds to call meetings whenever there is need. So I do not see why the divisions or even town councils should get worried because the Tender Board of the city council and that of the municipality and the district will have enough money to call meetings and attend to their business. Therefore, the divisions and town councils should be happy to see that they are not even going to spend on that item because the Central Government is taking care of it.

I want to end with hon. Sembajja’s remarks that the District Service Commission should have standards. Yes, I want to inform him that the members of the District Service Commission will be required to have an ‘A’ level qualification. On the question of equivalence, it is unfortunate that it originates from the Constitution. So it has been carried on in most of these definitions that either “A” level, “O” level or the equivalent, diploma or what have you. So unless we change that, we still have the problem of quoting both the specific qualification and that of equivalent.  

I think those were the main areas touched by most Members. I beg to stop here. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank all colleagues who have given very useful contribution to this debate regarding very pertinent issues. I also thank members of the Committee for an excellent job, and my colleagues from the Ministry of Local Government. 

I pointed out at the beginning that the purpose of this amendment Bill was to strengthen the decentralisation programme, which, as colleagues have pointed out, has empowered our population both politically and economically. It has enabled them to make far-reaching decisions regarding the management of their society.  

I agree with the answers the chairman of the Committee has given to the issues raised by colleagues. We concur with the way forward and the suggestions made in the Committee report. I would like, however, to bring to the attention of my colleagues that there are some points that we need to look at very critically before we come to the final conclusion of this amendment Bill.

The first is the issue of qualifications for district councillors. When we were amending the Local Governments Act, there was no contention as far as the district chairperson was concerned. However, after wide consultations both within this House and the rest of the country, it was felt that if we set the minimum qualification for the district councillors at “A” level, very many influential district leaders with a lot of experience would be left out; leaders who have made outstanding contribution to the leadership of this country. 

You will recall one of the consultations at that stage was with His Excellency, the President. He actually referred this matter back to us before we concluded it.  We felt that if the district chairperson had the minimum qualification equivalent to that of a Member of Parliament, it was possible for us to execute business fairly comfortably with him / her and the vice-chairpersons. The Ministry’s position on this issue was further enhanced by Section 19 of the Local Governments Act, 1997. “The vice-chairperson, (of the district council) shall be a person who qualifies also to be a district chairperson”. In other words, we had two of these with the minimum qualifications of “A” level. So, not to exclude very prominent leaders in the district, we felt we should stick to this position for the district councillors.  

The second issue, which we concur with the Committee’s recommendations and contributions from Members of this House, is the minimum qualifications for membership on the Statutory Bodies in the districts. The District Service Commission, the Public Accounts Committee and the Tender Boards. We also feel –(Interruption)

MR.DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. According to the submission by the hon. Minister, it was anticipated that when we have minimum standards set for the chairperson and vice chairperson, it would help in the way business is conducted in the Local Councils. Apart from where the vice chairperson will be delegated to represent a chairperson elsewhere at a function, how will the qualification of the two persons enhance debate on local matters, on issues that are in English? The Local Governments Act itself is in English; everything is in English! The Budget is in English; the figures are complicated. How will the qualifications of the two people, who in any case do not preside over council, help in the execution of business in the district councils?  That is what I want to be clarified about.

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, considering that the majority of our sub-counties now have secondary schools, what real justification does the Ministry have not to raise the standard of leaders at this level? Furthermore, considering that, as a result of the decentralisation policy, a lot of resources are going down there, and you need people who can budget, who can plan, who can give adequate accountability; how does the Minister expect primary school leavers to give the essential accountability for the funds being sent to the lower levels of Government? 

DR.P.BYARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, this is precisely the point I was trying to emphasise; that the chairperson and the vice-chairperson, should be able to influence in terms of explanation. However, we agree that as far as the councillors at the district level are concerned, we a leave this function to the voter. Yes, we leave it to the voters to decide. If we have many secondary schools and so many educated people, we should not disenfranchise those people with potential leadership at the level of the district councils. This was reached after exhaustive discussions and consultation with various people.

DR.NTEGAMAHE: Thank you hon. Minister for giving way, and thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to give you information concerning the decentralisation policies.  We have graduates at sub-counties, we have doctors at county level; we abolished certificate people. How do you expect an uneducated councillor to interact with these people?  How do you expect him to work with these people? Personally, I am getting confused. I think it is high time we realised why we have put universal primary education, why we have recommended that every sub-county will have a secondary school. We are increasing the number of students sponsored by Government at the university, why are we wasting our time then? Please, I kindly request you to take this information and internalise it and use it properly.

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Well, I take the information with an open mind. The point I was trying to bring out was that this was, and continues to be, a very contentious debate. But, Mr. Speaker, protection me from my colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

DR.P.BYARUHANGA: I, however, wish to add that at the sub-county, we agreed with the Committee that the chairperson should have a minimum qualification of “O” level.

MR.RWAKOOJO: Mr. Speaker, I am kind of confused, and that is why I am seeking this clarification. When talk about the councillors, who in most districts are handling budgets of over Shs.1 billion and responsibilities and a high degree of debate, we say we do not need any minimum qualification, and I happy with that. But when we talk about the chairman of LC 111 whose main job is actually mobilisation, you say we want a minimum standard. Are we not being double faced here? I need clarification please.

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: You remember colleagues -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, do you really think this debate is going to resolve positions? Why do you not wait for the Committee Stage?
 
DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Yes, I patiently listened to my colleagues’ contributions, and I thought I would also give some information and contribution on this and then reply.  

We agreed that at the sub-county level, a lot of resources are now being sent there. That is direct from the district to the sub-counties and also directly from the centre to the sub-counties. There is no problem. Here we have agreed –(Interruption)

MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Speaker, because of the bell, we can not hear what the Minister is saying. I wish it could be switched off so that we can follow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The bell is ringing because we will be winding up in a few minutes and we will be required to decide on the matter. That is why I have to alert Members to come so that we do business.

DR.BYARUHANGA F.: Thank you very much Brothers and Sisters. We are setting this minimum ‘O’ Level qualification for the chairpersons of the sub-county because they are actually the implementers of the budget passed by the district council. As you have rightly argued, some of the actual implementers and the professionals at the sub-county are graduates. So we have agreed with your proposition that we should set a minimum qualification for the chairpersons at the sub-county.  

The other point, which came up repeatedly, was separation of powers between the chairperson and the speaker at the sub-county level. We were in total agreement with Members of the Committee and colleagues who contributed to the debate. Again because the speaker will be conducting business of the sub-county council, we agreed on the minimum qualification of “O” Level. I think there is no double standard on that because this one is guiding the debate of the implementation programmes, which are being passed on from the district council.  

The other point that also came up repeatedly was the issue of the Chief Administrative Officer and his appointment. On this one, I would like to refer Members to Article 188(2) of the 1995 Constitution. “The Chief Administrative Officer shall be appointed by the District Service Commission and shall be the chief accounting officer for the district.”  

The main argument here was that the Chief Administrative Officer must be protected from the politicians within the district. We may share the same sentiments but then we would have to amend this constitutional provision. These CAOs and Town Clerks are appointed by the District Service Commissions. There is no way at the moment we can appoint them through the Public Service Commission or from the centre. This would be contrary to the current provisions of the Constitution.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think there is protection because Article 173 of the Constitution deals with protection of public officers. I think even public officers serving under Local Governments are protected.  “A public officer shall not be- 
    (a) victimised or discriminated against for having performed his or her duties faithfully in accordance with this Constitution; 
    (b) or dismissed or removed from office or reduced to rank otherwise punished without just cause.” 
So, I think there is a constitutional protection and there is no need of a statutory protection when there is a bigger protection.

MR.KINTU MUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, whereas it is necessary for civil servants or technical people to be protected from politicians, it has been our experience in some of the sub-counties in my constituency that, in fact, it is the politicians who need to be protected from the machinations of the technical officers. The politicians and the chairman LC 3 and his councillors are easily manipulated by the technocrats on financial matters. Therefore, if anybody needs to be protected, it is the politicians who need to be protected against the technocrats.

DR.BYARUHANGA P: Thank you for that information and I also thank the Speaker for the guidance and support on that one. 

In addition to that, Section 60 of the Local Governments Act also provides protection to these civil servants. “A district officer or employee shall not be victimised, dismissed or removed from office or reduced in rank or otherwise punished without just cause.” 

Two, “A person aggrieved by the decision of the District Service Commission may appeal to the Public Service Commission provided that the ruling of the District Service Commission shall remain valid until the Public Service Commission has ruled on the matter. This was lifted out of the Constitution into the Local Governments Act as the situation stands currently. 

Members also raised the issue of MPs being ex-officio members of Local Governments. That also came up repeatedly, but I would like to clarify to colleagues referring again to our Constitution, Section 80(3). You will recall that we had a heated debate on this when we were passing the Local Government Bill. “A person elected to Parliament when he or she is a member of a Local Government Council or holds a public office shall resign the office before assuming the office of Member of Parliament.” Even this council sits once or twice in a month; ex-officio membership of that council is a public office. You cannot, therefore, as this section stands go back as a Member of Parliament to sit as an ex-officio member of a Local Government Council. It would be contrary to provision 80 of our Constitution.

MR.DOMBO: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Quite often, the law framers have the intention and the spirit behind the later. When the constitutional framers made that provision for a Member not to hold the two offices, what did they intend to do? I thought that they had anticipated that nobody can hold two offices from which he can participate gainfully and it was the intention to protect the resources so that somebody does not get paid twice. When somebody is an ex-officio member and his intention is just to make a contribution, we could make that protection in the law specifically provided for.  But let us look at the intention. What was the spirit behind that paraphrasing of the Constitution? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I think the Article, which the Minister has read out is very clear in simple terms. Then you cannot interpret and then bring in other interpretations when the provisions are very, very clear. They are saying, ‘if you are a member of the Local Government Council and you are elected a Member of Parliament, you have to resign’. Now, you are saying you have already been appointed a Member of Parliament and then you want to go back. Although the other one is talking about when you are being elected; definitely when you are a Member of Parliament you cannot, because of this provision, be a member of the other council, and the words used a very, very clear. So, you cannot say let us go behind and find out the policy, which policy! The policy is that you cannot be a member in the two councils! I have heard the contributions but then this is a clear provision of the law.  

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: I am seeking clarification from you, Mr. Speaker, and probably to ask whether the hon. Minister holding the Floor is aware. It appears as if the application of that particular provision is being applied on double standards. Is the hon. Minister aware that some Members of this Parliament are holding other offices? For instance, the chairman Consolidated Properties is a Member of this House. We have several Members here who are still on the Boards of parastatals. We have hon. Members here on NEC; we have hon. Members here who are directors in secretariats and universities. Can you help me to understand the application of the provision without being double edged and whether the hon. Minister is aware of those cases I have enumerated? And if so, what is the specific exception for Members of Parliament not being ex-officio of Local Councils but they can be on boards and be directors and on university councils? Can I get clarified in no uncertain terms?

CAPT.BABU: Mr. Speaker, I see what the hon. Member would like to have, but I think all of us have had a problem in expressing ourselves. I think we need a relationship with our districts; some sort of relationship where we can sit with the district council at least once in a certain time of the year, like in three months; and we want to make it a little bit formal. 

In Kampala, for example, we have not had a problem because our Council invites us during the budget, in some of their executive meetings – I was just giving an example that there is a relationship we have set with our own Councils. The good thing about this arrangement is that if there is a very big problem with that Council, the Members of Parliament will not be involved. They seek our advice; we give them advice and they take it very seriously. We have an MP forum with a chairperson who is permanently in dialogue with the chairman of our district and also with the chairmen of our divisions. But to become Members of another Government Council, as opposed to a board, would be extremely unfortunate. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think, what can be done is to make provisions to entitle Members of Parliament to attend; because there are circumstances when a person who is not a member can attend the proceedings of another meeting and even contribute. The only restriction will be that he will not vote. So, we can make provisions to entitle Members to attend these meetings without making them members. 

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Thank you Mr. Speaker for that guidance. As I said, we are open-minded on this debate.  What I was referring to specifically was that being ex-officio members of the council would be out of order. In addition, the question raised by hon. Akika. I am concentrating on the Local Governments Act especially as far as operationalisation of this Act is concerned. I am not aware of what will happen in other boards like, National Water, which hon. Akika is very familiar with.  

Lastly, Members raised the issue of contributions from the town councils, the upper county units and district councils to form some kind of linkage. I feel that what hon. Okulo Epak raised yesterday was very pertinent to this issue of linkage. The 0.1 per cent is really tokenism considering the fact that when you visit some of these urban and town councils, they are complaining about inadequacy of resources and the fact that most of the conditional grants go to the districts for priority programme areas. But then there are specialised services, which the urban authorities are supposed to carry out and do not have adequate funds. So, even what may appear as tokenism, they really need it very badly. So, on this one, I disagree with my Committee and urge that we leave this tokenism out as far as the town councils and urban authorities are concerned; they need it very badly. 

If there is need to reflect this linkage, it is provided for in Section 100 of the Local Governments Act. “If the Minister of Local Government is not satisfied that a duty or a power of a council is being exercised in proper, lawful and efficient manner, the Minister may, in respect of that duty or power, cause a meeting of the council to be called and points out irregularities found and give the council the guidance necessary.” If we need some linkage in terms of supervision, there is that section to follow up on supervision. 

I am satisfied that the points raised by the chairperson of the Committee answered the queries raised by colleagues. I wish at this stage to submit that the –(Interruption)

MRS.BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Yesterday in the general debate I raised a very important issue concerning the conditional grant sent from the Central Government to the Local Governments where they do not benefit persons with disabilities. I suggested that at a later stage there was need to put some Clause to ensure that people with disabilities can benefit from these conditional grants. I have not got any response from either the Minister or the chairperson. Thank you. 

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I too yesterday in the general debate wanted to know from the Minister following the contribution by the hon. colleague from Bushenyi, why the collection of graduated tax was so low. This was by way of information. She said it is only two per cent. I have inquired from others who said it is not more than 10 per cent. Is this a general trend in the country? If so, what is the cause of this low collection of graduated tax? And as a district being viable, could we get some information on this? 

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Yesterday I gave information to the effect that it is true a Member from Bushenyi mentioned low percentage of graduated tax that has been realised up to today. I said we are carrying out some studies to verify this information. Hon. Pinto also wondered whether this was the trend throughout the country! It would be unfair for me to give you un-researched and incorrect information. But I want to emphasise that graduated tax continues to be the main source of internally generated revenue in all the districts throughout the country. 

On the issue of disability vis-à-vis conditional grants, I want to point out that when you look at the priority programmes and the funding from the centre to the districts, this funding cuts across all special categories and groups; the youth, the women, the disabled in as far as health services, education, roads, water are concerned. Again, this is an area, which we can discuss with hon. Baba Diri to see the specific areas she may wish us to consider. But these conditional grants, particularly for the priority programme areas, cut across all these special categories of persons throughout the country and in all the districts. I thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali): For whatever it is worth, Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform Members of Parliament that the graduated tax collection for the previous year was Shs.66 billion in all Local Governments. As the Minister has said, for this year it is just a claim by some Members that so much has been collected, but we still have the Local Government Finance Commission to give us what will be in this particular year.  

The second point of information is on the question of a contribution by municipalities to the district. Let us remember that each municipality is being represented in the Council by not less than two, three, four members who are entitled to allowances and all other things, which a district councillor is entitled to. They get their allowances from taxes collected locally and so if you resist the idea of a municipality contributing, then your representatives in the districts will be benefiting from taxes paid by the rural sub-counties. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.BYARUHANGA P: Thank you very much for that information. Mr. Speaker, with that information, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “Local Government amendment Bill, 2000” be read the Second time.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the motion. The only problem is that I do not have the numbers required to decide one way or the other. So I think I will put the question tomorrow at 2.30p.m. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until 2.30p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.17p.m and adjourned until Thursday, 8th February 2001 at 2.30 p.m.)

