Wednesday, 3 February, 2010

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting, but as I said yesterday, we have a lot of important business to handle; we have Bills and so forth. I am quite aware of the circumstances under which you are operating, but I appeal to you to spare some time so that we can carry out this work on top of your personal commitments elsewhere. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING BILL, 2008

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Urban Tibamanya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planning Bill, 2008” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have the backing; please proceed.

MR TIBAMANYA: Mr Speaker, we have in this country a law known as the Town and Country Planning Act, CAP 246, which was enacted in 1951 and revised in 1964. It is outdated. This Act was enacted to regulate and operate in a centralised system of governance where physical planning was carried out at national level through the Town and Country Planning Board. The implementation of the Act was supervised by local governments, especially the urban local governments. 

Uganda has gone through many social, political and economic changes. The promulgation of the 1995 Constitution established a decentralised system of governance which divulged several powers and functions including physical planning, finance and execution of projects from the central government to the local governments. This has created a need to enact a physical planning legislation which is consistent with the Constitution and the laws governing physical planning in Uganda. 

Therefore, the object of the Bill is to consolidate the law on physical planning into one law in order to make the whole country a planning area. The Bill seeks to enact physical planning legislation which is in accordance with the Constitution and other laws governing physical planning in Uganda. 

The Bill establishes a National Planning Board, which shall be responsible for physical planning. The Bill seeks to establish district and urban physical planning committees. It also provides for the making and approval of physical development plans, applications for development and other related matters. 

As you will see, the Bill is divided into eight parts and nine schedules for consideration by this august House. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister. 

2.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have the honour to present the report of the committee on the Physical Planning Bill, 2008. This Bill was read for the first time on 12 August 2009 and was referred to the Physical Infrastructure Committee which has considered it in accordance with rule 161(c) of the Rules of Procedure. 

Let me take a minute to explain what physical planning is all about. Physical planning is the process of establishing orderly human settlement development with requisite activities, social services, amenities and physical infrastructure to achieve social, economic, political and environmental wellbeing of the people. As you can see, physical planning is the mother of orderly development for all of us on planet earth. 

Human settlement is faced and characterised by catastrophes like buildings collapsing and rampant fires that have claimed lives. Urban settlements have borne the effects of other catastrophes and property worth of millions has been destroyed. 

Urban and rural development in Uganda is characterised by the following:

    • There is general lack of guidance for the housing sector both in urban and rural setting. That is why there are a lot of slums developing in our urban centres. 

    • There is abuse of road reserves. You can recall that whenever Ministry of Works is building new roads, we are involved in a lot of compensation because of abuse of road reserves.

    • Abuse of building space and service lanes.


    • Abuses of known and disseminated building standards with clear control mechanisms. 

    • Absence of building designs which are appropriate for different topographies. You can see that whenever people are building on hills, they excavate, which might not be necessary. 

There are also poor or no enforcement mechanisms in planning areas. This is well demonstrated in urban centres where physical planning has been exercised. 

Objectives of the Bill

The Bill is intended to consolidate the law on physical planning into one law in order to make the whole country a planning area (urban and countryside), which is essential for efficient resource use. This is a fundamental change and I hope honourable members will internalise and understand the implications of this.

The Bill introduces different levels of planning with specified mandates of functions, linkages and approvals. This will lead to public participation in planning and implementation. The Bill establishes a National Planning Board and District and Urban Physical Planning Committees responsible for planning.

The Bill is timely, since the current Town and Country Planning Act Cap. 246 was enacted in 1951, then revised in 1964 and cannot be applied to today’s development strategy. The Bill, if passed, will repeal the Town and Country Planning Act. 

The Bill seeks to enact a physical planning legislation which is in accordance with the Constitution and other laws governing physical planning in Uganda.  

Before I go into details, I would like to request my colleagues to get acquainted with the guiding principles of this Bill. 

Methodology

The committee interacted with the following institutions and persons: 

    • The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
    • Uganda Institute of Professional Engineers
    • The Uganda Society of Architects
    • Urban Authorities Association of Uganda
    • Baruga Planning Consultants
    • Mr Mukasa Kintu, a professional Physical Planner
    • Mr Charles Kyamanywa, Chief Town Planner, Kampala City Council

Observations

        1. The establishment of the National Planning Board does not state the categories of persons to be appointed, their qualifications or profession. This is a professional issue and we note that we must have some specific professions to be on this board.

        2. At the district and lower local councils, the physical planning committees are intertwined with the local councils. This is likely to lead to political interference. 


        3. The law will require massive sensitisation of communities to appreciate the importance of physical planning. As you already know, physical planning has only been exercised in urban centres but this makes the whole country a planning area hence the need for massive sensitisation.

        4. The physical planning law should be synchronised with other existing laws like the Land Act, NEMA Act and others.


        5. The financial challenges for the implementation of the law will include funding the physical planning committees at all levels and compensation for property affected by the planning. 

        6. The law will result into sustainable land management, equity and social justice, preservation of heritage, for example, buildings, preserve culture and will ensure public participation in planning as well as reduce time lags.


        7. The committee also notes that there will be institutional challenges in the implementation of the law, for example, the land boards may view it as an infringement on their powers.

        8. Since the creation of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, there hasn’t been any effort to harmonise the functions with that of the Ministry of Local Government in respect to urban management and development. The issue is still divided between the two ministries and this needs to be clarified.

Recommendations

There should be participation of the private sector and individual land owners in planning. Here, we are emphasising the private sector, the people who are driving this economy, and individuals to participate fully in implementation.

The law should clearly highlight the kind of people to be members of the National Physical Planning Board. This is a matter that requires professional skills.

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in conjunction with that of local government should address the financial implications of implementing the law like facilitating the physical planning committees at the district and urban levels.

The law should create room for appeals in case the proposed plans are not acceptable to the land owners. There is no provision within the law where land owners can appeal.

The proposed Building Control Bill should be brought to Parliament as it also addresses planning. The implementation of the two would facilitate development.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and members of your committee, for this report. Honourable members, debate is now open on this Bill.

2.47
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you. I want to thank the committee for the report and for the matter that concerns the planning of this country.

I want to note that there should be some further clarification on this. There has been the inter-relationship between this law and other relevant bodies that exist like district land boards and the challenges that the report says the law will envisage. 

However, I want also to know how this law and the board will interlink and synergise with the National Planning Authority. We want to have this clarified. How will the synergy between the National Planning Authority and the board come about? Won’t they also be challenging as if they will be playing the same role? We want the law to streamline the relationship between these different bodies that deal with the same issue. 

The report also touched on funding where it said that government should be ready to budget and fund this board. We know there is an issue of the land tribunals and the funding therein and these are closely related entities. So, how can this law now streamline and ask for funding from government for the board yet the land tribunals which are core structures that directly feed into the board are not yet funded? I want that clarification at least to be made so that when we pass this Bill all these synergy issues are streamlined. Thank you.

2.50
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a huge challenge as a country. While all these laws which are coming are good, we have a problem of synergy or of co-operation. I will give an example. For us who come from the urban areas, when you talk about physical planning and urban planning, and you find the Department of Urban Planning in the Ministry of Lands, we get lost. The Department of Urban Planning as far as we who represent urban areas are concerned, should be in the Ministry of Local Government because these are the people who are handling the day to day issues. The Department of Urban Planning being in the Ministry of Lands and Physical Planning makes the whole thing queer. They are not co-ordinated and that is why you see most of our urban areas which are under the Ministry of Local Government are just springing up and when people from Urban Planning, which is under Lands, come, they have no appropriate connection. In fact some of us had even approached members of the Cabinet and we were requesting that the Department of Urban Planning should go to the Ministry of Local Government.

Secondly, how is this law related to the Country and Urban Planning Act? I know the committee must have done a lot of work but for us as Parliament and as Government, because we are working for the same people and the same country, we would like to see the harmony and the co-operation that is existing within these ministries so that if it is necessary to transfer a department for purposes of improved planning and improved implementation, it should be transferred. For example, I know that the Department of Urban Planning is wrongly placed. People can say what they want but being in Lands and not Local Government is absolutely a big disservice to this country and to the urban areas in this country. I thank you.

2.52
MR NORMAN MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take the opportunity to thank the committee for the report that it has made and I also want to thank the ministry for coming up with this law.

All other things being said about this law, I think this law is long overdue. This country lacks planning and that is the issue that is perturbing us. When somebody fails to come up with a good plan in an urban place or to cope with the authorities in the urban centres, then he just goes a few kilometres out of the urban authority premises or areas of jurisdiction and he goes to the other rural sub-counties and puts up the premises. At the end of the day, the planning which we are yearning for - coming up with those kinds of places that will have been wrongly developed - I think we shall always just be chasing an issue which surely should have been rescued in time. 

So, let whatever needs to be done be done but the law for planning the country as one unit needs to be passed right now. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.54
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The Physical Planning Bill is a necessity. It is high time that this nation got planned. You do not need a very intelligent person to tell you that. Wakiso should have been planned ten years ago. The kind of mess that we are going through because we have not planned our country is terrible.

Be that as it may, I find the observations that have been made in this report, interesting. The first one is, “The law will require massive sensitisation of communities to appreciate the importance of physical planning.” The question is: what should have come first? Is it the Bill or the sensitisation of the population? Because you are going to pass a Bill, make it an Act, impose it on people who have not heard about it and then start telling them, “There is a law now requiring you to do the following.” Can you imagine the kind of problem we are going to go through to get this Act appreciated and then implemented? I think this is something which should have been taken into account first and foremost. 

I am saying this because I come from an urban authority. Even in areas where planning has been required for years, it is a problem convincing people to even present their own plans with their own houses for approval by the urban authorities. People do not yet understand that it is necessary to live in a planned environment if you live in an urban area. Now, what more will you have to do in the whole country if you have to involve everybody? 

There is another observation: “The Physical Planning Law should be synchronised with other existing laws, for example, the Land Act and NEMA Act.” Whom do they want to do this? Why do you talk about the synchronisation? I thought that should have been an obvious thing which should have been considered a long time ago. Because as we talk now, the kind of conflict you have with people living in wetlands, having had to be physically evicted from wetlands when you allowed them to build there in the first place and when you gave them land titles for those places is an indication that actually the aspect of planning has not been taken into account. 

And then, the third observation: “The financial challenge of the implementation of the law will include funding the physical planning committees at all levels, compensation of property affected by the planning…” Now, what amount of money will be involved in this kind of thing? Are we offloading an Act of Parliament on to the population which has massive financial implications without having taken them into account? One expects that there should have been an indication of what will be required in this particular Act.

I am saying this because we passed a Land Act and set up committees which never worked simply because they were not funded. Are we now repeating this mistake in this Act when the Land Act itself is not working?

Finally the committee notes that there will be institutional challenges in implementation of the laws, for instance, land boards may view it as infringement on their powers. Since the creation of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, there has not been any effort to harmonise its functions with that of the Local Government in respect of urban management and development. We who live in urban areas have a nightmare. You want to do planning in the Municipality but –(Interruption)

MS SEMPALA: I want to give some information about the chaos that poor planning has caused in areas where many Members in this House reside, especially, here in Kampala. We have a place which we have reported to the division in Makindye opposite the barracks; it is a merry-go-round building with many additions. It works for 24 hours but it does not have a septic tank. The sewage from that building that accommodates up to 600 people goes to an open septic tank. The division does not know whether it has a right to tackle the issue or whether it is the city council to handle it. So those are some of the problems that we have in urban areas.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: I am just informing the honourable shadow minister that you cannot postpone the Bill on Physical Planning just because you have not yet implemented the land law because actually planning normally starts before everything. If you do not plan, you may not do anything. So this Bill is very important. Actually you should have asked why we didn’t start with this law before we went to the other one. But to put it the other way around is to belittle the power of planning. Unless you think about building a church or Mosque, you cannot start building because you need the land first and go on to plan the appropriate Church or Mosque.

I beg to inform the honourable shadow minister that planning is a fundamental prerequisite for doing anything as far as development is concerned.

MR KAWANGA: I thank the minister for his advice. I do not know where he was when I started my presentation because that is where I indicated how important planning was and how late it is but then I started pointing out where the mistakes are - perhaps he was not listening at the time.

I want to indicate that for some of us who come from urban centres our nightmare has been that the land is owned by the district land boards within municipalities. They are the ones who allocate land to developers but they do not take into account the planning facilities within the municipalities before they do the allocation. There is no coordination between what goes on in the municipal councils and the district land boards. So allocations are made and what should have been open space is converted into other things; people are given titles and the pressure of how you are going to do implementation is not taken into account.

Unfortunately, I do not know whether this new Physical Planning Bill will handle that chaotic situation about planning. I am a supporter of physical planning and that is why I want to ask the people who have been involved in this Bill, how many physical planners do we have in this country? When the Act goes out, who are the technical people who will help implement it? Do we have enough of them? Because in my municipality, we have a very small physical planning department with one person handling it and he needs a lot of assistance from other people. What will happen when a whole Bill of this Act is offloaded on to the country; do we have enough physical planners to put in place? I support the motion.

3.02
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative Apac): I support this motion and I want to start by talking about the problem which the Bill intends to address or the mischief it intends to cure which the report does not talk about vividly.

If you look at Kampala which is called a city, it is not a city if it was to be judged as a planned city. You will find residential areas in the centre, which are supposed to be commercial areas. If you go to Luwum Street or to William Street, you will find commercial activities in that area but you will find children playing. You will find the majority of Indians staying in Kikuubo, William Street or Owino as a residential area and you wonder whether this is a commercial area or a residential area. 

In normal planning of a city, a commercial area should be left for commercial activities because there are risks. Imagine when Owino got burnt and there are people staying around! William Street is a purely commercial area but you find so many Indians living there. For the MPs of Kampala here, it is the truth and we know it.

Look at what we call petrol stations; you go to Kampala now and petrol stations are like bananas that you buy on the way home. You move one meter and there is a patrol station; you move in residential areas and there are petrol stations; you move near hospitals and there will be petrol stations. Imagine if a patrol station caught fire near a hospital! I think this is the core issue why we should support this Bill. I hope that if the Bill is passed and it becomes law, we shall rectify some of these issues, because you cannot have a petrol station near a hospital or near an area where, if it catches fire, everybody and everything is in danger.

Go to a residential area, you will find schools there. You will also find people praising God in a commercial area or in a residential area and you are in danger of noise. In the developed world, you cannot have all these noisy instruments in a residential area. Here you will find that people have put up ambiguous churches and they are making noise and people are in danger. You sit and wonder: Am I living in Kampala City or in a commercial area? In such cases, there should be places where churches, schools and estates should be put. 

If you go to Kenya, you will find specific areas where you can put estates. Estates are these flats which are now masquerading in Kampala. Someone will go and buy one plot of land, which should be a residential area, and put up these huge estates for rent. For you, you are in your bungalow there and someone is in an apartment and you do not have your privacy. These are things that this Bill should address. 

I am glad that the Bill talks about standards and guidelines, as well as promoting orderly and sustainable development. The only problem I have with the Bill is that it is talking of planning for only three years. If you look at page 18, it says, “To ensure the integration of physical planning into the three-year integrated development plan”. You cannot talk about planning when you have an integrated development plan for only three years. I think we need to look at the broader issue of how long. Objectively speaking, three years should not compel us to accept the plan. 

Otherwise, I support the motion and hope that when the Bill is passed, the enforcement and implementation will be rigorous and we shall correct some of the anomalies in the current planning.

3.09
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to my colleagues who have welcomed this Bill with a view that it is long overdue. I support the motion and the minister and I applaud him for bringing this Bill.

I support the committee for the views they have raised, but wherein lies the problem? I do not agree with the committee that because of inadequacy of laws regulating physical planning, we have the mess in Kampala and other urban areas in this country; no! The Town and Country Planning Act is archaic as it was enacted way back in 1951, but have we complied with that law? We have not enforced it to the letter. 

We know what is happening with the Town and Country Planning Board here in the ministry. It is ineffective. You know what is happening with the physical planning boards we have in local authorities or even here in Kampala City Council. They are extremely corrupt. A person constructs a structure which is illegal, he comes and talks to these people who are supposed to approve those plans and all of a sudden the structure which was illegal is approved. You know this, Mr Byandala. You were an engineer in the city one time and you know what happens in Kampala City Council.

The tragedy we have is that we do not enforce these laws; that is the problem. I do not want you people to condemn the people I represent in Kivulu, Kisenyi or Katanga that they are the only ones who are violating the laws. Yes, I know – actually, we have a law in this country which states that you are not supposed to construct pit latrines in the city centre, but you come and see Kampala Central, which is the heart of the city; there are so many pit latrines even on the pavements. The other day I had to move because there was a pit latrine being constructed on a pavement around the old taxi park on Namirembe Road. I went personally and demolished it and the person is there complaining. The physical planners were there and the laws are there. 

I see many of you attending conferences in Imperial Royale. That hotel is in a road reserve and it is a fact. It has no plan. I sit on the Local Government Public Accounts Committee. We went with the physical planner and the city engineer to inspect a five-star hotel, which was supposed to be constructed at the Centenary Park. What do we find there? Nakumatt Shopping Mall! We asked the engineer, “What does the plan say?” He answers, “The plan says a five-star hotel for CHOGM purposes”. Then we said, “This is Nakumatt Oasis; is this the five-star hotel?” He had the audacity to tell us, “But honourable members, this is equally good; you also appreciate.” But where is the plan? 

Buildings are collapsing in the city and we are faced with a crisis. This is a catastrophe in the city not because we do not have the laws in place, but because people are corrupt and they do not want to enforce the laws. So, much as we are applauding the minister for bringing this Bill, we should address those problems.

When you look at the memorandum here, the policy behind the Bill is to consolidate the law on physical planning into one law in order to make the whole country a planned area. I find a bit of a contradiction here. I see here on page 3 of the recommendations, the last one where the committee says that the proposed Building Control Bill should be brought to Parliament as it also addresses planning. This also violates our Rules of Procedure. We are not supposed to legislate in anticipation of a Bill to be brought to Parliament. I wonder how the committee got to know that there is a Bill that has not yet come to Parliament and they are saying it should come. Even if it is brought, it is in conflict with the principle here that says we want to consolidate all the laws relating to physical planning. 

The same applies to the Bill which is before Parliament - the Kampala Capital City Authority Bill. It makes Kampala and the surrounding areas a special planning area, yet it is not captured here. We are making a law for physical planning in the whole country yet there is another Bill we are going to discuss specifically for Kampala, Mukono, Mpigi and the surrounding areas. So, what is it that we are making? Why are we inconsistent? Why don’t we move systematically?

Again, the Minister of Lands is coming up with a land use policy. A land use policy is supposed to inform legislators about physical planning. Aren’t we putting the cart before the horse by debating the Physical Planning Bill when the policy is yet to be brought before us? It is not yet debated and passed. A policy should come before the law.

Finally, on the issue of the land tenure system, we have a hotchpotch of different land tenure systems and they are not even addressed here. When you are looking at issues of physical planning, you cannot lose sight of the fact that we have a confused land tenure system in this country. How do you plan? You can find a piece of land where there is a mailo interest, a lease interest, bona fide occupants, a customary tenant, tenant at sufferance, a tenant at will, squatters, trespassers – all kinds of people on the same piece of land. This is the problem we have in Kampala; people are claiming different uses of land. Why don’t we re-align the land tenure system in Uganda and come up with a land policy and then the physical planning comes last?

I thank you, Mr Speaker. That is my view. Otherwise, I support the idea of consolidating the law relating to physical planning. I thank you.

3.16
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion, but I would like to say right from the beginning that our problem in this country is not lack of laws. We are very good at making laws and very poor at enforcing them. All the three parliaments since 1996 have made so many laws that we do not even know the number. If you are given a law now, you may not know that you made it. We just make the laws and pack. 

The first problem is corruption. You will never enforce any plan, however good it is, in a corrupt situation like this. Three years ago, for example, I worked in Kololo for KCC and I found a plot on Baskerville Avenue sub-divided into four plots. I wrote to the National Planning Authority and I have not received any reply up to now. In one plot, you find vehicles reversing from the main road. We are now transferring slums to Kololo! It is very unfortunate and this is because we are corrupt. The chief planner in the city council should not have allowed that to happen, but it is happening in broad daylight. Where corruption rules, forget implementation of the law and good planning – (Interruption)

MS NABILAH SEMPALA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Since you are talking about the area around Kololo, I think every Member in this House has used the roundabout near Fairway Hotel. There is a Chinese mall there. It was a residential house but the Chinese have put a showroom by building roofs and their doors through the perimeter wall. Everybody passes there. I informed the town clerk about that issue on a personal level, but I think that Chinese is powerful because she was able to construct the showroom and all Ugandans are busy buying from her. That was the information I wanted to give.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank hon. Nabilah for that information. 

The second problem we have is indiscipline. Our officers in Government have no discipline anymore. If you go to any government office at 10.00 O’clock, you will be lucky to find one officer. Coming to office now is an honour. It is very unfortunate. 

THE SPEAKER: But do you take into account the traffic jam -(Laughter)- that prevents them from reaching there? 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) If we are to go by traffic jam rules, then we should forget about making any law. This is because they go to office at 11.00 a.m. and leave at 3.00 p.m. How do they work? It seems the whole system or what we know as government in this country is laissez-faire. Actually, the thing is running itself as if there is nobody in charge. The people who should implement the law and enforce discipline will never succeed. This is a technical and professional law. You cannot make a law like this and give it to laymen to implement. They will not know what to do with it.

Before I retired, decentralisation had already started. One of the districts appointed an O’ Level leaver to be the chief planner. An O’ Level leaver! (Interjections) It was Kisoro. (Laughter) I was the Commissioner of Lands and I wrote protesting that that officer should not be allowed to take office. They said they could not afford anything higher than that. If it is the question of affordability, let us forget this law. It will not help us. We need professional and technical people to implement this law. 

Making laws is not a problem, we can go on. Whether the law will help this country or not is what I do not know, unless we change our method of work. If you look around Kampala now, apart from the City Square, which some people call the Constitution Square – I will never call it the Constitution Square because I do not know any constitution made in that place. (Laughter) Most cities have city squares where the city dwellers enjoy themselves, hold meetings there, and it has nothing to do with the Constitution. (Laughter) 

Apart from that and the Centenary Park, people in Kampala now walk and get tired and have nowhere to rest. Very soon, this one in front of the railways will also go. Look at the one in Kamwokya, at the end of Acacia Avenue, it is already fenced and a huge building is coming up there. It was reserved for the children living in that area to play and be healthy. You cannot have a jungle of concrete and mortar like we are putting up here. In 10 or 20 years, this city will be unliveable as nobody will be living here. It is already a total mess. If or when this law is made, I doubt that it will correct the mess because the mess is already too big.  

I have been saying that we go to the Masindi Port and start a new city there where we shall not allow any nonsense - no slum or anything - like Abuja now. In Abuja, the first thing was that slums would not be allowed. Let us try. I think that in a few years time, those who walk on foot will be moving faster than those in vehicles. (Laughter)  

Now because the whole city has failed, it has failed us, it has failed itself and it has failed everybody. What we need is a new city that is well planned with well trained and remunerated officers who value their work, not part-timers like we have in the current government. Employees have become part-timers. Look at those who are sweeping the roads; they sweep the roads for two hours and by midday they are in their shops in Owino. At the end of the month, all of them are at City Hall to get their salaries. You cannot get a monthly salary when you work for only two hours a day; it is sad. We are in a very sad situation and I do not know what can rescue us –(Interruption)

MRS SEZI: Is the honourable member in order to make an assertion that in the Government of Uganda, public officers do not work? 

Secondly, is the honourable member in order to mislead this House that the position of a chief government valuer is at the district level when he is aware that this position is only at the Centre?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, can you please substantiate what you said.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you. I thought we were debating a very serious Bill –(Laughter)- and I did not expect anybody to sleep. (Laughter) I never talked about the Chief Government Valuer. Where it came from, I also wonder. (Laughter)  

To conclude, I would like to appeal to the Executive to try and save the little that there is. If we do not try, even Nakasero, Kololo, Bugolobi and Port Bell will become slums and the entire city will become a huge slum, the biggest in Africa. I thank you.

3.28
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you. Let me be the only one to oppose this Bill this afternoon for the following reasons. I do agree with the others that Kampala is one huge slum and not a city. However, I think that treating the problems of planning in this country in such a piecemeal fashion is not going to help anybody. If we wanted to sort out the planning mess in this country, I think that this Bill should have come with very specific mandates. 

I am looking for a plan for this country that looks at Uganda in the next 100 years and not just looking at a few institutions or creating another planning board which can be patronized and they do nothing. We have not seen much since we passed the National Planning Authority Act in this House. Nothing has changed in this country and yet we are creating another committee of seven or 10 persons; to change what? Uganda needs to be looked at in terms of the next 100 years. Which road shall we have in this country for the next 100 years? As it were, I think we are proposing in this Bill to create an institution without focusing much into the future. 

I thought that this Bill, if it were to merit my support, would also be looking at planning for an alternative city, one completely different and away from Kampala. The Bill falls short of that. I do not see it. So, why should I stand up here and say that I support it just to appease my honourable friend? The minister is my dear friend. I do not want to support him on this one because I think something else should be done. 

My other quarrel is that we already have laws like the Land Act, as has been said previously. I have been moving around and the committees are not functioning. If we ask them to sort out some of the issues, they cannot. There is a problem of enforcement. Wouldn’t we have learnt from history that the real challenge this government faces is the question of leadership, the moral authority to enforce what has been given to them and what has been agreed to? 

I want to say that Government has failed to demonstrate that it can organise Uganda. This country lacks organisation. You have all the paperwork and everything you need but you have failed to organise this country. 

We do not want to be misled that the reason a petrol station exists near a hospital is that there is no law. We have urban planners. Couldn’t they have planned with the little they have to separate petrol stations from residential areas and deal with the potholes in this city? Couldn’t they have used the little they have to create a neater Kampala? I think the problem is that Government has not had the authority that is requires to enforce what is already available to it. 

I think the hallmark now of our cities and country is bad planning and the cure is not in these pieces of paper. Recently, my office was receiving interns from Yale University and I asked one intern why he wanted to come and work with me during summer. He said, “If you will let me have the privilege of testing the potholes in Kampala…” I actually recruited that intern because he just needed to see the potholes in Kampala – that is the hallmark. We have totally failed this country.

Finally, I am opposed to this Bill just like I was opposed to the Land (Amendment) Bill because I do not believe in laws that come before policies. Currently, the Ministry of Lands has the fourth draft of the Land Policy in which they talk about settlement, acquisition of land and all sorts of things. I think we should first of all agree as to where we want to go as a country and then transform the policies into laws. Some of our policy positions pre-suppose a very radical shift from the pre-existing conditions. The Bill provides for recommendations on change of land use; how do you come up with a Bill to change land use when you have not sorted out issues of policy? 

I do not want small pieces of legislation that heavily impact on the Constitution and the parent law, the Land Act, and then you begin to deal with issues in a piecemeal manner. For that, I do not support this motion. I would like to ask the honourable minister to go back, consult in the countryside, sensitise the people, sort out the policy first and then we will pass the Bill based on the information that is in the policy that governs land use in this country. I thank you. 




3.41
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): I would like to thank the ministry and the committee for this Bill. Uganda is a country whose population is going to double after a decade and we seriously need to contend with the challenges of the population explosion. This means that the challenges we have today in terms of the slums and evictions are actually going to double by that time, and this can only be addressed when we address issues of settlement, migration policy, urbanisation and land use management. 

I think we should also take courage in urbanising Uganda. As Parliament, we should take the lead to make a radical move to recommend urbanisation. You will all agree with me that all the trading centres coming up in our parishes and sub-counties are increasingly becoming slums. We talk of Kampala, but right back in our homes the same is happening. We need to have a policy of urbanisation and physical planning right from the parish level. 

It is surprising that under decentralization, we do not seem to be giving enough resources to the whole land sector in terms of land use management, physical planning, etc. I think urbanisation should be addressed. 

I represent an area from the Albertine region where Uganda has succeeded in finding oil. I have been having a challenge in understanding the level of organisation in the related ministries. When the oil is discovered, as a priority, even if it means a supplementary, the issues of land management and land use planning in the Albertine area should be brought up. However, it is surprising that when the oil companies are prospecting, it is the nomads coming as an advance party. This is one of the challenges we must deal with. 

When we want to produce oil now, we have challenges of sorting out those who decided to come and yet Government should have been planning these areas in terms of where the communities will be and what areas Government wants for the oil companies. This should have happened so that we do not have the stampede which is about to happen to some people in these areas? 

I would also want to advise that settlement in this country should be guided by provision of infrastructure. You will find that Kampala continues to grow around Mengo, but the beautiful Lake Victoria does not have lakeside roads to inform the settlement and for urbanization. We could have a tourism circuit - a Durban or Alexandria - around Lake Victoria but people are now congesting Kyanja and I do not know where else. We should be doing the same integrated planning for Lake Kyoga and Lake Albert in line with other government national needs of development and tourism. 

I must also say that while we were touring the North, I found out that it is good our people have left the IDP camps and have gone home. I want to urge Government and leaders that we should not miss this good opportunity - what we call a blessing in disguise – to create for these IDPs a semblance of urbanization. We could have water, schools and health centres in one setting. This way, it becomes cheaper for Government to provide amenities and services in a centralised area. Well, as our people are going back, we need to have another arrangement of turning these once ugly IDP camps into –(Interruption)  

MR ODIT: That statement which tends to make a veiled appreciation of the settlement under IDP camps sounds a bit insulting to most of us who represent people who lived in camps for 20 years against their will. There was an apparent attempt to keep our people in camps, develop them as urban centres for settlement and then leave the land. Now, may I know from the honourable member representing Buliisa whether or not he believes that the going back to the rural communities by our people is something which the Government does not appreciate? That is a statement coming from the government side.

3.41
MR BIRAAHWA MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): I would like to first make this very clear. I am not speaking for Government. I am not opposed to people going to rural areas. I have actually said we can turn a problem into an opportunity. What I am saying is that the whole of Uganda, including Northern Uganda, we need to take serious consideration about our organisation. I am only emphasising planning organised and cheaper means of providing power, water, health services and education to communities which are organised but, I am not opposed to people going back to the rural areas.

I want to be understood in terms of development planning. That is what I am talking about. I appreciate the sentiments that it brings, I know hon. Odit means well, but I want us to graduate beyond those sentiments and start planning for this country.

Mr Speaker, I want to agree with the report that we should have started with the land policy and everything possible should be done to fast-track the land policy.

A lot of –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the thinking of my colleague which points to the need for this country to be well planned, but I am terribly concerned that he approaches the matter of internal displacement basically as a question of sentiments.

In the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments, this House set up select committees to look at issues of internal displacement in this country and those committees reported to this House, highlighting the pain of internal displacement. But most importantly, one of the things that came out was that nobody was in the camps out of their own will.

In fact, the first camps in the Northern and Eastern part of this country were set up because the Government of Uganda, the NRM Government, forced people into the camps and told them they should stay there as they clear the LRA from the villages, an exercise which took 20 years.

These camps became a death trap; people died, and right now we are grappling with a situation of children born and bred in the camps and they have no future because of these camps. Hundreds of thousands died in these camps.

What we as leaders from Northern and Eastern Uganda have been continuously telling Government is that instead of you just grossing over these problems - we have told the President of this country that he owes the Northern part of this country an apology for a failed combat against the LRA which pushed people into the camps.

Mr Speaker, the deaths and the sufferings of the people of Northern and Eastern Uganda cannot be reduced to mere sentiments. Is he, therefore, in order to be oblivious of the pain and the suffering of our people and reduce our concerns in the House to mere sentiments? [Hon. Members: “Shame”]

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I am talking about the future of these sites. I am not talking about returning people from their homes. I want to be understood and on record – and I am talking of planning and voluntary - a person from anywhere in the country who will go and get a plot in what ever site it will be.

But as I conclude, I would like to encourage –(Interjections)- I would like us to get courage as Parliament and support urbanisation. I would like us to provide leadership. I would like us to find courage and look at the future - population explosion is a reality; you do not need to do any research; it is a reality with us, as we develop the National Development Plan.

It is important that we address these matters so that the future generation will count on the Eighth Parliament for having provided a settlement policy, and a migration policy, well covered under the land policy. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.48
MS BEATRICE MPAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the minister and the committee for coming up with this Bill. However, what is worrying me – as many have said in Uganda we are lacking planners. Maybe we do not have them at all. That is why we are seeing houses mushrooming everywhere.

Even in the rural areas, and coupled with the discovery of oil, in Bunyoro region and some parts of Acholi, what my people from Buliisa ask me is how far Government has gone with the issue of planning.

So, when I came to this Parliament today, that is one thing I was expecting in the Bill. At least there would be something concerning comprehensive planning for the oil city which is going to be either in Buliisa or some other part of the country.

Because we have seen in many oil producing countries where people staying in the oil regions face many difficulties and challenges.

But our Government has kept quiet, and has not even informed us, the leaders, what plans they have for those people who are staying in the oil region, specifically Buliisa. Most of the wells have been discovered where people are settling. What are we going to do?

That is my biggest problem. Most of the districts do not have physical planners. For example, Buliisa has advertised three times but up to now the district has failed to get a physical planner. What are we going to do? 

THE SPEAKER: Can we send you people?

MS MPAIRWE: We do not have physical planners. This is the reality. So, I am informing the minister. I support this Bill but there is that big problem. Which people will implement the law?

Another thing that is going to make this Bill not to perform is the issue of finances. There are several Bills and laws we have made in Uganda which could address the planning issue but they are not being implemented because funds are not available. Could we find a way of getting some funds so that we implement some of these laws and policies which have been enacted? I support the Bill.

3.52
MS BEATRICE ZIRABAMUZAALE: (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the minister and all those who were involved in making this report. Physical planning in Uganda generally, has been lacking, and may continue to lack if we do not wake up now. I am one of the few people who look around our city and urban areas, and wonder whether we have any people trained in physical planning. When I look at the top of the hills where they have put up houses and I wonder whether physical planners are ever involved when people are going to construct houses. Everyone who puts up a house up there plans in his own way for a road, or where the building is going to face, and when you imagine what would have been a beautiful building for Ugandans to look at, enjoy and appreciate, you say, “What a hell”.

I have looked at one of the six points which were presented here and it stated, “General lack of guidance for the housing sector both in urban and rural settings”. Is there anybody who sets anything anywhere sensibly? Things have gone so wrong that people who have seen other towns, small or big - I wonder whether we have such people. 

When it comes to roads which go through such centres and towns, do not be surprised to find a road which ends abruptly, because someone has decided to put up a house or a building in the middle of the road. We have looked at the abuse of road reserves. Are they there in Uganda? If you move around, you find that houses are built on road reserves.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Colleague. I will just give you information to reinforce the point you are raising about lack of respect for the road reserves by not just mere Ugandans but Ugandans who are supposed to be enforcing these laws. I consider, for instance, Lugogo Bypass. Before we broke off for recess, I raised the issue that there is a gentleman who had decided to put up a commercial structure up to the drainage system of Lugogo Bypass as you move towards Kira Road Police Station or as you get out from Kampala Parents School. I raised it here with the minister, hon. Byabagambi. He has been trying, but he has also failed and it is just yesterday that I was told that it is the in-law of the first family, Mr Karugire, who is putting up that structure. 

So, if the minister can fail, who will enforce this? The Minister for Urban Development is here. What is he saying? This is the first family who are supposed to be enforcing - Works has failed, so who should enforce this?

MRS ZIRABAMUZAALE: Thank you. I was talking about abuse of road reserves and we have heard about the Lugogo Bypass. I recall, whether it was a rumour or not, but what has actually happened shows that something happened along the Northern Bypass. I used to hear that that road should have been bigger than it is now but it now looks like an ordinary road anywhere, maybe in Jinja. When the road was taken over by Government, people started building along that bypass and when time comes for the road to be built, it will be very painful to break all those houses. 

What else happens? Corruption comes in and somebody says, “Do not break my house.” “If you give me so much, I will leave your house”. That kind of approach has reduced that road which should have been built to international standards. (Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank the honourable member for accepting the information. About a year ago, city council decided to knock off kiosks in Ntinda. Around the ministers’ village, there were many kiosks without toilets. They knocked all the others except two which are still there up to now, and the information is that those two kiosks belong to soldiers. So, planning and enforcement depends on who you are. 

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: I would like to inform hon. Zirabamuzaale that the Northern Bypass was conceived by Government of Uganda together with the European Union and the land for it has been reserved. The fact that one of the lanes has not been built is because the money from the Ugandan side was not enough. Otherwise, they are building both lanes of the road right from –(Interjection)- they are building it, I can assure you, because the land has been marked and I have got papers to that effect.  

I am sure the Minister of Works and Transport will come here and assure you about what is going on as far as the Northern Bypass is concerned. It is true there were some people who were trying to disturb; they were actually evicted; they were very cantankerous and had to be taken to court. I was a member of that committee when I was still a backbencher and we fought very hard to make sure that the Northern Bypass was built according to international standards. 

I am sure hon. Zirabamuzaale sees that the road from Jinja to Bugiri which passes through her constituency has also been built to international standards. So, I believe that the road sector is doing very well and actually Government is doing very good work in collaboration with the European Union. We should not belittle it. The work is on course, but it is just incomplete because our budget contribution is lower than what we were supposed to have contributed.  I thank you.   

MRS ZIRABAMUZAALE: I thank you, Mr Minister. I think we should appreciate that that area was approved about 40 years ago and whatever took place, no one knows. I know there have been changes in Government and whoever failed, failed. I should say - and please, do not misunderstand me - I must congratulate the NRM Government for having put up this road. Otherwise, we could have taken another 20 years or so without one. I, therefore, thank the government.

Allow me to say that the abuses that have come up and characterised the development of our physical planning could be as a result of lack of enforcement mechanisms in the planning area. Who does the enforcement? It is our people. Who should supervise them?  I want to say that we should all supervise these people because one Member was saying that some people report to their offices at 11.00 a.m. and they are gone by 3.00 p.m. 

I think we need to look at our civil servants and analyse their performance because when you look at some areas, you wonder whether they want to fail the government, because they are not doing what they are supposed to be doing.  So, who should supervise them and their line bosses, and condemn them? We should do this.

I have also looked at another statement which says, “Absence of building designs that are appropriate for different topographies…” You wonder, when you get to an area where everybody is building in their own design. You find a very beautiful building, an ugly one, a short one, a large one -(Laughter)-  It shows that there is no one taking care of the physical planning in the different areas in Uganda, be it rural or urban.  

I want to encourage the minister to implement all the plans other than them remaining on paper, because all of us want good things to happen in Uganda. All Ugandans feel that we have failed to enforce our good laws. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.14
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the Bill, but I do not agree with hon. Kigyagi that physical planning should go to Local Government. It was in Local Government many years back and research made Government to move this department back to Lands, Housing and Physical Planning. 

Local Government has very many governments to manage and run, but physical planning is a small and independent responsibility which should be carried out by the ministry which manages land use, and which is in charge of housing; it should also be in charge of physical planning, generally. I hope that my brother will drop that campaign in Government to try and take back physical planning to Local Government because it failed there; there was no proper handling and management of that department when it was in Local Government.    

Secondly, even the plans that exist in the Department of Physical Planning have not been adhered to. It has been so much so that due to the absence of strict adherence, the developers started planning for themselves, while the planners started adhering to what the developers want. People are not going to wait for planners and a department that is not doing its work. So, what they do is to draw their plans, go to physical planning, which plans according to what the developer wants. 

I am really happy that now the whole country has been declared a planning area. I think this is one of the greatest things going to happen to this country. It is going to be fundamental like Universal Primary Education; it is going to be universal and fundamental, but that is if the planning people adhere to the plans that will have been worked out. If the physical planning board sleeps as it has been, then what hon. Okello-Okello experienced in land matters will happen again - because him and the late Dr Okulo Epak worked in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

Okulo Epak was a valuable Ugandan as far as planning is concerned; he was a specialised person in that field. Hon. Okello-Okello was in charge of land management in this country. That is why all his views must be taken seriously although unfortunately he belongs to the Opposition. But that does not –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would like to point out that there has been so much damage done to the country in terms of planning. This damage is actually irreparable. That is why I pity my friend, the minister handling this sector. But maybe the President was right to appoint a man whose name is “Urban” to be in charge of the urban development sector. Isn’t it? I am, up to today, still intrigued by that appointment.

There is no doubt that the Towns and Country Planning Act is obsolete. That is why there is need to generate another Bill called the Physical Planning Bill, to take this country a step further from where the Town and Country Planning Act has failed.

Lastly, I would have wanted to see the committee tell us about more consultations than what has been done so far. It is very limited! Mr Speaker, there is what Habitat calls the brown agenda, which is a programme for Habitat that involves human settlement all over the world. The towns are no longer green; they are brown because of pollution and dust. That is why it was called the brown agenda. 

I would like to say it out that - hon. Byandala knows this very well - this is a very important agenda for human settlement and fighting dust, pollution and diseases in the cities. It is a United Nations Programme. So, I would have loved this committee to take interest and have consultations with Habitat. 

I would also love to see this committee talk to the Uganda Investment Authority, which is mandated to give out land for development. It was important for them to tell us what their views about this Physical Planning Bill are. 

I would also have loved to see the committee talk to NEMA for an input. This would help us know what NEMA has to say about planning in Uganda. But also there was need for the committee to talk to the land valuers in this country, which would help us make a multi-dimensional law with all the institutions involved in terms of opinions. 

However, I also would have loved to hear what the National Forestry Authority has to say about this Bill. How about the police that is in charge of security in the whole country? They know the dangerous and dark area and all sorts of issues in the urban areas of this country. I believe they can give us potential input on how the city should be planned for security management and so forth. I thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to say I support the motion.

4.13
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA: (NRM, Bunya County East, Bunya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. However, I would like to seek some clarification from the Members in the House because most Members have argued that we must, first of all, have a policy before the Bill is passed into an Act of Parliament. I must say, I have been a bit flabbergasted by this because my position is that the law should first be enacted before we get to design the instrument to operationalise it. 

Looking at both the Bill and report, I would like to first say that it is a good Bill that we should have passed yesterday, but what I would like to mention is that as we make most of these laws – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, maybe what you should note is the fact that in 1995 when we made the Constitution, we created Article 237(7) which states thus: “Parliament shall make laws to enable urban authorities to enforce and implement planning and development.” This is what we agreed on in 1995. 

I also heard one Member complain about the different land tenure systems, and I would like to say that the constitutional provision that I have just read came about after the Constituent Assembly created what we called the confusing land systems like customary, freehold, mailo, leasehold and so forth. All these were actually created by the constitutional provisions in 1995. It was on the basis of that that we resolved that Parliament make laws for planning. I am clarifying on this because some Members argued that we should first have the land policy before passing the law, but already there is a command in the Constitution for Parliament to make such laws.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I was saying was that as Ugandans, we do not have the culture of observing ethics and abiding by the laws that Parliament passes. This culture has died out in the whole country. There is total defiance as far as actions of Ugandans are concerned. 

So, I would like to urge the Minister for Urban Development, since he is called hon. Urban, let him be more urban and ensure that when we pass these laws, they are candidly implemented. 

Mr Speaker, we have made several laws, but I think most Ugandans are cowards and cannot implement the laws that we make. The voters take us hostage saying that, “If you force me, I will not vote for you”. I would like to say that Ugandans vote for leaders in order to manage public affairs for their good. 

Hon. Ministers and the other implementers, when we make laws, why should you bend them and treat them as business; you put a lot of burden on Parliament because we became a laughing stock. 

As long as they are talking about physical planning for the houses – here they say, “There is lack of guidance for the housing sector both in urban and rural setting, and abuse of road reserves ….” Mr Chairman, I think you should have included here that Ugandans are so gluttonous that they construct buildings without including a provision for parking. These are supposed to be business premises but we have to struggle for parking; you take hours trying to park so that you can transact business. So, I would like to mention that at an appropriate time, the issue of parking should be made mandatory. In some countries, you find a building of about ten floors and about three of them are for parking. But Ugandans would like to use them all. 

The other issue is that the committee observed that, “Since the creation of Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, there have not been any efforts to harmonise its functions with that of Ministry of Local Government.” 

I would like to note, like hon. Butime has said, we would rather leave this to the same ministry, because I notice that in the local governments, right from the ministry, there is total defiance of orders and laws from the centre. 

I always ask myself, who brought local governments in this system of decentralisation? Was it the local governments or the central government? The answer is that central government is the one that brought decentralisation. But we make the laws and the local governments think that they are governments of their own and we have no say in their affairs. That is why when we say that we want to decentralise some other services, they grumble, not knowing that the central government brought them into being. So, I would like to agree that this matter remains in the Ministry of Urban Development and not local government. 

The other matter here has been that most of these ministries do not have co-ordination in their activities. That is why we have had – one day you may have a pipe crossing the road, another day they dig it up for a cable line – there is need for all the ministries to co-ordinate other than spoiling and wasting the beauty of our urban areas. 

There is a vivid example here. As Parliament expanded and we added on Bauman House, it has taken us four years lamenting and requesting for a zebra crossing. Some Members might end up losing their limbs there. It is a simple thing but it requires a lot of bureaucracy. I am disappointed that Parliament has to request for a zebra crossing for a whole four years. For the Members who come from across, the boda bodas are a menace and we are lamenting for something that can be done within a few hours. 

So, Ministry of Transport and KCC, we demand that you make for us a zebra crossing because we have offices across the road; many Members are going to lose their legs because of the indiscipline of some fellows –(Interruption) 

MR BYANDALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give some technical information, the physical condition of that place cannot permit a zebra crossing. What we can have there is a pedestrian crossing, and those are two different things. so if you want, you can ask for a pedestrian crossing, but not a zebra crossing –(Interjections)– the difference is that for a zebra crossing, a pedestrian has a right of way, but with a pedestrian crossing, it is a caution to both the pedestrian and the motorists that, “Please, people are crossing.” Like on Entebbe Road they prohibit people from crossing anywhere and have them cross at one point so that a driver is made cautious that people are crossing at this given point. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am not an engineer, I am an economist, but the point is that we want people to cross the road safely; it can be a zebra crossing or not, but that is the point. 

Lastly about the report, I would like to mention that this Bill should cater for the mobility – we are talking of putting up buildings in a well-organised way, but even the movement of traffic should be planned for. Last time, I went to the IOV and he was saying that they had gazetted the roads for motorcycles in this country and that plan was sabotaged. 

When you are at the round about, say on Jinja Road, the lights may go red but the boda bodas will still have right of way, and you will see them crossing while the traffic officers watch. Why should they be treated in a special way? There is need for us to have gazetted areas for those boda bodas because 90 percent of the accident patients in hospitals are victims of those riders. They have no permits and there is no riding school they go to. So we should also think of planning the movement of the traffic as far as physical planning is concerned. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.24
MR JOHN EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill, but there are a few areas that I thought that the committee and the ministry would straighten out. The issue of the composition of the National Physical Planning Board is very crucial to the functioning of this Bill. We have all stated that implementation is a problem and that has been because the planning boards have not been functioning. 

I think what the committee and the ministry could do is to spell out thematic areas that normally affect planning, for instance the environment, road engineering section, construction section – building of houses, people concerned with land - land officers, and so forth. If we do not hinge on the professional qualifications of the persons who will be on that board, then we will have missed the point. Many of the boards failed because the persons who had the relevant qualifications were not there to guide in the planning, and we are talking about the physical planning authority, which should have some professionals. 

Mr Speaker, this should not only remain at the national planning level but it should also go to the committees at district level and even urban areas because the same physical areas that we need to plan for are also in urban and local government areas.

It also goes without saying that having formed these boards or committees, they need to be funded. The biggest problem of boards being formed at both national and local government level is lack of facilitation. We have these committees, even now at district level, but they died because of lack of facilitation. They could not move; like hon. Tom Butime mentioned. 

When I looked at the consultations made by the committee, I thought they were very few considering the subject that we are discussing. Glaringly absent was NEMA. In Kampala, when we talk about planning, we normally forget about the environment completely. 

Two weeks ago we were at Imperial Royale and the issue of physical planning was high on the agenda in the NEMA workshop, and I was very surprised that the committee did not consult NEMA and did not even consult Uganda Local Governments Association. 

The issue that was raised by the committee, which I thought was very important as well, is that this law would require massive sensitisation in our communities. Back in our rural communities, there is lack of appreciation for physical planning. 

So, there is also need for us and even these boards when they are appointed, to go out and sensitise the people about the need to plan for our environment. If we do not do that people will not understand what we are talking about and why we are planning.

I belong to the committee on Local Government Accounts and we have been moving around Kampala city to see how buildings have been constructed and how contracts have been given out. It is very amazing to note that within Kampala alone, if you look at the person concerned with town planning, it leaves a lot to be desired. The Town Planner will not even tell you whether he or she was involved in planning a particular area. 

My colleague, hon. Lukwago, mentioned it a few minutes ago that you go to an area and you ask the Town Planner of Kampala whether he is aware that a house should not be erected there, and he will tell you that he is not aware. If asked what action he has taken, you notice that no action was taken and this is true of many houses in Kampala. 

The need for the Ministry of Lands and Local Government to work together on this particular Bill is very important. Because as I speak now, there are many towns that are springing up in rural areas and they are unplanned. I will give an example of my own area in Soroti, for example, the one very close to my area, Brookes Corner. It is growing very fast and it is not planned. If you went there as a Member of Parliament and said, “Now that you have put that house there, where will the access road pass? How will somebody access his or her house?” Nobody will tell you what will happen. So, for you to access your house, you have to move around in a circle. So, there is a need for us to get this law implemented as soon as possible so that we have our towns properly planned. Thank you.

4.30
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): I would like to support this motion but also make some suggestions because it is a good Bill for the future Uganda. 

I want to suggest that if the government could make a deliberate effort and implement this Bill in areas that have not yet been developed, it would help Uganda. For example, in our rural setting, where we have many small trading centres, they could identify a vacant place and government plans for it, demarcates plots and then develops proper infrastructure and provide all amenities. That development alone will attract the population into these newly planned areas and they will help us have more orderly and organised settlements. 

Because of this, I want to agree with honourable colleagues that what we are proposing has been long overdue. Government should be looking at long term planning for our country especially for our national city, to relocate Kampala into an empty place that is not developed; carry out all the planning, put physical infrastructure in place and that way people will relocate to a more organised place. When we compare our country with other countries, we take a leaf from what we see there. Kampala can remain a commercial centre and they make alternative plans.

I was also looking at other laws that have been passed before, especially the Land Act. There are many structures that were proposed; the land committees and land tribunals, which have never taken off because of financial challenges. I am wondering whether the same financial challenges will not affect the enforcement of this new law that we are proposing to have. 

And as colleagues have noted, we have good laws that have been on the shelves but it is their implementation that has been a problem. This might be one of the many that will also find its way to the shelves and stay there. How sure are we that once this law is passed, it will be enforced within the shortest possible time?

Mr Speaker, in the committee recommendations, they proposed massive sensitisation for the communities about the law. I want to ask the honourable minister what should have taken place first; going around sensitising the masses about the Bill or sensitising them after the law has been enacted? I think that is enough because all has been said. Thank you. 
  
4.35
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also agree that this law is long overdue. Our population is increasing and there is also increased urbanisation. Also, more of our people are getting educated and they want to get settled in well-planned places.

Last year, around May, I was in Cairo and I met quite a number of Ugandans and they introduced themselves as district planners. They were from all over the country and they were taken around Cairo to see how deserts were being planned for new construction areas. Most of them were shocked and many of them of course lamented and said, “Even with all this we might not be able to do much.” 

So, I only wish that our people would always get exposed and see what other people do. I think our minister is exposed enough and he should see what other people do and be able to improve our society so that we can live a better life. 

This is the very reason why many of us are now calling for the shift of the capital city. In the next five or ten years, Kampala is going to be unbearable. We cannot live here. How long will it take you, Mr Minister, to rush to your office? There is total confusion; construction is going on all over the place. If you are to destroy some of these places it would be too costly for government to compensate. If you are to expand the roads, it will be too costly; and even if you want to construct flyovers, are you going to protrude through some buildings? That would mean that you must destroy some buildings. 

So, as we move on we must start thinking of central areas like Nakasongola which is open, where we can go and plan properly for a decent capital city. Ugandans are decent. Ugandans are fairly average in the world but when people come here and see the way we rotate around this city, I think it is a big shame for us. So, together I think we should start thinking, while we come with this law, that the capital city of this country should be shifted away from Kampala because it will be too costly to improve Kampala.

There is already a talk - I have read in the newspapers about some towns to be upgraded to city status -(Interjection)- yes, there is a lot of excitement in the rural areas about getting city status. But I think a lot more needs to be done. I have also seen that there is a lot of excitement about areas to become municipalities. I think there is a lot more that needs to be done. We must qualify what should be a municipality, a city - 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. If you remember, we already dealt with that law. It was during the time of hon. Bidandi Ssali as Minister of Local Government when he brought a law that helped us to grade municipalities and so forth. The law is there. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, the biggest challenge we have in this country, as many of my colleagues have put it, is that we have always come up with very good ideas; we have always made very good statements and we have also made very good laws but at the end of it all, we have not been able to implement them. If you go, for example, and see the kind of municipalities we have: Fort Portal, Arua, Mbarara, Gulu, they are not worth what a municipality should be. So, there is a big challenge, Mr Speaker, and the minister responsible should actually take keen interest in improving these areas.

This is physical planning for the whole country and I just wanted this clarified more. While it is easy to plan urban settings, I also wanted to know what the plan would be for rural settings. What would it be like if I had my piece of land and I wanted to put up the kind of structures that I want, either in the middle of my land or at the edge, and I want to graze my animals there? How are you going to implement this? 

What framework are you going to put in place so that rural people can also adhere? How about people who want to go and settle in rural areas? In any case, in the long run, rich people will be running away from town and going to rural settings because that is where there is not much pollution. So, what kind of framework are you going to put in place to be adhered to?

Sometime back during the CHOGM, when Imperial Royale, the hotel next to Serena, was being constructed, City Council actually blocked the construction. The city council sent in some enforcement officers to effect that process but they were thrown out by armed people and the papers reported that these were orders from State House. 

I would like you to clarify this because how would we implement this law if, for example, a lower authority is supposed to implement whatever -(Interjection)- yes, we blame city council but they have also tried in some cases but again there are powers above that have come up and prevented this, and of course if you walk around Imperial Royale, you will see that that kind of hotel is not worth the place it is in.  

The biggest problem in this country is moral decay. One day I was driving and in front there was a vehicle with a red number plate that had “CM” in brackets. For purposes of records in this House, “CM” is Cabinet Minister. As I drove, I saw an empty mineral water bottle being thrown out of the window and I thought that perhaps that was an accident. I followed the vehicle and a second mineral water bottle was thrown out. So, you can see that even at that level we really do not care. If you move in town, the people driving the very posh vehicles are the ones who throw things out of their vehicles as they want. Really, do we care about a good environment as we plan for our city? 

Finally, just for record purposes, when our people went to the protected camps, some people came with a plan that they should be urbanised. We protested and fought them. 

I want to put it on record that we do appreciate the contribution of this House and with you in the forefront, Mr Speaker, you moved in Northern Ugandan and you led very many MPs. But you moved because the Members of Parliament from the North offered that leadership and they stood firm behind what was realistic. If the Members of Parliament from the North had shifted goal posts about the situation in Northern Uganda, this Parliament would not have done much. They would have surrendered. 

Therefore, I would like to tell my honourable colleague from Buliisa not to add insult to injury. We stood and offered leadership to our people and this Parliament stood by us. My advice to you is to offer leadership to your people without shifting goal posts so that we help you solve the problem of the Balaalo. But if you shift goal posts the way you have shifted, we will not be able to help you. I thank you.

4.45
MRS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this work, but somewhere, somehow, I get discouraged after reading a three-page report. I thought that this Bill would attract a lot of attention almost countrywide. Seeing the group of people that were invited to the committee, the ministry was left out and yet it was mandatory that they appear before the committee. I was not impressed and possibly that is why we had a three-page report from the committee. I seek to be guided. 

On page one, there is this issue of the Town and Country Planning Act. I wish the chairman of the committee could throw more light on it. What is in the Town and Country Planning Act of 1964 that is not in this Bill? Otherwise, out of these comparisons and in your elaborate findings, you would have been able to bring this out such that when debating, Members are able to juggle the two and find a middle position. But by just mentioning that what was in the Town and Country Planning Act of 1964 did not measure up to the challenges of the millennium, I feel much was left out regarding that.

Under your observations, the district and lower councils planning committees will be instituted after the passing of this Bill. There is a problem in the districts. Most districts do not even have planners, Kaberamaido inclusive. Before you even think of passing this Bill, I hope this is at the back of the ministry’s mind or the chair of the committee should press hard. 

The various districts we have in this country do not have physical planners. How do you expect the mushrooming trading centres to be planned for? Most of the structures are very close to the road reserves. In fact, they are really close to the road. Most times I go sensitising the communities, but that alone is not enough. If I am doing it for Kaberamaido, what about other parts of the country? There ought to be physical planners all over the country. Other than that, even if you made multitudes of laws, you would still not change anything. It would be a law on paper, but when you move on the ground, there would be completely nothing.

Another thing is that even before passing this law, you are already complaining about the funding. After instituting the various committees that will come in place after the passing of the Bill - but even before you go that far, I remember in the financial year 2007/08, the Minister of Urban Planning did not have a vehicle; he was using a departmental car. This raises the issue and question of funding to the Ministry of Lands. Ministry of Lands handles very important areas of this country - the whole land question in the country and then the question of physical planning - but do you know the paltry money this ministry gets? Less than Shs 20 billion every financial year, whereas other ministries are swimming in all the monies they could possibly dream of.

Even before passing this Bill, you are already thinking of the question of funding, but this alone is not enough. I do not know if it is a question of greed or a question of prioritisation, but I do not think it is priorities. We have had essential ministries in this country going with meagre resources when others are swimming and floating in all the monies they need. It is not until the powers that be think about increasing funding for the Ministry of Lands that you will solve some of these questions.

You have talked about Local Government and Ministry of Lands. This is on the question of facilitating the physical planning. This alone is not enough. You should also include the Ministry of Public Service because this is the ministry in charge of recruitments countrywide. Even if you need staff, when the Ministry of Public Service has not handled the recruitment, you will remain and cry, “We do not have doctors; we do not have nurses.” The other vital ministry that should, therefore, be incorporated under those to be catered for should be the Ministry of Public Service.

We have a physical planning department in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I am interested in knowing what they have achieved so far in the last five years, and what they do that we do not see much of. We have been complaining; there are always cries and collisions between ministries. We complain about Kampala City Council and Kampala City Council defends itself and says, “No, it is the Ministry of Works,” or “It is the Ministry of Lands.” 

We are struggling with the question of traffic jams in the city. The roads are so narrow; everyone is constructing along the road reserves including Hotel Millennium, which I hear is for a minister. What do we do at the end of the day? All constructions -(Interjections)– there is this hotel on Buganda road which is very close to the road, and even if there was underground parking - which does not warrant construction close to the road – such that pedestrians are forced to reach the structure even when they do not want to pass near the building. 

At the moment, I do not know whether it is the Ministry of Works keeping quiet. People are constructing along the road reserves. You see the marking, “Road reserve” but you get structures there. If you went counting how many structures along Entebbe Road are with the road reserves, you would get baffled. When are you going to begin knocking down these houses, yet people are constructing with your eyes open? You have all the facilities that you could use, and when you go to question most of these people constructing, definitely they are close to “well placed” people. Even if you tried to evict them, there are definitely “bigger guns” that will come behind them. So, at the end of the day what are we doing? Is it a matter of making laws or are we supposed to make laws that are supposed to be enforced?

I find myself in a precarious situation to an extent that at times I do not want to defend these laws that you bring before us, because we labour so much, but at the end of the day what do they change? It is not until powers come from State House that something will change. What is the use of making laws when institutions cannot do the work that they are supposed to do? I find this disturbing; possibly we will wait until we have a change of Government before we can have some of these things implemented.

Lastly, my dream for Uganda is to have another well-planned administrative city out of Kampala. Because as long as we are continuing with these same people, I do not see any house being knocked down along Nasser Road or Nkrumah Road. You leave this place at 6.00 p.m. to go home and whether you like it or not, you will remain in the traffic jam for two hours before you can break loose and drive at 60 kms per hour. This is bad; we are losing a lot of time and resources.

So, if you do not want to plan and break structures that are built within the road reserves, plan for us another city outside Kampala. Some of us will be very happy to leave Kampala and move to another administrative city because this is a hotchpotch of a country.

4.55
CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): I seek to be guided basing on the general contributions that I have keenly listened to from both sides of the House. What is very clear now is that all the Members in the House today have expressed one thing in different ways: The fear of the inability institutionally, for this law to have any meaningful effect in what we intend to cure, and that is for example, what Hon. Tom Butime called the irreparable damage that the country has suffered because of the lack of effectiveness in the physical planning areas.

I want to seek your guidance on this issue, Mr Speaker, because in this law there is an attempt to create a board and generally speaking there has been a lot of lamentation on the potential for this to equally fail. I want to be guided as to whether at this point the minister does not need more serious help from this House. More serious help by way of saying that he can create a national physical planning authority. Because the Bill has declared the whole country a planning area and you are just going to be talking of departments which are disintegrated, existing at several levels. How is this going to help us?

We should use this as an opportunity to deal with this issue once and for all. A creation of a national physical planning authority in my view would be the way to go.

THE SPEAKER: I thought that if you look at page 16, 17 and 18 they talk about opening up structures to deal with this issue such as the establishment of the district physical planning authority. This time, as hon. Okello-Okello has said, we need to use technical people to formulate this one.

I think the outcry has been that we pass laws but they are not implemented. Parliament is not the one to implement, Parliament is the one to pass laws, and it is the function of the Executive with the civil servants to implement. Now they have heard, I think when we pass this law, they will really take it seriously and it will be implemented because of the outcry that has been made today during the debate.

MR OLENY: Just one more, Mr Speaker; we need one command centre.

THE SPEAKER: even if we need one command centre it cannot efficiently do the work for the entire country. These bodies which are set in the district and so forth will be controlled at the apex, but the apex cannot really work on Kisoro or Yumbe and that is why we have these. I think what you are saying is that enough has been said and we can now pronounce ourselves on the second reading?

5.00
MR YOWASI BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): I stand to support the Bill and also thank the committee for the work done. This Bill has been brought to Parliament and I think we should look at it more seriously than we have.

I will start by suggesting that the name of this ministry in charge should be changed so that physical planning is given more weight. If we could call it, “Ministry of Lands, Physical Planning and Urban Development” so that Government becomes more serious on this issue of physical planning.

Recently, I got embarrassed. I have a friend of mine who is a Member of Parliament in the DRC and he came to visit in Kampala. I had no time to go and pick him from the airport. I told him to pick a taxi and find me at home. The biggest problem that I had is that I could not explain where I stay. I kept telling him, “Turn right, turn left” and I really got embarrassed because this is what Kampala is.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you mean you had to tell him to pass by the anthill. (Laughter)

MR BWAMBALE: Yet last year, I had visited him in Kinshasa and he just gave directions of the streets and avenues and I reached there in 15 minutes. But I had to drive from Namugongo and wait for him at Kireka.

MRS MUGYENYI: I just wanted to add on what he was saying by giving him information that now there is a new Global Positioning System (GPS), this acts as a navigator; you put it in your car and it guides you to the address where you are supposed to go. But that GPS cannot work in Uganda. It works everywhere in the world but it does not work here.

MR BWAMBALE: I thank you very much for the information. I have that gadget in my vehicle but it cannot work here. Physical planning is the nerve centre of how we live.

I have been looking at this country and wondering whether we are all civilised or primitive. You look at Kampala. Nakasero and Kololo are for the whites and high class citizens; then Nakawa and Ntinda areas were for the low class. When Africans took over, we wanted to mix up the whole system as one of the colleagues was saying here. Commercial areas became residential areas and residential areas became commercial areas and it became a jungle as one Member put it. That is why I am supporting this Bill that actually, physical planning is very necessary.

We should not only look at Kampala, but also look at the upcoming urban centres and municipal councils. I will refer to my local town of Kasese. It was planned by the Canadians in 1958 to 1960 and they planned a very beautiful city. They had special interest in that place because of the copper mines, which they were running. When they went away and we took over, the green areas were developed into commercial areas and the whole town is now a mess. 

I was one time a chairman in that place and I advised the urban council that they were messing up the town. That town is in the flood plains of River Nyamwamba, which is a very big river. During the rainy season, it floods and during the dry season it floods because of the snow on the Rwenzori. 

These Canadians had developed specific drainage areas that were clearly demarcated on the map. What happened when the blacks took over is that they allocated these drainage areas to developers and cut them into plots. I warned them, I think it was around 2001, that when this river turns muddy the way it used to, we are going to lose a lot of people. Three days after I had said that, the river flooded and we lost 50 people and 70 houses in one night.

This is a question of being foresighted. I saw what was going to happen and indeed it happened. It can happen elsewhere in any part of the country. We have messed up what we inherited. If this law is going to rectify this then I am in total support.

The other area we should look at in this law is the settlement patterns in the rural areas. Recently, we have been on the rural electrification programme in my constituency, but the biggest hurdle we are facing now is that we are going to supply electricity in a more expensive manner than we would if our settlements were organised. This is because moving from residence (a) to (b) would necessitate pulling wires about half a kilometre or one kilometre away. So, people are now calling it roadside electrification; it is no longer rural electrification because of our settlement patterns, which are very poor.

Recently, I was in Tanzania and much as I don’t admire the Ujamaa villages very much, I think it is a better settlement pattern than we have here. This is because when services are being provided you know where to pass the lines for water and electricity; where to put a hospital or a school. I think something about these settlement patterns should be looked at.

If I can also echo what other Members have been saying, the implementation of this law is going to become difficult because of patronage, corruption and nepotism. This is because when you look at this hotel on Entebbe Road called Bwebajja Hotel, it is on the road; not only in the road reserve, but actually on the road. 

When the municipal authorities in Entebbe complained about this hotel, some big man said, “If the management of the urban authority feels that the hotel has been put in the road, the road should be shifted to allow the hotel to be constructed in the middle of the road.” With such a mentality, it will -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, my colleague. The information I want to give is that, that hotel claims that that part of the road is part of the hotel land. They have strongly pushed that the road be shifted downwards and it looks like the people in the Ministry of Works are pro-shifting the road because the land there belongs to the hotel. So, the hotel people have taken over public interest.

THE SPEAKER: You may note the recent development by the Ministry of Works of marking what is pre-supposed to be road reserves by putting those stones. Recently, I travelled to the North and I also saw along Kampala-Gulu road that they have got those markings. Road reserves are controlled by law. The width of the road reserve is not uniform on all roads as roads are classified. There are roads where they would say the road reserve would be, say five metres and there are others where they say ten metres so let us not assume that it is uniform. 

Therefore, what happens in a situation where there are no marks is that a man has a title. His title includes a road but he doesn’t know where the road reserve starts and that is why they are now helping people to have their property marked. So, I think you may excuse those who might have built on their land, but in what you may now assume to be a road reserve. They tell you, when you read the law, that you go to the centre of the road and make this distance. If the distance was not marked apart from the road being there, why do you assume that as a mailo owner, I should be the one to start fidgeting and marking the road reserves? The law is there.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, what I wanted to be helped with is that we know visibly when that road was established to link Entebbe and Kampala and I think it has existed for a very long time. Perhaps before the hotel bought that land, it had existed for public interest. Also, there is a provision for public interest. Mr Speaker, what I want you to help me with, is do with some cases where private interests take precedence over public interests. In that case, that road, which is very important for us, is the only way to the airport and it has existed for a long time. It is also known internationally since it links Kampala to Entebbe.

THE SPEAKER: The question I am going to ask you by answering you is, why has the responsible ministry done the markings after the event? It must have realised that the mailo land owner had no fault because he did not know. That is why they are insisting now that the land owner should know. They have now put stones marking the road reserves. The stones were not there when construction of the hotel took place.

So, we have to be helped. Public interest is more important than private interests because the public or those commanding the public interest are in position to make the markings. But the Bwebajja Hotel is on somebody’s mailo and he has the title. Do you blame him?

MR BWAMBALE: Mr Speaker, are you are giving information or what?

THE SPEAKER: Let us exhaust the issue for us to be educated.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As it has been stated, public interest takes precedence over private interests. According to experience, there is a tendency by developers to encroach on the road reserve, yet they know it is a road reserve. Some of the roads are very old as has been observed; they are older than the land titles. So, the marking of roads today, which was our -  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Engineer, do you just look at something and say this is a road reserve? I have told you there is a law on road reserves and the reserves are not the same for all roads. There are those, which are very narrow and there are those, which are wide. Therefore, the custodian of public interest is supposed to make those markings.

MR AMURAIT: Mr Speaker, that is the law - 

THE SPEAKER: I am talking about a law I have read. 

MR AMURIAT: I appreciate that, but under such circumstances, what the developer should have asked for is compensation. This is happening everywhere. It happened with the Northern Bypass, it is happening on the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana Road. There are structures belonging to people, but because that is the best path for the road, there arises a need for compensation. 

In the case of Bwebajja, it would have been cheaper for that person to ask for compensation for the undeveloped land than for an entire road to be shifted. You know, changing the horizontal alignment and displacing people on the right hand side of the road as you go to Entebbe.

THE SPEAKER: The law on compensation says you should not take somebody’s property compulsorily until you have paid the compensation. So, if you want to take somebody’s property because of public interest, you have to compensate that person before you take over. That is constitutional.

MR BWAMBALE: So, Mr Speaker, that leads to another problem of what is called the egg of the hen because who was there first? The mailo land owner, the hotel or the road? 

But that is not the issue now. The issue now is city renewal. There is what we call city renewal in urban development whereby instead of shifting the capital city to some other area, Government mobilises funds and re-designs the entire city. Kampala can be re-designed. As we re-design, I request the ministry to take keen interest in the sub-urban areas because Kampala, the city, is shifting to areas like Bweyogerere, Seeta and Mukono. It is expanding 10kms, 20kms out of the city centre. Since the land there belongs to individual mailo land owners, Government is not bothered about how people are building, how they are selling their plots, who is buying and what type of development is taking place. 

There is a place in Namugongo where someone had about 10 acres of land. He sold five acres of land to someone who is developing a school, two acres were sold to someone who is developing an entertainment area and the rest is being sold to people who are putting up residential houses. Imagine a school here, a bar here and residences here. That is what is taking place in our sub-urban areas. It is a pity. That is why I am supporting this law. It should be passed very fast and we have sanity in this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, have we exhausted this issue? I now put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

Can we proceed with the committee?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: We shall start with the committee tomorrow. Honourable members, thank you very much for your contributions and time. House adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.19 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 4 February 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 

