Thursday, 8 February 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY & FISHERIES  (Mr J. Nasasira):  Mr Chairman and hon. Members of NRC, this is a Ministerial statement on the emergence action plan that my Ministry intends to put in place to bring the water hyacinth under control.  This is the second time that a Ministerial statement is being made in this House by Ministry on water hyacinth since the obnoxious weed started causing serious problems where our favourable climate is promoting its rapid growth and reproduction.  The first statement in 1994 was an expression of concern by Government and in need therefore, to prepare a coasted time bound work plan for the control of the water hyacinth whose prolification in our water bodies has reached quite epidemic proportions.  With serious social economic impact that requires an emergency action programme pending the medium and long term control measures.  

Today, I would like to present the emergency action plan for the control of the water hyacinth that the Government has approved in addition to updating the House on the progress being made to control the weed, nationally and regionally. If I might just give a small slight background, Mr Chairman, an estimated 3,000 hectares or approximately 3,000,000 tonnes has spread over the shore line and bays of both the main land and Islands of Lake Victoria, Lake Kioga, Lake Albert and along the River Nile and the River Nile is already infested with the water hyacinth since the weed was first reported in Uganda in 1988.  River Kagera alone delivers 3.5 hectares or 1,800 tonnes a week.  Due to the prevailing winds bringing the water outlets from Lake Victoria, Uganda is on the receiving end for water hyacinth as far as water hyacinth production is concerned.  

Accessibility of the water hyacinth problem is further aggravated by a build of nutrients from rivers feeding in the Lake and the River Nile and this has seriously affected about 90 per cent of the shore line which also includes rural and urban drinking water in take points, fish landing centres, boats and wagon piers, and livestock watering places.  Owen Falls Dam as some of the hon. Members might have noticed, where electricity is generated, is seriously affected and fish breeding grounds.

Mr Chairman, since the appearance of the weed in Uganda and particularly since its rapid spread was noted, the Government, within the limits of the resources available, has spent UShs 736 million on the implements for physical control, biological control, research and operations.  In addition to this, the Government has already contributed Uganda shillings 5l0/= million towards the purchase of two weed harvesting systems from Netherlands which covers 40 per cent of the total cost. The Netherlands Government is providing a grant of approximately U$760,000 or 60 per cent of the cost of those systems.  

Mr Chairman, because of the serious economic, social and environmental impact of the water hyacinth and its rapid expansion, there arose an urgent need for a comprehensive action programme designed to avert expansion and bring about the reduction of the weed to manageable levels, so as to reduce the negative effects of the weed.  As a result, the Government has prepared an emergency action programme in an effort to reduce the present level of the weed to a level where the weed shall not be problematic and to ensure through medium and long-term measures that it does not tolerate the same level again.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, the Emergency Action Plan which has been prepared for the control of the weed was completed and adopted in November last year.  In brief, the Action Plan recommended an integrated control measures involving physical removal, mechanical removal, chemical spraying and biological control. Each of the options was reviewed and it became apparent that none was sufficient enough to be used singly; hence the adoption of the integrated approach.  The activities recommended for the implementation are as follows and at the following locations:

Owen Falls Dam:

Two Booms will be installed at the gate way of the in-take dam and headdress area and the other near the Rippon Falls to trap the in coming weed for removal.  Physical removal with hands, cranes, harvesters and cleaning the screens at the dam in-take points will also be carried out.  Limited use of herbicides to kill the water hyacinth at the sluice end of the Owen Falls Bridge to release the emergency to a situation.

On the water treatment works, construction of outer streams to buy invasion of water abstraction areas by floating mats of water hyacinth at Entebbe, Gaba, Jinja and Jinja water works, physical removal and cleaning of springs be linked up for chemical harvesting once the machines have arrived in the country.

Water transport vessels at Port Bell

In this area, manual removal of the weed will be reinforced by mechanical harvesting and weevils which have been produced will be released for biological control. In areas where we have boat and fishing landing sites, off shore of the water hyacinth will be sprayed by herbicides, physical removal of residue weeds at the landing sites by mobilised and facilitated community participation and people and sensitising and training of affected communities with regard to effective use of hand tools and precautions will be taken in case of herbicide application.   There will also be further provision of hand tools and protective clothing to these communities.  To deal with the influx from Kagera River, we shall construct a retractable boom close to the mouth of River Kagera to trap the weed to be removed mechanically and we shall also introduce weevils up stream for biological control. In order to do this, a clear chain of command is being established within my Ministry to ensure timely, effective and efficient implementation of this action plan.  A Water hyacinth unit will soon be established within the fisheries Department with the overall responsibility to implement, coordinate and manage the day-to-day operations of the Emergency Action Programme.  

The total amount required under the Emergency Action Plan is U$5,426,795.  This Budget does not include Government contribution of a further UShs 320 million by way of staff salaries, office accommodation, refurbishment, logistical support, space for damping and chemical verification costs.  Apart from that, as I mentioned earlier, it does not also include the contribution by Government of UShs 5l0 million. In order to address this Budget and to make sure that this Emergency Action Plan is put in effect, international funding agencies have been requested to meet the balance of the Budget of the amount of U$5.43 million dollars mainly for technical assistance, equipment and operation expenditure for implementing the recommended Emergency Action Plan.

The following contributions have now been committed:

USAID has committed U$1,000,000, UNDP - U$530,000; UEB and the World Bank, U$500,000, the Dutch Government, U$760.000 which I have already mentioned and of course, the contribution from Uganda Government of U$510,000.  This brings a total of U$3.3 and other funding agencies and including Japanese Government are expected to report their participation at the next donor’s meeting scheduled for next week and we hope to bring this gap of U$2 million dollars that is still missing.  

Mr Chairman, negotiations on management consultancy for the implementation of the Emergency Action Plan are also under way, with Meta’s Aquatic and Limited of U.S.A and the University of Florida Centre for aquatic plants and together under the coordination of UNDP.  The Management contract with consultants will be finalised this month; water hyacinth control sub-units shall be established national-wide before the end of April 1996.  The on-going chemical verification study shall be completed by the end of February 1996.  Actual implementation of the Emergency Control Programme which is to take one year shall start in April or May 1996; immediately after the arrival of the first mechanical harvesters and other equipment and on completion of the Environmental Impact Assessment Report which the Management consultants will prepare by the end of March and which will take into account the use of herbicides.

Mr Chairman, hon. Members, this is what the Government has done so far and what it will continue to do in our national effort to bring the water hyacinth under control.  I am therefore, appealing to the hon. Members of this House, and to the public at large, to be patient, as appropriate plans are already in place and as soon as adequate funding is realised and mobilised, there should be no reason, why we should not as a nation, barricade the weed and bring it under control levels within the estimated time scale of one year.  During this period, we shall put in place the medium and long-term process of control in order to continue to remove further threats.  I shall, Mr Chairman, keep this House informed from time to time on the progress being made, so that we control the weed. I thank you.

MR WANENDEYA  (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Before I go to the Bill on the Floor, I would like to thank the - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  We have not started the Bill, we are on the Ministerial Statement.

MR WANENDEYA:  Most obliged, Mr Chairman.  The point over here, is that, each time I face the East going to the mountains of the Sun, at our Dam, Owen Falls Dam, I have been seeing this thing and I am today very grateful that my Friend the Minister for Agriculture has come up with a statement but Mr Chairman and hon. Members, they have been talking about eradicating or the Government has been talking about eradicating the water hyacinth on quite a number of times, but without taking appropriate steps. Now, with the available money in the chit, can the Minister not start off with what is expected instead of - (Interruption) 

THE VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, what I am saying is that, the Minister has said, that he is going, but when, because, we have been getting all these empty promises each time and we do not get very fast.  When is he starting exactly, Mr Chairman, because, if he has started, Mr Chairman, I would urge that he does with all the speed especially at the Owen Falls.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I just wanted to hear from the Minister, because, there was a time when a machine was brought in the country and we told that it failed to work, I do not know what - has he forgotten that or it has been taken back to - or something and then, Mr Chairman, I want also to know from the Minister since this is a regional issue, he has not told us what are these other Governments affected by the water hyacinth of Lake Victoria, our neighbouring districts, is it an issue concerning Ugandans alone or they have also consulted their counterparts in the region; so as to bring into action a coordinated effect on the water hyacinth.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  I thank you Mr Chairman and I thank the hon. Minister for the statement he has made to the House on this scourge of the plant.  I seek some clarification, because, what the Minister clarifies may be very useful for the future of this country.  Is it true that when this plant started coming into Uganda, that it originated from River Kagera and that some experts warned the Government some four/five years ago, if not earlier that this needed to be arrested at once, because it had caused a lot of havoc in the America and nevertheless the Ministry just ignored it.  Is it also true that at about the same time, there was an offer by someone in Government to bring money; when the plant was hardly visible in Lake Victoria and that this matter was brought to the research department of the Ministry again, no one did anything about this?  

Is it also true, Mr Chairman, the Minister can clarify - that until he himself, became Minister of Agriculture, there was no policy whatsoever on the hyacinth plant?  I wonder whether he could clarify that, because, if this is true, then this country could be engulfed by some catastrophe even though we are forewarned with people not doing anything about it and if all these allegations are true, is it the intention of the Minister to ensure that those who are responsible at the various times, are brought to account and are disciplined for neglecting their duty?  Mr Chairman, could the Minister clarify?

MR MWANDHA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  By way of clarification, I wonder whether the Minister can clarify a statement which I heard on radio made by an expert who came to this country to advise the Government on the water hyacinth and the expert was saying in this radio programme, that in fact, we should not in terms of eradicating the water hyacinth, rather than we should talk in terms of managing the water hyacinth, because, the way the level it had reached, it was no longer possible to eradicate it and the only thing that was available to us, was actually to learn to live with it and therefore, we must find ways of managing the hyacinth.  Can he clarify, Mr Chairman?

MR KAYONGO:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I also seek clarification from the Minister.  Mr Chairman, I do understand that whenever Government wants to attempt to eradicate this water hyacinth, it only looks to people abroad, I wonder whether he knows that even here, we have some people may be who are better than those they are looking at.  I have a particular example, we have Dr Michael Senyimba, who is now Bishop of the Diocese of Mukono and whose discipline is in Botany and he offered, in fact, he modelled a machine and he urged Government to avail him money so that he could develop it, he says he could even develop it with our people in Katwe and half a start, but this man was ignored.  How can we build capacity at home, if our own people are marginalised?  Will the Minister clarify on that? (Applause)

MR NASASIRA:  Thank you very much.  First of all, I want to thank the Members for the way they have received the statement and I will go through the queries or clarifications they have raised, which they wanted clarified.  

Hon. Marwas wanted to know whether the machine which was brought and failed to work, whether it is still here or has gone back.  Let me say that that machine was bought for Uganda Railways through the grant funds given by the European Union and really, our involvement was minimal as a Government directly, but we accepted the grant and consultants or fabricators were chosen and I am sure when you followed the Press, when this machine had come, the manufacturer kept telling the public that, that was a very good machine.  Of course, we have proved that the machine does not work, it is still there and the law of contract will take its course, with that contract that they had entered with that manufacturer; so eventually, the manufacturer will have to be dealt with contractually.  But that does not help us, the machine is not working and we have to move ahead and do other things.

On the regional issue, yes, we are handling this water hyacinth under the Lake Victoria Organisation and also there is this Law Environment Management Project, but those are going to be considered under the medium and long term. As I said, in my statement, we get most of the water hyacinth on our side; the River Kagera unfortunately, does not flow going backwards, it keeps flowing back in the Lake.  So, while we are organising Regional Cooperation, we cannot wait, in fact, we have waited a bit, part of the delay was to get clearance from our neighbours on herbicides, on using weevils.  So, now that we have got that go ahead, we cannot wait, until we have got these regional funds when we are the most affected; we have to take our own action and that is one way to barricade it at Kagera. 

Hon. Kanyeihamba, is it true that this weed started from Kagera?  No, the first sign of the weed was seen in 1987 in Lake Kioga and it was seen on Lake Victoria in 1988.  In fact, there is hardly any connection within Lake Kioga and River Kagera one, but it was seen in River Nile in 1955 in Sudan and in America and South America, this weed has been there for over 100 years.  It is expected that it could have spread by people bringing it as ornamental plants, because, it happens to be beautiful and of course, our climate is so good that it encourages it to multiply faster.  Whether it is true that money was offered and the Government did not take it, I am not aware of that, I have not found it on any of the files; whether it is true that there was no policy until I went to the Ministry, I know it is not true, I went there found a research - the research started way back in 1989 and progress has been none, I have found it where I have found it, and I have taken on where, I have taken on.  

So, I cannot say there was no policy, because, studies were being made and we were looking for funds.  But I want to assure that there is now a policy and what work was started earlier was to formulate that policy, I am just completing it and therefore, there will be no need to deal with those who might have delayed.

Hon. Mwandha was talking about management - eradication.  If you recall in my statement, I never talked about eradication. I was talking about management and control, because, we are aware we are not going to eradicate it; I will be coming here and telling the House lies that we are going to eradicate it, but as long as it is managed and controlled, so that it does not affect all those areas I have talked about, I do not think there is any problem - in fact, some scientists think that a small water hyacinth on edge or on the shores is better than none; so if we can keep it there, it has its own advantages.

Finally, hon. Kayongo was talking about the use of experts.  I have said, we are hiring a Management Consultancy for a period, but let me tell you that this Emergency Plan was prepared by Ugandans, it was not prepared by experts; all the research has been done by the Jinja Fisheries Research Institute and these have been Ugandans and part of this unit is not going to be followed by only experts, but the unit will have some experts and Ugandans; we are trying to get some experience of those who have been dealing with it for decades, where we have not reached. So Ugandans will be used and I hope that these Management Consultants will be here for may be one year and leave when we have established the units.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL,1996

MR KIZZA BESIGYE (Historical Member):  Thank you Mr Chairman, for allowing me to make a few remarks from the Interim Parliamentary Elections Bill.  Mr Chairman, I have read through the Bill, unfortunately, I was not around during the whole of last week and could not attend the Sectoral Committee, but I obviously see many small areas that may need our attention at the Committee Stage or better still, earlier than the Committee stage if an arrangement could be made whereby, they can be communicated to the Minister.

I will limit my remarks only on the main policy areas contained in the Bill.  I think this is obliviously very important Bill, especially in as far as it establishes ground for fairness and equality in the process of elections of the Members of Parliament.  On this question of election of Members of Parliament, I may be should also indicate that I hope the Electoral Commission will, in its wisdom, still consider that elections of President and Parliament, be made on the same day. (Applause) 

I have analyzed the reasons why there should be elections on different days and obviously there was a very long discussion on this matter in the Constituent Assembly, but at the end of the day, we decided to leave it to the Electoral Commission.  In its wisdom, it will determine the election day and I am saying that really, I do not see the justification for this, especially in as far as the cost in terms of money, human resources and so on and so forth is concerned.  

During the debate in the CA, we got to understand that the main reason for separating them would be not to confuse our peasants, who would not like to vote for this one, then vote for the other one, then, there are too many papers around and they are likely to get confused; which on the surface of it looks alright but which I do not fully agree with, because, you can have two separate tables; one here and one clearly separate and there are these agents who know that this one is for this and the other one is for that and that aside, when I said, - okay, if that is the problem, can we have Parliamentary elections first, and then Presidential elections later?  Yes, vice versa, and then my friend said, no, no, that is not good enough.  I said, what is the problem then, if the problem is that, there will be confusion, then this would have no problem also.  

So, I think in this group, if one examines it closely, he may find that the intention may be simply to seek undue advantage in one way or another. But my own concern really on this matter is the question of resources, that are additionally required to organise two separate elections which in my view, can be organised on the same day.  But this does not specifically concern the provisions of this Bill.  

Now, on the Bill, I have just a few remarks.  One is on Section 40 and 42, which talks about qualifications for nominations.  

Unfortunately, Mr Chairman, I was not here when the Presidential Elections Bill was passed and I had circulated some Amendments but I could not be available to speak to them, but I have a definite problem with increasing the minimum requirement for election into an office provided by the Constitution.  The Constitution provides for qualifications for election to an office.  Now, if we subsequently here put another condition without which you may be qualified, then, I think we are increasing the qualifications for elections beyond what is provided for by the Constitution.  

If for example, you say, that I must pay UShs 200,000 before I can become nominated, eligible for election, what if I do not have the UShs 200,000, but I fulfill the requirements under the Constitution and you bar me from being elected?  Can I not make myself available to court and demand that my nomination was unconstitutionally stopped. I would like may be the Minister to inform on this and if I will not be satisfied, then, may be I will move an Amendment at an appropriate stage on this area.

The second area which I have seen is in 46 (ii).  In 46 (ii), I found that there is a very restrictive provision in terms of time that is available between nomination and polling.  I do not know what prompted this, but I think that it can lead to some difficulties, especially since in Section 48 (ii), you are providing that there will be a candidates meeting in every parish of a constituency.  Now, the number of Parishes can be more than 30 in a constituency, but the maximum time between nomination and polling has been given as 30 days and I think that this area may need to be looked at.  

The other area which I think other Members have commented about is the question of public meetings intended to solicit votes. Whereas I agree that rallies can be destructive and may be need to be regulated in this kind of manner, I do not think that it is necessary to regulate on other public meetings, because, surely, if a school has invited me as a candidate to go and address them and tell them about my views and they are in my locality or its Makerere University, or it is whatever, I do not see why such a meeting should be clamped down on, public rallies, yes, where you invite whoever is passing, drunkards and so on, may cause problems, but I think extending it to restrict all kinds of public meetings is going very far.  I have a problem with the use of Government resources, especially the use of Government resources by public officers.  I have no problem with the political appointees, political people.

Political people can continue with their resources, because, in any case, they are already known to have a political inclination, a Minister is known that he has been appointed by the President and he is serving in that political capacity, but a public officer is supposed to serve everybody in the same way, he is not supposed to show - to become a political activist, that you have a Permanent Secretary, who is also the President of DP.  It obviously comprises the delivery of services put under his charge.  

Now, in the same way, therefore, I do not see why a public officer, if he wants to go into elections, he does not take leave.  I think public officers must take leave and by taking leave, leave our resources safely at base, go and campaign or do whatever and once they win or fail, then they can come back to these things.  So, whereas I have no problem with political officers, public officers, I have a problem in allowing that they can use resources ordinarily attached to them and so on and so forth to go and campaign.  Campaigning is a choice of an individual, if you feel that without these resources, you will not be able to campaign, you stay in your job, but if you want to go, you will leave the resources and go and I think other Colleagues had also made a contribution on this question of people who cannot read or write.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman and thank you for giving way.  The problem with public servants who were appointed in the old Constitution under Article 104 is that, even if they went on leave, 30 days advance or 30 days in advance, since they normally are the controllers of the resources in the Ministry, they end up again by using them but under different guise.  I think the best would be that if they are going to be contenders, they should actually resign and we will apply if they fail to go through.

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  The information I want to give for the benefit of the House is that, the question of a public officer resigning was made a Constitutional matter by the Constituent Assembly and it requires that officer to resign only after he has successfully gone through the election.  Therefore, we cannot do anything about it, I am agreeable to looking at as to whether they can go on leave, but definitely, it is hopeful thinking to think that they will be asked to resign.  

MR KIZZA BESIGYE: Thank you Mr Chairman and I thank the hon. Minister for that information, but really apart from being a constitutional requirement, I do not think that elections should be used also as a punitive measure to those who want to join politics; because, people join politics in order to serve, it should be taken as some kind of sacrifice and as a matter of fact, that is why I am not in favour of increasing the qualifications for being elected into any of these offices, beyond what is provided for in the Constitution.   Why should you make it punitive, that I must from my savings, pay you UShs 8 which is not refundable in order to become a President of Uganda.  Unless by becoming a President of Uganda I am going to get a lot personal benefit, but if it is not personal benefit, if it is just service, then I do not see why people should - (Interruption) 

THE VICE CHAIRMAN: Order.

MR KIZZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I was just going to make one remark on the question of the people who cannot read or write.  These people have been variously talked about, were a source of irregularity in the last elections and we recognise that they are there, they are not few even, the level of illiteracy is quite high, but I think we should still make some laws which will avoid ambiguity in how they can be handled.   First of all, the electoral papers according to the regulations I have seen and the provisions in this Bill are going to be elaborate in providing information on the candidates available, with pictures, with whatever, so even somebody who is illiterate, if civic education is sufficient, is done aggressively, will know that once he identifies the picture of the candidate, he affirms where - the important thing there is civic education; all these illiterates can go and vote by themselves.  But those who may not be able to vote by themselves, and there are many also, they may be many, you know, there may be a man who is blind, there may be a man who - these old women who are frail and cannot by themselves go through this procedure as expected. I think for that category of people and I think there will not be too many, I would myself consider that the privacy of their voting would be lifted; so that the person comes to the polling station and says I want to vote for so and so in the presence of the agents, because, in any case, before now, we have been voting, all of us, publicly, going behind the candidate we want to choose, all of us.  I do not see any problem with this small group of people, being required before the agents to come and say, I want to vote for so and so and then they tick in the presence of that person on that ballot paper; that would eliminate most of this confusion that may - 

Lastly, I would like to make one or two comments on the election of the Women, the Army, the Youths, Workers and Persons with Disabilities.  These category of people, the provisions in the transitional provisions not withstanding, are in Article 78 supposed to be regulated by Parliament and Parliament I believe is not me now, but of course, I am very aware of the provisions I think of too, under which we are making these laws, the provisions of 264, which require us to make measures that are necessary or practical to give effect to the provisions of the Constitution and in specific for elections of office bearers that are provided, but I contend that it is not necessary for these category of people to be elected now.  We will have Parliament, Parliament will deliberate as provided for in 94 (ii) - 94 (ii) provides that even without these people, Parliament of the other elected Members can be constituted and deliberate as Parliament.  This Mr Chairman, will also help us first of all, to deal with what is necessary now, absolutely necessary now, -(Interruption)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much hon. Chairman. I would like to inform hon. Kizza Besigye, clearly that the composition of Parliament is covered under Article 78 of the Constitution and under 78 (c), Parliament shall consist, it is a mandatory provision and the representation being talked about are covered under (b) and (c).  Under Clause 94, procedure in Parliament, it refers to a case, where may be a Member of Parliament had died, but I think it would be challengeable before a court for interpretation if a whole group of Women Representatives is not elected, there is no way you can say you have constituted Parliament, Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to get clarification from the previous informer whether reference to Clause 78 means that Parliament will not be such a House on day one without these people.  No, I do not read it here, my understanding of this is that, the provision which is clearly indicated here is general.  In other words, in the same way that NRC had the Youths and workers later, so could the women and youth and other categories, but this one, certainly, does not say, that on the swearing in, all these goods must be there. 

MR KIZZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I do not like this controversial subject; I am not a lawyer and I would like to invite the learned friends to discuss.  My own lay understanding of this situation is that, even without a section of that ‘shall’ the Members as long quorum is achieved and taking advantage of the provision that allows Parliament to be constituted even the absence of some of its membership, that Parliament can be duly constituted.  But would not like it to be a controversial matter over which we should exchange.  My own inclination on that point, therefore, would be, subject to that kind of consultation, that we go ahead and elect Members of Parliament who are clear, with their constituencies, in any case, these -(Interruption) 

THE VICE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR KIZZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I think that we recognise that these other additional groups, some call them special interest groups, others call them marginalised groups and others call them affirmative action groups, (Laughter) - they are very important, I am not trying to minimise their importance, it is in recognition of that, that we put them in the Constitution and I think that they should be there.  But I am only saying that should we now bog ourselves down before - because, I said the provisions of 264 under which we are operating require us to do what is necessary to bring the provisions of this Constitution into effect and I think it is not absolutely necessary to engage in that, to bring the provisions of this Constitution into effect and it will -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Is it really in order for the hon. Member who is on the Floor to suggest that these special groups be for the time be suspended until or their elections be postponed until further notice and then the other group which is the main group continue - yes, Mr Chairman, is it in order when we are the very people also who have cast our votes and we are going to vote for these very people?  Is it in order for these hon. Members -(Laughter) - to suggest, Mr Chairman, is it therefore in order –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Madam, please, you have not got him clearly, proceed, please.

MR KIZZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I think there is a misunderstanding. In fact, what I am proposing would favour no other group other than the women, because, all these women who are in this House, can even go on the county and contest; those who win, come in the first Parliament, those who loose, wait for the other one and join again. (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Let it be made clear, Mr Chairman.  I think we are getting somewhere, the solution is, the women will have a clear Constitution, if they are prepared to spend at District level for the direct elections, then we have no contradiction. They will just go straight and during our time, they will be elected, just as  - but if they go back to stand through what they call the college, then it means the Constitution of the college must also wait for the new election where they are bound to hang on until the colleges are formed properly.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE VICE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed, try to wind up.

MR KIZZA BESIGYE:  Let me wind up on this point, Mr Chairman, that I would like my Friends in the learned profession to assist me with interpretation and if it is technically possible, I will be moving a Motion to that effect that we postpone this and we move it from here, but if it is not possible, because, you should for example, even read carefully the provisions of 98 (iv), which says that Parliament shall by law, prescribe the procedure for election of representatives referred to in paragraph (b) and (c) of Clause 1 of this Statute.  It did not talk about others, but for these ones.  Now, the question is, where you want to put the Parliament, but we can continue consulting on this matter.

I would like to wind up by giving my views on affirmative action whenever, because, there will have to be an election whether now or in the future.  Now, my views, since I will not be in Parliament, even if we agree that it will be Parliament, I will certainly not be here and I would take this opportunity and give my views on affirmative action.  Affirmative action is intended to give deliberate advantage in order to promote the interest or position of a certain person or group of persons; this is the whole intent of affirmative action.  It is supposed to be used as a corrective measure and therefore, affirmative action should not one day be looked at as an end in itself.  It can only be a means to an end and this is done, I fully agree with the contention of hon. Ssebaana Kizito, this in our case, has been done by removing the men from competition of those seats.  You have an election of only women contesting alone, that is the element of affirmative action in as far as I am concerned.  In my own thinking, I support the use of an electoral college on the other hand.  This is because, first of all, it makes it more affordable for more people, but more importantly, I think it avoids that kind of impression of a double representation, it should be observed both at the level of law and the level of practice that the affirmative action seat is simply a stepping stone and that it is not a permanent seat by itself.  Now, if in fact, we went to universal adult suffrage, -(Interruption) 

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give information about the point he raised last, that it is not a permanent feature.  Now, as recent as January 1996, in Britain, there were women only designated constituencies; some men felt that there was violation of their rights, two men, one of them a lecturer of law at the University of London, his name Peter Jefferson, with the assistance of equal opportunity commission there in Britain, took a case to court, the judgement was in favour and those constituencies were re-opened.  So, that emphasises the point that it is not a permanent feature.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, I agree that affirmative action is a temporary measure within the Constitution - the subject to review, but I want to tell hon. Rwakakooko, that on the other hand, in Norway, it is a Constitutional provision that in all cedes, Government, legislature and whatever, there should never be less than 40 per cent of each text.  Why is it there?  Because it is there by way of affirmative action and it is working there in Norway and things are better than Britain in terms of equality of sexes.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, in the same vein, in the same country, which has had democracy for over 800 years, the women never voted until 1926, that is England where women were not allowed to vote until 1926, in Britain, in America, they had to have a special Amendment which means, that Uganda, which is just starting its democracy, giving this affirmative action to 10 years only is very far advanced compared to the countries that have spent 800 years to realise that women must not have affirmative action.

MR KIZZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, therefore, I support affirmative action for women; I support the use of electoral colleges for that reason, that there should not be double representation; that there is actually, I think there is one representative for every constituency.

To create the District Constituency, to have the same mandate of universal suffrage as Constituencies is going to simply create a lot of chaos and the women will even have a higher mandate than men.   

Mr Chairman, the weaknesses in the college be mitigated by expanding the college and I think the Minister has done very well in doing that.  Now, however, in light of the requirements that this seat should only be used as a stepping stone, I would like that the use of this seat should be limited for the same individual.  It has been argued here by those who were opposing the college that the Members here already money; they are going to bribe the electorate.  Now the thing is if you have used this affirmative action seat, you have been in Parliament for five years, you have been debating, maybe you are already a Minister, why should you at the next election, block another woman stepping on the same stone and you come back to sit on the same seat. (Laughter)

Surely, Mr Chairman, can it be logical that hon. Matembe requires affirmative action? 
 
MRS MATEMBE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the seat for the District is not for hon. Matembe.  It is for a woman representative, and it is open Mr Chairman to all women in the District to come and contest just like the Country seat is open to all Ugandans.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, the point of information from hon. Matembe is well taken.  But he she has obviously misunderstood my point.  My point is not that the seats available should not be competed by all Ugandans.  I am only saying the affirmative action seat is meant to bring in as many women to this exposure you had as possible and that it will be defeating its end if it clogged by the same woman, leaving the other women in the quarrel.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to give the information to the speaker on the Floor because I think he has misconstrued the whole concept of affirmative action in this case, about women.  Affirmative action is practised in an attempt to counteract the effects of previous long-term marginalisation or discrimination.  It is something that has been done against a group that you are trying to counteract.  Affirmative action, therefore, does not mean the promotion of individual Members of that group.  It means promoting the general interest of the group. Therefore, I welcome for once the concurrency of opinion with hon. Kanyomozi.  But I am afraid the conclusions are different.  I am saying that affirmative action in this case therefore, means the promotion of interest of women in Uganda.  When we talk about electing a woman representative, the idea is to have a woman at levels where women interests can best be articulated.  Therefore, when you choose this woman you want to choose the woman who can most effectively articulate the interest of women.  It has nothing to do with whether it is ‘X’ or ‘Y’ or ‘Z.  It is about who can best articulate the interest of women.  That is what affirmative action, in the case of Uganda, is all about.   Thank you.

MR KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, I take the information given by hon. Mbabazi, but I would like to assure him that I did not misconstrue anything and that on the contrary whereas he argues like I did, he comes to a wrong conclusion. (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, I fully agreed that affirmative action in this case takes into account women who will champion the interests of their like.  But it is also a matter of fact that it is intended to bring more women into the political arena because the main problem is that there has been a starvation of the numbers of women participating in politics.  So, we would like to promote as many women.  In any case, how do you know that you have achieved the most eloquent now?  The person who has been exposed through the affirmative action sees it of course better; he has had more interaction, has had more exposure, knows more Ministers, has attended seminars, and will of course speak more eloquently.  But we would like other women also in order to achieve what the term I hear them talking about now ‘the critical mass’.  Relying on one leader, what if that leader goes?  

I finally wish to give notice that I intend to move an amendment to put a limit and it was actually supported by the Constituent Assembly, but they said this is a Parliamentary matter to put a limit -(Laughter)- .  Mr Chairman, that is all I wanted to say this afternoon.  I will move that amendment and we will discuss it on the merits of it.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I thank you.  Mr Chairman, I wish to refer you and the whole House to Rule No.30 of the Interim Rules of Procedure of the National Resistance Council.  ‘Any Motion for the reference of a Bill to a select Committee’.  Mr Chairman, a number of Speakers, earlier on this week and last week, requested, and there was general agreement that after several Members have debated that this Bill - the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Bill, 1995, be referred to a Committee for thrashing out the different amendments which are similar and others still contradictory.  Even as the last Speaker was speaking and several lawyers rose, there were still disagreement even on the interpretations on certain aspects of the Law and Constitution.  

Mr Chairman, therefore, in view of the many varied opinions, expressed on the Floor of this House and amendments, in view of the number of these amendments themselves being contradictory and controversial, and this House being desirous of giving due attention with a view to harmonising these several amendments which are in many cases similar, I wish to move that this Bill be referred to the House Committee on Legal and Security affairs to report back to this House within seven days.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, right from day one, I have been following the move in the House.  There is desire that this Bill be looked at by our Committee and I have no objection to that.  I have worked very well with this Committee and I think it will benefit.  My own request is that rather than proceeding under what hon. Gasatura is proposing, we proceed under Rule 58 which allows the Mover at your discussion to wind up, then after winding up, immediately before we go to the Committee of the whole House a Member would move a Motion that the Bill be referred to this Committee and then we go to that Committee.  Since we have a lot of constraints on time that we report by Tuesday.  Seven days would be eating too much into the programme we have.  I only want to have an opportunity to respond to a few issues raised by way of winding up and then we go into a Committee.  I beg to move.

MR ELLY KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, in view of the fact that the Motion has already been moved and has been accepted by you, Mr Chairman, and the Motion has been seconded, I think the hon. Minister is not right to say and he is not in order to say that the Motion which has already been seconded that he will be allowed to wind up.  Another reason I would like the Minister not to wind up, is that he still has a chance to wind up after the report.  But more particularly is that I would not like the Minister to stand here before the Committee has met him, and kind of give a Government position before the Committee has met.  It will not also be fair to him that when he comes back to wind up, he will find that most of the things he had come up as Cabinet have been rejected by the Committee.  It would appear as if the Committee has kind of overpowered him.  So, I would rather, that he holds his fire that we proceed and we come to the Committee. There are very many controversial issues.  

I know some of the issues the Minister would like to push, if he is allowed to wind up, he will definitely push some of those issues.  I know that in some of those issues which he will push, it would be better and even more diplomatic for his to do it and push to the Committee.  One of the issues, if I can pre-empty, is the number of the Members of Parliament who will be sitting here.  Now if at this moment, is pushed, I do not know what the consequences are likely to be.  So, I would appeal to him, to withdraw the request he has put and we proceed with hon. Gasatura’s line.

MR KAVUMA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is hon. Karuhanga in order to plant thoughts in the humble Mover of this Bill about what he anticipated to be moved and the rest of it?  Is he in order to misunderstand my very brief contribution which in effect should have been revealed to a man of the brilliance of hon. Karuhanga that I actually opposed the Motion moved in preference to having a more orderly procedural Rule deployed.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: The first one he was not in order, but the second one he is quite in order.  Proceed please.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it will be recalled that when this Bill was introduced for the Second Reading, I was the first one to contribute and I immediately moved because I was aware that before we debate on the Second Reading we should go into Committee first.  However, in their wisdom, the House I think, you are right, they objected to this formula.  They proceeded to want to a debate on the Second Reading, which they have been doing.  It is most unusual Mr Chairman, that during the Second Reading, before the Mover has wound up, that you proceed under Rule 8.  

We must proceed under Rule 58 because a number of issues have been raised here which the House ought to get some answers from the Minister or to get a reaction.  I do not agree with my Friend hon. Karuhanga that when the Minister speaks here, he will bull-doze at all.  The proper way, Mr Chairman, the Minister is right we must proceed under Rule 58, he must, because we are in Second Reading, he must wind up.  The House must see how the Minister has reacted towards some of these views and then before the question is put, that is when the Motion to put this Bill to the Committee would be moved.  

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, the House like this works by presidency and we have had several debates here, discussed had Bills; discussed on Second Reading and before winding up, we have referred these Bills to Committees; many of them.  Presidency also are very, very useful to guide us.  I am not in particular concerned about whether the Minister winds up or not, I would like Mr Chairman, to save on time so that the Committee embarks on this work right away.  The Minister will still have the opportunity to impart those things that he wants to impart.  Equally he will have the opportunity, because of the interest shown on this Bill, most of us will be there.  If we are there and there those attractive things, even the Members of the Press normally attend these Committees, he will still impart this knowledge that he has.  I would, Mr Chairman, support the Motion of Mr Gasatura, that you allow to proceed and the Minister will still come first impart some of the knowledge; secondly, when we come to report he will do the same.  I thank you.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, looking at the Article of the Constitution which concerns this matter, Article 90, one would notice that Clause 1 of Article simply says, ‘Parliament shall appoint standing committees and other committees for the efficient discharge of its functions.’ When you look further down, Article 90, Clause 3, it talks of the functions of the standing committees.  It says, ‘standing committees shall discuss, make recommendations or Bills which are laid before Parliament’.  This, Mr Chairman is no longer a matter of choice.  It is a must.  The only problem we have Mr Chairman, is that in the Rules of Procedure we did not have the Standing Committees in mind.  But now, that the Committees are here, it is a must because this requirement in Clause 3 has two explicit requirements.  First that the Standing Committee must discuss; second that it must make recommendations.  Then it has one implicit requirement that the Bill must be referred to the Committee.  

Mr Chairman, if I will not be shy to be outrageous I would not even say, that it goes to Standing Committee; I would say that it goes to a Select Committee.  Mr Chairman I support the idea provided that goes to a Select Committee.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR LUBEGA: Mr Chairman, I would like to call upon the Members, through you, not to confuse Sectoral Committees with Select Committees.  In case of Select Committees under which the Mover on the Floor has put the Motion, the Select Committee Rules, that is under Rule 83,  provide that it is you, Mr Chairman, who has got to appoint the Select Committee.  Matters can be referred to that Select Committee for them to report subsequently.  But in case of Sectoral Committees which is the Legal Security Committee the same Mover has referred to, once that Sectoral Committee considers the matters before it, in this case the Bill, it has to give a report not necessarily whether that Committee was appointed as a Select Committee or not.  We can use one of the procedures.  If it is the select Committee, Mr Chairman, it is you to appoint it.  It should consist of not less than 5.  You can choose the Sectoral Committee to be the Select Committee for this purpose.  There are no contradictions.  

I would like also to refer to the comment which was made sometime ago by our Chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security.  Whereby he said, that unless the matter has been referred specifically by this Council to that Sectoral Committee it is only then when that Sectoral Committee can report to this House.  That was very unfortunate with due respect of the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security.  Because as we met on the Presidential Election Bill, and as we have been meeting on the Parliamentary Election Bill, it is the duty of that Committee to report formally to this Committee whether the Motion passes through or not, because the Sectoral has already sat.  Therefore, we expect the report from that Committee on matters which have been discussed and which maybe discussed later.  So, Mr Chairman, it is up to you to either appoint Select Committee now, and you can formulate it by saying it will be the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security.  It is up to you because you have got the - under Rule 83.  Whatever the case maybe, the procedural aspects now require that the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security has got, he is obliged to report formally to this Committee because the Committee had discussed this matter already.  I thank you.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I am sorry to interrupt.  But is hon. Lubega in order to mislead this House that the Legal and Security Affairs Committee has met informally to consider the Parliament Bill when in fact it has not.  Mr Chairman, I will tell you what happened.  We had struck an arrangement in order to save on time with the Committee to meet them even before we came to debate this Bill.  But we were only able to deal with the Presidential Bill.  On that we came to the House and we told them we had done this.  Now, this House felt that this Bill should not be treated in the same way.  So, we did not go back informally meet with that Committee.  We waited for the mood of the House which indicated that they wanted to refer it formally to the Committee.  Sir, we addressed -(Interjections)

So, Mr Chairman, is hon. Lubega in order to mislead this House into thinking that the committee has already considered this, when we have not; and is he in order to further mislead this House by arguing that even after -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: First of all the Members want this Bill to go into a committee. Isn’t it?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Secondly, you want the Minister to wind up. (Interjections)- forget about the rules -(Interjections)

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of order. Mr Chairman, is it in order for Members to misunderstand -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, is it in order for those Members who have spoken to misunderstand how this House is supposed to operate under the committee arrangement.  Mr Chairman, when the Bill is read for the first time which happened in respect to this Bill as it did for the Presidential elections, that Bill automatically went to the committee concerned. That Bill after the first reading, was supposed to have gone automatically to the committee concerned to start deliberations on the same committee.  Mr Chairman, I suspect that  because of the controversy on this Bill, the committee feared. Is it in order, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The committee feared?

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Yes to deliberate and make a report on this committee. Now is it in order for the Members including the hon. Minister of state to be vague in matters relating to the procedure which should have been followed in this respect?

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: We have the Legal Select Committee here.  That one will handle this issue. (Applause) They should report here on Tuesday at 2.30 p.m. With that we have come to the end of today’s session. We adjourn until Tuesday next week.

(The Council rose at 4.15 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 February 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)

        

