Wednesday, 2 February 2011 

Parliament met at 11.23 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I thank you for your time so that we can transact Parliamentary business as we shall be informed by the Attorney-General, who is the owner of the business we have on the Order Paper.

I want to make a little adjustment to include a motion by hon. Ndeezi. I understand he wants to move a motion seeking your permission to move a Private Member’s Bill. He intends to bring a Private Member’s Bill and according to our rules, he is supposed to make that application. So, adjust your Order Paper to give space to hon. Ndeezi for that purpose. Maybe, we start with that.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need some guidance from your chair or the Attorney-General. We woke up today with a hot headline that court has ordered 70 MPs - some of our colleagues are out there wondering whether to come or not. So, possibly you could guide us.

THE SPEAKER: Well, there are procedures to follow for the kind of thing you are suggesting. I have just read this in the newspaper today and obviously, I do not act on newspaper reports. But when I arrived in my office, I found a copy of a judgement of the Constitutional Court which I have not been able to peruse through because of this business and, therefore, I cannot say, “So and so should not come in yet”, because things have to be done formally.

For instance, I cannot act if there is a meeting at City Square and somebody declares that he has joined this party or that party. I cannot say I heard you at the City Square saying so, so from today do this and the other.

A Member of Parliament ceases to be a Member when he writes to me like the case of former Member, hon. Kajeke of Mbale. He had to write to me, but he could not ring me and then say he has resigned. 

So, let us wait and after I have studied the judgement and I have seen the extracted order - because from that judgement, they must extract a court order. If I look at it, then, I will see what to do. Obviously, I will also consult the Attorney-General to advise me and then as a result –

So, any Member mentioned in that newspaper can continue until I have studied the ruling so that things are done properly and formally.

So, maybe we hear hon. Ndeezi’s motion before we go to this big business.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday you directed the Attorney-General when I raised here a matter of national importance.

THE SPEAKER: What?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yesterday, you directed the Attorney-General to respond to a matter of national importance that I raised in regard to the youth elections.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us finish then I will call the Attorney-General to respond.

11.29
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Central Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this unique opportunity to move this very important motion on behalf of my people.

I beg to move that leave of Parliament be granted for introduction of a Private Member’s Bill entitled: “The Persons with Disabilities (Amendments) Bill, 2011.” The motion is seconded by hon. William Nokrach.

The motion is moved under Rules 105 and 106 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, and it is also in accordance with Articles 32 and 35 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 32 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups including Persons with Disabilities.

AND WHEREAS Article 35(2) of the Constitution requires Parliament to make laws appropriate for the protection and promotion of rights of Persons with Disabilities.

NOTING that in 2006, Parliament enacted the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2006.

ALSO NOTING THAT the Government of Uganda ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) on 25 September 2008.

AWARE that the provisions of the PWDS Act 2006 and the other relevant laws are not adequate to meet the standards set by the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and, therefore, need to amend the Persons with Disabilities Act 2006 in accordance with the Convention on the rights to PWDs.

THEREFORE, Parliament collectively resolves as follows:

1.	Leave is granted for introduction in Parliament of a Bill entitled: “The PWDs (Amendment) Bill, 2011.

2.	The Clerk to Parliament is authorised to cause publication of the Bill in the Gazette for presentation in the House for the first reading.

3.	The Ministry of Finance and Government is urged to provide a certificate of financial implications in line with the relevant Rules of Procedure and Section 10 of the Budget Act”.

Mr Speaker, before I conclude my presentation, I beg to place on record our appreciation of the opportunity for the noble stake and great contribution of the National Resistance Movement Government in the protection and promotion of the rights of people with disabilities and other marginalised groups in this country.

I also beg to place on record our appreciation of your own mass input to the promotion of those rights. We also wish to thank this Parliament for the great job it has done in advancing the rights, not only of our people, but of other marginalised groups in this country.

Finally, we are very grateful to the Government of Uganda for having ratified the Convention on the rights of people with disabilities.

We appeal to the government to support this policy by supporting this motion. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, you have heard that he wants to bring a Bill to amend an existing law because certain provisions are required. This is his application. Do we need to debate this or is it clear?

11.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I do not want to comment on the merits of the motion; maybe the sector ministry can do that. But I wanted to remind Members of Parliament, backbenchers moving Private Members’ Bills – because we had a problem some time back when there was no interface between the mover of the motion, I think it was on matters to do with homosexuality - Hon. Bahati - and there was no good interface between the office of the First Parliamentary Council and the backbencher. 

I want to remind Members that under Article 94 of the Constitution, which is reproduced in our Rules of Procedure under Article 94(4); it says, “The Rules of Procedure of Parliament shall include the following provisions”, and under (d), it says, “The office of the Attorney-General shall afford the Member moving the Private Members’ Bill professional assistance in the drafting of the Bill.” 

I would like to urge the mover of this motion to interact with the Office of the Attorney-General, in particular, and the Office of the First Parliamentary Council, in drafting the Bill. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is fair.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I accept the guidance from the Attorney-General. 

11.36
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Northern Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to add something very small. This is a very good motion. I beg my colleagues to support it because Uganda has made so many good laws to protect the rights of persons with disabilities. Uganda has also signed many international laws in line with the rights of persons with disabilities.

However, there is a gap in this Act that we want to amend. The amendment will give us an opportunity to align the law with all other relevant laws protecting persons with disabilities. As I mentioned before, in Africa, for example, many people come to Uganda to find out more about the laws that have been made in support of the rights of persons with disabilities. So, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I request you to support this motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion as introduced by Hon. Ndeezi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted. 

11.38
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I noted the submissions of hon. Ssekikubo and the submission of hon. Kyanjo on the matter of youth elections that were held nation-wide on the 31st of January. I had written to the Electoral Commission and requested them to respond today, but I have not yet seen their response. The substantive matter of elections is handled by the Electoral Commission. It is independent of the ministry. I cannot respond substantively to the concerns raised until I have heard from them. So, as of now, I am not in position to respond substantively to the concerns. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay 

11.40
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the dilemma in which the Attorney-General finds himself. But nonetheless, I would have expected a commitment to follow-up on these matters so that the forthcoming elections are not cast in the same manner the youth elections have been cast. More importantly, on my part and I hope every Member’s part, we are committed to having a peaceful exercise. We want such incidents to be followed up and indeed, like the case of blacklisted officers, which had been undertaken by the Electoral Commission itself; they should not be the ones presiding over this very important exercise. Any system of bias where candidates who are expected, supposed, anticipated or suspected of supporting a particular side are deleted even when they are nominated is a matter of concern. That needs a follow-up.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, he wants your reassurance. Are you going to take it up? 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought that before the Attorney-General responds, I should add that it is also important for the Minister of Internal Affairs, to pay specific attention because the matters we raised yesterday do not necessarily or in bulk lie with the Attorney-General.  This idea of individuals usurping the powers of the Electoral Commission and acting as if they were the Electoral Commission lies directly under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

We have reported RDCs who have appointed themselves as agents of the commission. They are doing two jobs. They are recruiting individuals irregularly in the name of the state and acting directly as candidates. You know, it is a big mess. It would be of help if the minister also paid extra attention and presented either a commitment or a report after those investigations so that we can depart from the old practice of listening and not acting. 

We have had this experience when Members come here and we present cases and when you find the person responsible, he will tell you, “Go to Police and report.” This is my sincere request to the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate the cases and act quite positively so that we can avoid violence.  

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I have great respect for my colleagues, honourable Members of Parliament. There is mention of the habit of listening and not acting. I would like to assure you that, first of all, the listening is necessary. You have made your case on the Floor and the matter is in the hands of the Electoral Commission. I need to listen to them before I can conclusively advice on how it should be handled. 

Free and fair elections are a government programme. Free and fair elections are not imposed on us as a government by other people. This is a government programme and it is a government commitment to the people of Uganda; it is part of the political contract between the government and the people of Uganda. 

Because of this commitment, we have put Article 62 in the Constitution. The Article talks about the independence of the Electoral Commission: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the commission shall be independent and shall, in the performance of its functions, not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.”

I have heard what hon. Ssekikubo said. I have heard what hon. Kyanjo said to the extent that it falls within my portfolio. I will take it up with the Electoral Commission. Having listened to them, I will make recommendations to them, and I expect that they will take these recommendations seriously. But first, I will listen to all the sides involved, establish the facts and then make recommendations. 

I can assure you that because it is the commitment of Government to have free and fair elections, we will do our best to ensure this government programme is fulfilled. Thank you. 

11.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, this country is run in accordance with our Constitution and the laws we make in this House. The matter my brother, hon. Kyanjo, raised is very pertinent. My answer to this is that Police will definitely investigate, but it will investigate if we receive relevant information. For any irregularities, especially where it involves breaking the law, especially criminal laws, the first step is to report to Police and the Police will do what is necessary to rectify the position. Where the matter is civil, my suggestion is very simple, we go to the authority that handles civil matters. 

So, hon. Kyanjo and colleagues, we are ready to do everything that the Constitution mandates us to do, but we can only act when we have been given the necessary information. I thought I should clarify that. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO APPROVE THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS) (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 2011 UNDER SECTIONS 8 AND 100 OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT, NO.17 2005, ACT NO.17 OF 2005

11.48
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution under sections 8 and 100 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005, Act No.17 of 2005 seeking the approval of Parliament for the Parliamentary Elections (Special Interest Groups) (Amendment) Regulations, 2011. 

“WHEREAS elections of representatives of special interest groups are regulated by the Parliamentary Elections (Special Interest Groups) Regulations, 2001, Statutory Instrument No.31 of 2001;

AND WHEREAS it has become necessary to amend Statutory Instrument No.31 of 2001;

AND WHEREAS the regulations are required to be made by the Attorney General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on the recommendation of the Electoral Commission, and with the approval of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on the recommendation of the Electoral Commission, attached to this motion as Appendix 1, has caused to be prepared a Parliamentary Elections (Special Interest Groups)(Amendment) Regulations, 2011 attached to this motion as Appendix 2; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That in accordance with sections 8 and 100 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005, Parliament approves that the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs makes the Parliamentary Elections (Special Interest Groups)(Amendment) Regulations, 2011 attached to this resolution as an Appendix 2.”

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Mr Ruhindi rose_) Alright it is. Proceed.

PROF. MAKUBUYA: We have Statutory Instrument No.31 of 2001, which provided for elections of representatives of special interest groups and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development considered it necessary that the regulations should be amended in respect of representatives of the Female Youth Member of Parliament, the representative of workers in Parliament and also in respect of the First Schedule to the regulations in order to update that schedule to accommodate changes that have, over the years, occurred in the number and designation of districts.

Section 100 of the Parliamentary Elections Act requires that the applicable regulations shall be made with the approval or on the recommendation of the Electoral Commission. 

Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission, through its secretary, in a letter referenced LEG79/75/01, dated 21 December 2010, and attached to the motion, perused the proposed amendments and recommended that the regulations proceed to enactment. 

So, Mr Speaker, in appendix 2 are the substantive proposals for amending; one, regulation 8 to be substituted with the new one on how representatives of a Female Youth Member of Parliament should be elected. The Electoral College is indicated.

Regulation 3, in Section 3 of the proposed amendments, refers to regulation 12; how to elect representatives of workers to Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, with your permission, if you look at Regulation 12, from the top, line 1,2,3, it says, National Organisations of Trade Unions (NOTU) and the Central Organisation of Trade Unions. I have been corrected that there is one word missing in that line between “of” and “trade” so that it reads, Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions. Mr Speaker, I beg that this word be inserted. It was missed. 

And the new regulation 12 spells out the formula for sharing the seats in Parliament allocated to workers. The rest is really a detail on the formula and definitions, there being two labour unions, the National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU) and the Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions (COFTU). 

In section 4, we propose that the First Schedule to Statutory Instrument No.31 of 2001 be repealed and replaced by the new First Schedule. The importance is that new districts have been created since the old regulations were made and that the new ones need to be put on board so that they participate in electing representatives of youth and workers. The second thing the First Schedule does is to align the new districts under appropriate regions.

These amendments are necessary to accommodate, substantively, the representation of workers and youths in Parliament and to take into account developments in the areas that are represented, namely, the districts, since the old ones were enacted. We have consulted the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and they approved these amendments. We have consulted representatives of the stakeholders and they have assured us there is no problem. 

Mr Speaker and hon. members, I commend these amendments to the regulation to this Parliament and I crave your indulgence that you pass this motion.

THE SPEAKER: The honourable Member is informing us that there were regulations, but it is necessary to make amendments in respect of female youth representative and also to the workers union representation here. 

We also need to change the schedule because we increased the districts and they need to be included. It is good that we have in our midst people who are directly affected by these amendments.

12. 04
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (INDEPENDENT, Female Youth Representative): Thank you Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the Attorney-General for bringing this amendment. This amendment is very good because when we amended the National Youth Council Act, we did not have a way of electing the female youth MP because of the multiparty politics. Now that the college has been sorted out and we can canvass for votes then I am in support of it. 

12.05
THE STATE MINISTER FOR SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Let me thank the Attorney-General and the Minister of Labour and Gender, because we have been involved in implementation of all this. I beg the honourable members to support this motion.

12.06
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): We had consultations with stakeholders and the provisions that we agreed on are the ones that have been brought. So, we fully support the motion.

12.07
THE MINISTER OF LABOUR AND GENDER (Mr Gabriel Opio): As the stakeholders have stated, we have had a very meaningful discussion with them for several meetings and what has come here is a result of our consultation, and I am very happy that we have not been let down by any of them.

12.07
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Western Region): I also wish to join my colleagues to thank the Attorney-General for bringing these amendments at this time. The people with disabilities in this country are elected under a National Electoral College which gets representatives from every district in Uganda. We have had an increment in the districts and, therefore, it was prudent that all persons with disabilities in the newly created districts can come on board. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Local Government, have you looked at the Schedule and it has all the districts in Uganda? 

12.08
THE STATE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Pereza Ahabwe): The Ministry of Local Government has no objection and nothing more to add. I want to say that may be you put the question.

MR LYOMOKI: The last district in Western Uganda is Kanungu and not “Kanugu”.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe when we come to the central region we should add Kampala the capital?

12.09
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I rise to support the motion, but I want to seek clarification from hon. Attorney-General. Districts are being created every now and then and this may continue. What if a member dies and his district is divided into many - how will he/she be replaced when the new districts are not in the schedule? I want to be guided on how this is going to be handled because I have heard some candidates promising new districts and it is likely that they will fulfil their promises.

THE SPEAKER: I think you take the DNA of the original district and it will give you the placement of the new districts. For example, when you create a district out of Mukono in Buganda, obviously it will take the tag of Buganda. This is what you do, in that you take a DNA to find out where it has come from and it is placed in that region.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, not being a lawyer, I would like to be more convinced in a situation where some representatives who will probably have to formulate an electoral college, are coming specifically from districts registered within the schedule and the situation comes at a time when a new district is not in the schedule, but it is in existence and it has to sponsor members for the electoral college. Won’t we have a legal roadblock on how these Members are going to appear because other Members will come and say, “Yes, we are coming from districts.”?

THE SPEAKER: You see, what should guide you is – if you take Article 5 of the Constitution – of course that article provides that:

(1) “Uganda is a sovereign state and a Republic.
(2) Subject to article 178 of this Constitution, Uganda shall consist of - 
a) regions administered by regional governments when districts have agreed to form regions as provided for in this constitution; 
  b)  Kampala; and 
  (c) districts of Uganda, as specified in the First Schedule to this Constitution and such other districts as may be established in accordance with this Constitution or any other law.”

So, naturally, if a new district is created, it is created from an existing district. Then it falls where that bigger district was. That is the DNA I was telling you.

MR KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, the fact that we are now amending the First Schedule of Statutory Instrument, No.31 of 2001, if a situation arose like hon. Kyanjo is raising, would it not be possible to also consider probably amending the schedule? Or are we amending the schedule for that time?

THE SPEAKER: No, you see when you look at this schedule as it was arranged, the number of districts, say in western region, is not the same as in central region. So, automatically, and this is common sense, that if another district is legally created, it will be in that area where the original was.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: And it appears that this disposes of today’s business. House is adjourned sine die. (Applause)

(The House rose at 12.17 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

