Tuesday, 7 February 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1996

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I am raising this order above the privileges of this House which appear to me to be, persistently violated by the press.  Yesterday I made it very clear both at the beginning and at the end of my contribution that I was supporting the Bill.  At no stage in my speech did I allege or imply that the Bill has been revived to enable rigging of elections.  In fact I did not even use that word; it did not escape my mouth.  But The New Vision has reported today with a big headline ‘Abu Mayanja Attacks the Bill’.   Maybe they have gone on to tiptoe.  And in the body there they said that, I have accused the Bill, that being that I have accused the government of wishing to rig the elections, which I did not say.  Mr Chairman, this seems to me to be an attack and an abuse on the privileges of the House, by misreporting.  And I do not know how I wish to do; maybe this might be a matter which should be referred to our Committee on Privileges of Members in order to advise us what to do.  Because this reporting has gone on for such a long, long time, Mr Chairman.  That is the point of order, I want to rise.

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is personal explanation but it is okay; we will deal with it.

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated Member): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I continue from where we left yesterday, by referring to Clause 28 and Clause 29; on page 24 and 25.  In Clause 28, we are looking at a punishment that is given to some one who is unlawfully in possession of any voters card, whether issued in the name of any voter or not, or attempts to sell or offers to sell any voter’s card; whether issued to any voter or not or buys or offers to buy any voter’s card whether in his or her own behalf or on behalf of any other person, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding shillings 300,000 or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both.  

Now, when you look at the next one, there is also as you end 1(g); commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding shillings 300,000 or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.  Now, there are many of these and you go down under two, causes or induces any person or attempts to cause or induce and so on, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of not exceeding shillings 300,000 or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both. Now, there are many of these.  My question is whether shillings 300,000 is equivalent to three years.  That is one.

Two, there are other offenses where shillings 300,000 is also prescribed.  But the period of imprisonment is one year.  Now, you wonder whether there is any equivalence in these offenses and indeed in a punishment.  I think this needs to be reviewed and some standard measure established.  So that, when you commit an offence where Shilling 300,000 is a unit, then the three years is also another unit of imprisonment.  The equivalent of those punishments or those offenses should be established.  So that we do not have Shillings 300,000 in one case and then three years imprisonment and so on like that.  This goes on actually, in the case of Section 12, on page 76. 

Other Election Offenses.  When you read all of those articles from 103, to 114, you will find there are offenses and there are punishments measured out.  I think we need to standardise that and solve a problem.  Now, the second area, Mr Chairman -(interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I will like to give information and also to thank the hon. Professor for his remarks about the voters cards.  You may recall, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members that during the CA elections, I think on the eve of election, the Chairman of the Commission announced that anybody who has got voters card can vote anywhere.  And I think some of the results of the CA elections were definitely affected by this announcement.  Recently, we have been reading in the press that there are voters’ cards at large.  People are saying they are selling them and so on and so forth.  And I think the Chairman of the Commission also recently indicated that this story is true that there are some voters’ cards circulating.  

Mr Chairman, if the possession of the voters’ cards were not an offence during the CA elections, how does it become an offence now?  I am raising this matter because I understand that there is a proposal in the regulations and it is better to pre-empty this that, during the coming Presidential Elections anybody with a voter’s card, can vote anywhere in the country.  And anybody with a voter’s card in a constituency can vote anywhere in the constituency.  If this is so Mr Chairman, this would be the highest method of rigging elections.

MR KAVUMA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform hon. Adonia Tiberondwa and the House at large, that there is no intention whatsoever of that kind voting, this country is going to vote in accordance with the law we passed in this House.  Mr Chairman, maybe hon. Tiberondwa has picked rumours from somewhere, but definitely it is not correct to step them up to the level of this House.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Let us look at article 34(2), on page 28.  Mr Chairman, I am questioning the wisdom of 34(2); where in the case of someone dying and no such appointment is made, one of the polling assistants who is the oldest in age and has the criterion, shall act as a presiding officer.  Mr Chairman, age, as a criterion for wisdom, is something to be questioned in an Electoral Process.  I think you need to have somebody who is able.  He maybe young, but he should be competent.  So, do not just look at age, otherwise you may certainly pick a ‘Kabuubi’ or some one like that because of age; because you have looked at his bold.

Mr Chairman, lastly, the behaviour of the contestants.  Mr Chairman, those of us who had experience in 1980, and an experience which is so indelibly marked on our memory, would not want to see any rigging in elections.  That is why I get worried when some people want to have private or rather individual candidate’s meetings.  Those who do not like an open debate and yet they are talking of transparency.  In my opinion, the behaviour of a candidate at the campaign platform is going to be very indicative of whether democracy has sunk into our heads.  Because I think a contestant or an opponent is not an enemy, and I think we must encourage this.  That is why I support very strongly joint meetings, let all the candidates present themselves, let them present their programmes and let the people have a chance to judge all of them, one after another, just as we all do when you are making a choice.  And I think anybody who claims he is a democrat and thinks that, he should have separate meetings in our situation is actually deceiving us.  Therefore, I want joint meetings and I hope that we shall all abide by that. The last point on that one is the way we are implementing the Constitution.  

Mr Chairman, one reads in the papers that some people or some organisations are trying to open branches.  Now, if we are talking of having an election which is guided by the Constitution, we must respect the Constitution.  If we are democratic, we may have missed the majority in the CA.  But certainly what came out must be respected and obeyed.  So, I hope we do not have to chase ourselves with black cards and so on and so forth, just because there is something we do not like and we must disobey the Constitution. Because if we do, then we are going to have an election where people maybe arrested because they have become confrontational or because they do not want to follow the rules as set out.  I would, therefore, hope that when we pass the law as we are going to do in this House that, all of us who are aspiring to political office, will abide by those rules and will obey the constitution.  Because really there is no democracy if we cannot follow a constitutional order.  There will be no rule of law, if we do not obey the rules as they are set.  The laws maybe bad at a given point in time, but surely I think we have had better laws now, than we ever had and I think the Constitution we have should be obeyed.  

Mr Chairman, I beg to conclude by saying as an individual who is intending to stand in the next election, I would not want to be reminded of 1980, both as opponent and as a country.  I would not want to be reminded of what happened.  So, let there be no cheating, let there be no rigging -(Applause)- let us have a law that we can all follow.  And when the election results are declared, we are all proud of them, and I am sure that will be the foundation of our democratic future.  Our past has not been democratic, today we are building it.  I thank you Sir. (Applause)

MRS NTABGOBA (Woman Representative, Kisoro):  I rise to support the Bill.  Mr Chairman, the first issue I would like to talk about is the Presidential Elections.   

HON. MEMBERS: It is passed. 

MRS NTABGOBA:  It is passed, I am aware of that.  But we are on Parliamentary Electoral Bill that much I am aware of.  But when I hear Members proposing to reverse the order of electing our Members of Parliament to come first, I am standing to oppose that and I have this point to support it.  Most of us are parents, we are fathers and mothers and as you know a home is a most important thing in our life.  A parent in a home leads the family.  When a parent is in a home, children are the happiest, the wife is the happiest.  The same thing goes with a mother.  So, if we choose a President first, that will strengthen the nation.  We have a father to look at, while we trot Uganda looking for votes we are firm.  So that one, I support that Parliamentary Elections come after Presidential Elections. (Applause)

Let me talk on civic education.  Civic education has been a problem in our past elections.  I thought it is something we have to think about now immediately after passing this Bill.  All the penalties, all the crimes, whatever is being talked about in our Bill, is guided by the way we shall introduce it to the voters.  For that reason, I think and support very importantly that civic education should be tackled.  Let people have enough time to know what we have passed here, to know what they should do and what they should not do.  And more importantly to know the penalties which they will face in case they break any of the laws which we are going to pass.  Just to breach down the fine is not enough.  We do not want to see our people falling into problems.  And therefore, as they are leaders, we have to guide them before we can ask for their vote.  I have an experience in our last CA elections, when on the eve of the voting there was an announcement which everybody did not hear regarding assisting people who could not read, disabled members and those handicapped people.  

In fact, even the law enforcement officers who were on the polling station did not know about it.  In my area, one of the Constituencies, a member came and voted for 20 people.  That was very, very serious.  I had not listened to the news, because my batteries had gone down. 

HON. MEMBERS: Why did you not replace them?

MRS NTABGOBA: No money to replace it because I had spent so much, going round the district.  But when I contacted the Police, I said this is a bit too much.  He said, but the Commissioner announced it last night and I was defeated, Mr Chairman.  That is why I am saying civic education should be intensified and also the law enforcement officers, everybody who will be involved in this exercise should learn.  So that, should any one break these laws, they will be knowing the punishment to face.  Before I leave that point, I would like to propose that a fine which has been given of Shillings 300,000 is not enough, Mr Chairman.  It is not enough sincerely because we are in politics.  The opposer can afford to pay that money so that he will buy you off. But if our people have been educated thoroughly and will fear; say for example the fine of UShs 300,000 if it is doubled to UShs 600,000 the voter will fear because it is a bit high.  Where they talk of UShs 100,000, it should be raised to UShs 300,000.  Where they talk of six months imprisonment, it should be one year.  

At least, let us strengthen our laws.  Let us make good laws for these people so that they have something to fear.  I am aware our people are poor, the people we represent here do not have all that money; but as I have said, these people normally are misguided by we leaders.  They are normally bought, they are normally guided by we leaders who are seeking their votes.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, while I am happy with the statement being made by the Member on the Floor, I would like to be informed whether she has evidence that some people were fined because they abused the law during the last elections.  Because it appears to me we make laws, and we break them.  And this is so because she was telling me here in the House that, all of a sudden the Commissioner announced that anybody with a card would vote anywhere.  Which in itself was illegal, but it was announced by the Commission.  Could we not keep that as a valid rigging in which case nobody could be brought to court.  Whether she increases the money to UShs 600,000, I want to know whether there will be somebody brought for executions for this announcement if it is legalised.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, in fact the Minister should be able to inform this House and to inform the nation whether adhoc announcements by the Chairman of the Commission are part of the law.  Because recently, the Chairman of the Commission announced that, by 31st of last month, giving out Constitutions would not be right.  Is that part of the law?  And fundraising, is that part of the law?  Mr Chairman, I think we should make sure that, before we enter this electoral exercise, we know what is in the law.  Otherwise, the Chairman may think that at any time, he can issue guidelines or think out something and then it becomes law.  Because that question of voting anywhere caused a lot of problems during the CA Elections and I hope it will not be repeated.   And I think the Chairman should be advised that, he should quote the law instead of making announcements of his own.

MRS NTABGOBA:  I thank the hon. Members for the point of clarification given.  Mr Chairman, recently, one Member brought it forward and was proposing that, it is this Parliament which should make laws, propose them to the Commission.  That one, I really want to repeat.  But at the same time, as a man we have all delegated to do this work for us, I am sure the Minister will give him some opportunities, some simple laws to pass, that can not affect an electoral day as it did last time.  That case of voting for 20 people, under pretence that those people cannot read and write, when we sincerely knew most of them were even diploma holders and teachers; I think that thing should not repeated.  It happened, it was rigging I agree with you hon. Member, it should not happen again.  Because why did it happen?  We knew why it happened, even the policeman later on discovered that the 20 people had recieved money as bribe and therefore to make sure they paid for that money, was to go through a person who was delegated so that he will vote for them and then the votes were given in return of the money.  These are things; that is why I say, civic education should be intensified so that everybody, who will abuse the laws we are making will face these punishments and these punishments should be strengthened.  I have already mentioned that.  And I am sure I have answered the two Members.  

I also would like to say that, candidates’ meetings should be as they were during CA. (Applause) Why am I saying this?  I am not too young to know what happened in 80s and before 80s.  When people were moving holding different meetings, others were busy organising to disrupt.  In fact I witnessed people who were throwing rotten eggs to others, you know rotten tomatoes; throwing stones, you know standing in a distance and making noise to interrupt those who were attending the meetings.  These are things which used to happen.  Our young colleagues here might not know it.  That is why I am saying it so that you know.  These things happen.  And as now we are in our interim period, we need to use that period to pacify the nation, so that we get good Parliamentarians, the good leadership, so that within the five years, we will have achieved all what we want to achieve for the betterment of our nation.  It is also good to make these people not antagonise to each other.  When you move together, you are talking together, at times when the voters give you some food which is a culture in some villages, you are sitting at the same table.  These things are very, very good.  It never used to happen in our old politics.  That is why I support the idea of joint candidates’ meetings.  In fact if it was possible, if we had achieved what we want to achieve for women, the Affirmative Action, if we had achieved it, also these women would move with the men.  But here I would like to say that we have not achieved the Affirmative Action.  The Affirmative Action which we have been talking about which most of you Members ask, it was a project you started yourself, you have not evaluated it whether it has been successful. You have not seen its viability, all of a sudden you say, let us do away with it, all women go on universal.  Mr Chairman, that is not fair.  I see a lot of bias in this thing.  We are debating this point without being sincere to other people who are not Members of Parliament now.  

We have two categories of people who are already in the system; Members of Parliament and former CA delegates.  Those people are okay, they have done it, and they know what it is.  What about those who have never started?  Are we blocking them? (Applause)  Is that the affirmative action we were talking about?  Is it the affirmative action we started in this House?  So, we should be fair when we ask for leveling the ground, let it be for everything including Women Vote. (Applause)  

I do not like to end and say, the electoral colleges are diluted.  They are not.  They are diluted for those who did not have a call.  When you come to leadership in Parliament, it is a call.  You have a duty to perform and you are looking at a goal to achieve.  If we are looking at that goal, you do not come here and sit and only talk for women, you talk for your district.  I for one I have done that.  If my Colleague were here, I would have talked it when he is listening.  We have recieved many things in Kisoro, which we have done together with my Colleague hon. Mateke.  I did not sit back, while he was running, we worked together and achieved electricity for the district. (Applause)  That is very important.  Because that one is leading to industrialising the district, it is very important, Mr Chairman.

MR GWAIVU: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I wish to thank the hon. Lady for giving way.  I wish to remind the hon. Lady that if she had listened very carefully, on the reasons being advanced against electoral colleges, one of them is that the electoral colleges are easy to corrupt. (Applause)  And the financially mighty can easily corrupt the whole Electoral College, leaving the unfortunate poor woman who may be a better Member of Parliament behind. (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to contradict the information.  Mr Chairman, last year when we conducted the CA elections, the Woman Representatives of NRC stood up with other women who were -(Laughter) - I mean if anything, the NRC women were better off than those new comers and it happened that some failed to turn up despite their well being. So, the question of corruption does not arise.

MRS NTABGOBA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to reply to hon. Gwaivu that, I am a very good listener and I digest everything I hear in this House.  As a good trained teacher who was trained by the makers of education in Uganda.  So, I know that very well and in fact that issue was brought during our CA debate.  Members here did not make it, we were caucusing most of the time and this was one of their worries. That those who made it in the CA were Movement supporters and they were supported to overthrow them.  And so, we were laying strategies how we can sort it out.  And this is what we are doing now.  There is nothing to hide about it. (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, let me finish answering hon. Gwaivu, before I forget what I want to tell him.  I want to assure hon. Gwaivu and those who reason like him that, even in Universal Adult Suffrage, there can be bribe. (Applause and Laughter)  Mr Chairman, there can be bribe, we are all politicians, we can manipulate Universal Suffrage.  So, if it is that reason that you are giving to make women trot the whole district looking for votes, I argue you to withdraw it immediately  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, order please.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, aware that by calling the hon. Minister here before me by her in that title, means he could not be covered very well under our Rules of Procedure, Rule 42 where a person who is not speaking, should not actually do anything, other than rise on a point of order or a point of information. I am seeking your clarification whether I cannot now use Rule 47, subsection 2; as a Sessional Committee Chairman of this whole House to move a Motion that, hon. Besweri Mulondo (Minister) should be suspended from this House. (Laughter)

MRS NTABGOBA:  Mr Chairman, that is democracy.  We have laws, when they are strong we should follow them to be able to make discipline be our guiding torch.

HON. MEMBERS:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, one time we had a women meeting, we did not say where we were, but the Members knew where we were.  And we agreed that, some people were given money from shillings two millions, for campaigns from the NRM Secretariat.  What was that money for if it was not for corrupting people?  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MRS NTABGOBA:  Mr Chairman, I do not know about that money.  But my hon. Colleague heard me saying very well that even Universal Adult Suffrage can be rigged.  I am not protecting any system.  What I started with was that, the laws must be strengthened and that is my heading on my debate today.  If laws are strengthened, whatever happened during CA will not happen again.  And if it happens then penalties should be strong so that even after five years, people will have something to fear.  We are trying to pacify our nation.  There are many examples.  I understand some people, I do not know paid even shilling 40 million to bribe, but they never made it.  Why should people keep loosing their money looking for votes?  Why do you not if you are liked by your voters, let them vote for you and bring you here to use your talent and not your money? (Applause)

MR GASATURA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, a serious allegation has been made on the Floor of this House by the Member holding the Floor that, voters can be bought and yet it was substantiated that, the Member herself did reveal that some millions were given to her and she accepted that, that goes a long way to show that -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no!  You have not got her correctly.  Proceed please (Laughter)

MRS NTABGOBA:  Mr Chairman, let me proceed and talk to those who are attentively listening to my debate.  I would like to say that, we should not look at the laws we are making.  Some of them are being challenged that they are violating human rights which we passed in our Constitution.  Here, I would like to say that, there is no absolute law.  Laws are controlled and that is what we are trying to do.  If we say, freedom of association; in your category you are happy, you are violating mine behind there.  So, what is the rationale there?  That is why we want to make laws which will protect both sides.  It is a two-way traffic.  Both roads should be leveled for our people in Uganda.  

Let me talk briefly on qualifications.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please. (Laughter)

MRS NTABGOBA:  As I wind up, Mr Chairman, I would like to say that, we should be very, very careful, after giving our people a right to vote, a right to be voted for, a right to choose a leader and how to be governed, then we stand and say, you have to have this qualification.  I support it.  But it should not be put so high.  What I see the qualifications as laid down by UNEB; I would like to say it is not really detailed.  If this law chooses to follow those details, they should be comprehensive.  Because they are leaving out a very, very important group which presently hold a diploma in Education, some of them hold degrees, but they do not have O’level.  What are you going to do with those people? (Laughter)  That is very important, Mr Chairman.  

We should know our nation.  We should know the road we have traveled when education systems were introduced here.  Our government has stumbled so many systems of so many different countries and you find these Members hold different certificates, different diplomas from so many countries where we were borrowing a system.  Now, if we leave those people behind, we are not leveling the ground.  So, I urge the Minister, to look into that issue; either detail all of them or take one general statement.  You say, Post Primary, plus six years of training, that will be enough.  If it is not done like that, Mr Chairman, when our hon. Minister is not there, when our Commission is not there, when people are voting who are being registered, there will be problems which no people will be able to follow.  So, I argue you Members, to handle that with great care because we want everybody to have the right we have given them constitutionally. 

On general chapters  -(Laughter and Interruption)- This is the last one.  Because it is the last even in our Bill on general articles, Article 115 onwards, whatever is laid there, needs something strengthening because it is very weak.  Those things are very weak, people will not understand them, so I urge the Minister to revisit those Articles.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to say a few words about this important Bill.  First of all, before I say anything about the Bill, I want to say something which concerns the current state in which we are.  That is the state of preparedness.  Everybody is preparing himself for elections and the country is geared to this, Electoral Commission is in place and it has started issuing instructions.  One of these instructions is that, we should not be allowed to distribute the Constitution.  This comes at a time when we have just passed the Constitution and at a time when people have not known much about this Constitution and at a time when we are going to elect people according to this Constitution.  Now, if we are not allowed to distribute the Constitution, how do you expect our electorates to know what is in the Constitution?  Why did the Commission issue such a statement? 

MR TUMWESIGYE: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I heard one, Idore and another Bbumba I think saying that, people are free to distribute the Constitution.  But what they were objecting to was the holding of big ceremonies and the rest of it.  But the distribution of the Constitution is proper and it can be done.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member further that the information given by the hon. Learned Gentleman over there must be very new.  Because only a few days ago, one person was prevented by the Police from attending a meeting and the meeting itself was disrupted by the Police, because they were allegedly acting in force.  We are enforcing the order of the Commission.  And I would also like to ask the Minister for Constitutional Affairs or the Attorney General who is here, since we have not passed this law, under what law did the Interim Electoral Commission acting to issue these directives about not holding fundraising for our churches and schools and so on.  Under what law are they acting, before the law itself is passed?

MRS SEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you for the information.  Because as hon. Mayanja has stressed; to be exact, hon. Nsubuga Nsambu who was a CA Delegate for Makindye West, was prevented a meeting to which he was going.  It was dispersed, because it was suspected.  Not just because it was seen, but it was suspected that eh was going to distribute the Constitution.  And this was going to be distributed to youngsters; young men the youth of this country who want more than anybody else to have the right to know how they are going to be governed in the future.  Therefore, if the information given to me by hon. Jotham Tumwesigye -(interruption)

MR TUMWESIGYE: Point of clarification. Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification on this matter.  Because what I have heard about it has also been from newspapers.  What the Commissioner was supposed to have said, and now I am surprised by the statement of a National Political Commissar is asserting that there is no problem, because he read in the news papers  -(Laughter)- that some two Commissioners had said something like that.  Now, I would like this clarification to come maybe from the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs, on the manner in - first of all, what the current position is, and on the manner in which such a directive or positions are communicated to the public and how they be implemented. (Applause)

MRKAVUMA: Point of clarification.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  Sir, I can say this, hon. Members will remember that we sat here for a long time and debated and passed what is called the Interim Electoral Commission Statute.  It gave the Commission in place a number of functions.  Many of them were relating to organisation, and administration of elections and the rest of it.  That law is still on our Statute book, it is still good law, we have not repealed it.  There is a proposal in this Statute to repeal it after we have passed it, so the Commission is acting under that law.  I wanted to clarify that the Commission is not coming out of its dreams as regards the modalities of how they issue their directives.  I think what is important is to know that they have a legal basis from where they act.  Then if anything happens to be annoying certain Members, complaints can be raised and they can be looked into.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the point I sought clarification on was really to be informed what the current position is.  Whether it is as was communicated by the Chairman of the Commission earlier that these things have been stopped, or whether it is as hon. Tumwesigye read in the papers, that the things may continue -(Laughter)-  and to what extent?  I just want to seek clarification on this.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, in the last part of my response, I said if there is anybody who is aggrieved by what is appearing in the papers, by what eh thinks -(Laughter)- yes, hon. Members will continue to be honourable and listening.  I am saying say, that if there is anybody aggrieved by how the Commission is handling the issue of Constitution distribution and the rest of it, they should use the legal machinery available to bring it as a complaint and it will be looked into.  But we must also not forget that, your government has no intention of interfering in the day-to-day administration of the Commission.  We created an independent Commission and we should give it you know, the support it needs to do its work without interfering.  (Applause)

MRS MATEMBE: Point of information.  The little information I want to give is that, when I got that information about not giving Constitution, I thought it was quite unfair that we could come to the CA, debate a Constitution, pass it and then we cannot go to our people to explain what we passed.  So, I personally, went to the Commission.  Because I thought it was really not proper.  So, I asked what is this you are doing?  Because are you the one who are going to go and explain what is in those Constitutions so that people can vote according to them.  Because if you prevent us from doing that job, who will do it?  I went to the Commission; as a responsible citizen and I was told that, the problem was these big functions and calling like, you call hon. Kigongo to Mbarara and you call all these politicians across. (Laughter)  So, that was the problem.  

But when you take the Constitution to your people by way of a seminar like, it is one day seminar and you are going through the highlights of the Constitution; but I am telling you the information I got they can always put it.  So, I think I have a right to inform what I got from the Commission, because the Minister can as well later ask the Commission to put it in writing.  But that is the explanation I got that, if you go to your people and you are studying this Constitution and going through the highlights and you are discussing it; that is no problem.  So, that is the information I got, on the basis of which I was intending to go to Mbarara and continue doing my work.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am not talking about a theoretical situation.  I am talking about a situation which is real, actual happened in my Constituency Makindye, when former hon. Delegate for Makindye West was suspected that he may take Constitutions to a group of young people.   Actually, it was the youth of Makindye gathered in Nsambya.  On that day, they had invited hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, to take some Constitutions to them.  But this was just a behind way, because they had gone to discuss the programme of 1996, the development of the area.  And among the people, they had also invited was myself.  These youngsters in Makindye know that I am a graduate in Economics, and that I did a masters in Finance and Business Economics -(Laughter)- so they wanted to take advantage of my experience in business, so that I should show them what to do next.  But because the Police suspected that I was going to go there, the meeting was dispersed.  There were about 200 youngsters there and this is wrong.  These youngsters were denied the opportunity of listening to words of wisdom from me -(Laughter)- and perhaps who knows; I may have given them some Entandikwa! 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.  Proceed please.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, in this Bill, there is talk about campaigning.  And we are going to discuss and pass the campaigning.  But campaigns have already started, everybody knows it.  But there are some people who are going beyond what they should be doing.  They are using abusive language.  They are using the language which is intimidating.  For example, there was one Deputy Minister of State, whose name I will not mention, who told people that, if such and such a group comes here, do not go to their meetings.  Then in the same area, the area RDC asked people to stone those people if they went there.  These are very, very serious things.   I think in our law books we have got in our law books -(Interruption)

MR KIYONGA:  I thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to give to pieces of information.  First on the story in the newspaper which talked about an RDC advising some section of the population that they should stone a certain politician.  On reading this story, I requested the Inspector General of Police to dispatch an officer to that district to investigate this matter.  The return I got from the Inspector General of Police was to the effect that the said RDC although he held a meeting about that subject, did not utter words to the effect that the politician should be stoned; and only yesterday, the RDC concerned came to my office with the chairman of the district and gave me the minute of the said meeting.  So, our conclusion for now Mr Chairman, is that the story in the newspaper was erroneous.  

The second point of information Mr Chairman, hon. Ssebaana Kizito and I have communicated on a number of occasions on this subject of police stopping certain meetings and I did think that we had reached certain understanding.  First that any time we hear of a story that policy stopped a meeting, we take interest, we inquire what is the reason and most of the time Mr Chairman, we have found that either the story is not true or there was a reason other than what we are told either in the newspapers or in the NRC and I thought we had agreed with hon. Ssebaana Kizito that while this type of interaction must continue, politicians must complain here and outside.  Where they are not satisfied, we should take the matter further and even go to court because like hon. Nsubuga Nsambu who is not in this House, who was invited to a meeting, he thinks he was denied this right, it is correct for hon. Ssebaana Kizito to come and complain about him but he should also seek redress in a court of law; because when we the Ministers who are not there cannot take judgement and say our people are right or wrong.  But if the complainant can go to court and put his case, the police will also come and put their case, then judgement will be given.  So as far as the situation in Hoima is concerned, we have investigated, the story was not true unless someone can come with contrary information.  I have communicated with hon. Ssebaana Kizito that I take interest in these matters of police reportedly to be interfering with meetings and I thought we had agreed on some kind of procedure.  If he is not satisfied, we will continue discussion but also I advise that where one is not satisfied, let us go to court and we get a third party to decide who is right and who is wrong.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Earlier on, the Minister of State responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs told us that if there is anybody who is aggrieved, he should voice his grievances and I am hereby voicing my grievance -(Interruptions and Laughter)- about the denial by the police in Nsambya to the youths in Makindye to hear what I was going to tell them about development and so on and also to deny them the right to have constitution distributed to them by one who was representing them in the CA.  

Mr Chairman, there is also another story talking about this campaigning which is catching on very fast.  One Minister of State had this to say; Kabaka Muwenda Mutebi the second of Buganda is sleeping and will regret it.  I wish to take exception to this kind of language.  (Interruptions) I do not think that it is correct to bring such an important personality into the politics of our country and to use such derogatory terms as sleeping.  Those can be applied to us because we can hurl insults at each other but the Kabaka of Buganda has royal blood in him and therefore, he should be kept out of insults.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman and I thank my Brother for giving way.  Mr Chairman, this is the same Minister who came to Budadiri and he was decampaigning me. (Laughter)  Secondly, Mr Chairman, the information I want also to give is that he went to hon. Prof. Wangusa’s constituency and this is the same Minister who was in Obote’s NASA and he was chased like a woman.  (Laughter)

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Mr Chairman, clause 18 reads as follows: “The commission shall compile, maintain and update on a continuing basis a national voters register.”  I understand that the commission working under instructions from the Minister has closed the registers.  I do not know what a continuing basis means because our law says that everyone who is 18 years of age or above can register to vote and as you know, Mr Chairman, everyday, there are people who are becoming 18.  Those are going to be disenfranchised and the law says register on a continuing basis.

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  I thank you Sir and I thank hon. Ssebaana Kizito for give way.  The information I want to give to the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House is that in that Statute I talked about moments ago which we all passed here, there is a provision, I think it is section 8(5) either (a) or (b) which authorises the Minister to declare a cut off date for the updating of a register in relation to a particular forth coming election and the intention is that the information from the field should now come, be treated at the commission, be put in the computer with a view to enabling a provisional and later on a final voters register to be displayed when it is comprehensive and as Members know, we are heading for a general election.  There is not very much time.  So, we had to have a cut off date and this is what your Minister did by invoking the provision in the law.  

Now the continuing best suspect of it Sir, goes to the fact that after that election or after any election -but I will talk about this any election now which is most relevant - the commission may want to continue updating to accommodate people like hon. Ssebaana Kizito is talking about.  Why?  Because there could be bye-elections, there could be referendum and there could be other people who want to get on the register.  So we do not close the register permanently.  We close it in order to facilitate compilation of a register for a certain general election and then you re-open it to accommodate new cases coming in.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  I want to submit Mr Chairman, that since the Commission is using computers and unless the computer operators whom they have or the computer machines which they have are out of date, the cut off point should be very, very close to the election day.  It should not be as three months, four months before election day.  Therefore I want to say that in this country, there are a lot of people who are eligible to vote, who have not registered yet and since we have computers which work very fast, we should give more time for registration in order to allow more people to participate in the democracy which NRM government has established.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I concur with hon. Ssebaana Kizito because of lack of training, a lot of people were not sensitized about this exercise and as a result, a lot of people, more than 30 percent are being left out because we did not really programme our training very well.  So many people did not really register.  So I suggest that, Mr Chairman, we extend the date for registration.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you giving information or suggestions?

MRS WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to give information as regards to the registration exercise in as far as youths and children are concerned.  Mr Chairman, whereas Members are giving information that adults who would have known about the exercise and should have registered on their own have not registered, there is a concern from the Ministry responsible for the rights of children and that there are people who are getting children to register against their rights because this Parliament passed a law recently to protect the rights of children.  What are the implications Mr Chairman?  

What the Members do not know or they know and they do not want the population to know is that these children are going to be subjected to having their ages updated when they are not chronologically correct; so that when a young person goes to ask for a job, they will say they are this age but there will be the voters register which is going to be there permanently and I believe the government which will take over after the election will use this register to update who is a Ugandan and what age these Ugandans are.  

Mr Chairman, this is criminal, it is impinging on the rights of children and the law will take its own course because this Parliament also even if it said that you are a child up to the age of 18, this child is liable to criminal prosecution.  They will be accountable from the age of 12 onwards.  

So, it is up to us as legislators in this country to make sure that malpractice does not start from people who are aspiring for positions of responsibility by planting ill will and corruption in young children so that they can give them votes.  Mr Chairman, I also want to give information that whereas some Members are complaining that over 30 percent adults have not registered, we also hear that our colleagues in countries where democracy is already born, that you will have Members of Parliament voted in by less than 30 percent of the total population eligible to vote.  This is known because I know that in Britain, the voters that brought in the current government were less than 30 percent; those that voted but the government is eligible.  We are in a process of learning and there must be a cut off point Mr Chairman.  I thank you.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I do not know how thank all the Members for the information they have given me and it goes to show that registration exercise still has got to be carried on and the plea to the Minister should not fall on deaf ears.  

Mr Chairman, I want to refer to clause 22(3).  This clause refers to registration of voters of Ugandans who are residing abroad.  I am very skeptical and very many people whom I represent are equally skeptical about the success of such an exercise.  People who are living in other countries should vote of course but taking into account that there has been in the past massive rigging of elections, it is better to leave those people out all together.  If a person wants to vote in Uganda and he is living abroad, that person should travel to Uganda, register, go back, comes back for voting otherwise we should not open ourselves to abuse by saying that we are registering Ugandans who are living abroad when there is no way in which you can check.  The only thing that is there is integrity of the foreign service officers and that integrity cannot - (Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Who may be a non-Ugandan.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Yes, who may be a non-UgandaN as a matter of fact and that integrity we have seen that many, many officials of this government and of governments in the past have abused their integrity.  Therefore I wish to say that this clause should be deleted altogether.  Mr Chairman, there is also talk about women representatives.  It has caused a lot of anxiety and some high pitched -

MR NTIMBA:  Point of clarification.  Following what the hon. Member holding the Floor has hinted out regarding the registration and voting of Ugandans resident abroad, it is not clear.  Whereas those people who will be voting in Uganda, there is a specified method by which votes will be counted, etc.  But in the case of these people who are supposed to register abroad in our Embassy and so on, it is not clear how they are going to cast their votes, how their votes will be transmitted, how they will be counted and so forth.  So maybe the hon. Minister of State could do us good by throwing more light on this.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Mr Chairman, this one, I am going to move for its deletion.  Therefore, the Minister need not answer that.  (Laughter)  The same thing applies to clause 67 which refers to voting by patients in hospitals and so on.  I do not think that it will be proper to get votes from patients, carry them to a ballot box because anything may happen there.  In other words, everybody who is unable to vote at the ballot box should miss the voting altogether.  This should be because we suspect that a lot of malpractices could happen between when votes are transferred from a person to a ballot box.  Therefore, I think this one also should be deleted.  

I was going to talk about representatives of the district who happen to be women.  These women it has been argued very ably are representatives of the district.  Therefore everyone in the district is interested in these women including myself who is not a member of the Electoral College.  Therefore I would like to have an opportunity to elect one of these women representing my district.  The same goes to everybody who is of voting age in the district.  Everybody who is of voting age in the district must have a right, must have an opportunity, must have facilities to vote for people of their own choice who are going to represent them.  Therefore the question of Electoral College should not even arise.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman Sir, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Ssebaana Kizito.  He is a very good Friend of mine, that being a legislator even in East Africa, how he would describe the election in the Parliamentary system of government or the Westminster system of government or a leader of the government, would that be an electoral college or will that be universal suffrage?  Because the Prime Minister of Britain is not elected by the people.  Thank you.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  I hope Mr Chairman, we are not in a class of political science.  (Laughter)

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, in addition to what hon. Ssebaana Kizito has just said, let me add this to the hon. Minister who has just asked a question that the most famous case of Electoral College is the one which elects the President of USA.  Mr Chairman, that has been so for hundreds of years but for all that length of time, there have been two big complaints against it and the conclusion is that the method is undemocratic.  (Laughter)

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  I wanted also to complete my sentence Mr Chairman.  We now have a constitution in place which provides that even the leader of the country will be elected by universal suffrage.  Therefore we have moved away from the question of Electoral College to the practice of universal suffrage.

MRS WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I hope the Member on the Floor will just give me two minutes only to say something about electoral colleges and women’s representation as a matter of information.  Mr Chairman, there has been a lot of outcry from within Parliament and some circles when we were debating the constitution that it is against the rights of women to be elected through electoral colleges.  I am not going to labour again to explain to the House why the issue of electoral colleges came up.  Number one is that women are going to come to this Parliament as a matter of affirmative action and that is clearly known; the same as the youths, the same as people with disabilities.  

If one says that the woman who is going to be elected through an electoral college at the district level is not going to deliberate on issues that affect everybody in that district, then it means the electoral college for the youths will also not be adequate for these youths.  It also means that the Electoral College for people with disabilities, it will mean that the ten percent population of this country which is composed of people with disabilities will effectively not be represented.  

Mr Chairman, when we talk about adequacy of representation, this Parliament was made supreme by the constitution but when you look at each Member, even as we are constituted now, now only because we were elected through an electoral college but we are an electoral college at the end of the day because you are here deliberating for the whole of Uganda.  But somebody up there in Kitgum will not come to elect you here in Kampala, somebody in Kotido will not go to Kyamuswa to elect you.  Mr Chairman, electoral colleges come and go.  It is just the scope of how far you can stretch it.  Even when we talk about adult suffrage, the people above 18 are also an electoral college for the people in that constituency.  (Applause)  

Mr Chairman, I know that many times when we are in the heat of election time, we forget why things are being done.  If the issue of women is to address the representation of people in a constituency, then people who will be elected through the constituencies will have no work to do because this woman whom some Members want to be elected through adult suffrage will be enough voice for everybody in the district.  There will be no need for constituencies.  

There is an argument that the NRM is going to rig.  Everybody is open.  If the NRM is going to rig this election, let the alliance also rig because this electoral college is open, it is full of NRM members, it is full of alliance members and the fact that the alliance has been talking also about the movement having given chicken fee to the women and that we want to use this electoral college come in big numbers to Parliament, the 39 seats, I want to submit that as a Minister responsible for Gender, Gender has no tribe, Gender has no religious affiliation.  

So, Mr Chairman, for one to imagine that when a woman comes to this Parliament because she has been elected or people have been paid for her to be elected, is a misconception that I hope hon. Members will think in depth and reverse the decision and take up what the Minister has suggested.  When you talk about logistics for election.  If you subject this district woman to an electoral college, that is why the Minister has suggested, for a district like Kampala, which has five constituencies here in the CA, it means if I was to have been elected through adult suffrage, my fate would have pivoted on the five Members of Parliament who would have the adult vote.  

So, I would be an appendage of hon. Babu, I would be an appendage of hon. Ssebaana Kizito, I would be an appendage of hon. Lubega, indeed, I want to disclose here that before we held elections in Kampala District, I talked to some of the Members who had already been elected.  Some of them rejected me and I went and talked to each member of the Electoral College.  But through adult suffrage, this woman will be elected by the number of constituencies not the people in those constituencies.  I wish to really say that there are some women who are advocating for adult suffrage.  

Let me say this very frankly as a spokesperson of those people, the silent majority who do not come here.  Mr Chairman, the women who are advocating for adult suffrage are the women who have been known for many years in the district so that when they are to go for each vote, the members would have heard about Matembe.  Who does not know Matembe in Mbarara?  So that at the end of the day, a Kyomuhendo who is really capable and has also fresh ideas will take as many times as the number of times Matembe has gone round Mbarara within the few months left to the election.  Mr Chairman, let us really be as open as possible so that at the end of the day through affirmative action -(Interruptions)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.

MRS WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  I am giving information. (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, I want to finalise - maybe this is what he wants to clarify me about.  Let me finish, then you will give the clarification because it will be for the benefit of the House.  Let me say this finally as information to hon. Ssebaana Kizito who has been my political mentor also for a long time in Kampala and since the days of the Democratic Party.  (Applause)  Let us forget as we move ahead in implementing this new constitution that whereas we want our country to move as first as possible, the speed at which we move will be determined by the slowest member of our society and when it comes to politics, when it comes to affirmative action, it is this woman.  Let us through the electoral process give this woman affirmative action by giving her any electoral college which she can address in total and then as we continue reviewing, you will get more of the likes of Kazibwe who through an electoral college will move.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  I am glad the hon. Vice-President still remembers where she came from.  (Laughter)  Now Mr Chairman, I am very grateful for the information particularly for the lengthy information by the Vice-President.  But I understand by affirmative action to mean that you are going to promote special groups.  For example, if you are going to have a woman representative for each district, the people who are going to compete for that position should be women.  That is as far as I know affirmative action goes.  Affirmative action should not be extended to people who elect these - for example, when you are electing women in the LC system, the secretary for women must be a woman but she is not elected by only women.

MRS WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am glad hon. Ssebaana Kizito gives way all the time because the only way you know that you are a good teacher is when you get students who are better than you.  (Laughter)  I remember in the Constituent Assembly, I told one Member that there are teachers who are given exams given by their pupils and they get worse marks than the pupils.  But I want to acknowledge being tutored by Ssebaana Kizito.  The Electoral College which brought women to this NRC was not composed of women alone and the Minister is not suggesting that it is women who are going to elect women representatives to this Parliament.  The Electoral College goes beyond women alone.  It will include men, it will include women, it will include youths.  So Mr Chairman, that representation is as wide as it can go.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, a proper electoral college before hand the candidates for whom they are going to vote for and the American system actually is designed that way.  Before the electoral college, somebody goes for elections and he says she is supporting so and so.  It is the total votes cast that gives a delegate to the convention which elects a president and that is a proper constituted electoral college.  In our case Mr Chairman, the people in the electoral college even do not know the candidate they are going to vote for -(Interruptions)- they do not.  But the time they come, they are elected because if I wanted a proper electoral college, I would say, candidate A, candidate B are standing.  The people who are voting at RC 1 and RC 2 would be asked which candidate they would eventually vote for.  Yes, that is a proper electoral college.  This one is not properly constituted.  If we were to have a proper electoral college for the women in the manner Her Excellency the Vice-President wants, then we would have formed those electoral colleges in the knowledge of the candidates who are going to stand and it would be fair then because at a lower level, I would vote and tell you, if I am going to vote for you, when you go to vote for the women representative, support X or support Y and that is the system of a proper - at least there is a degree of representation.  

What happens in our case Mr Chairman is this. Even if the electoral college wanted A, by the time you go to vote, you vote as a representative with a free conscious and you vote for anybody and your own electorate down below does not even know whom you are going to vote for and that is the weakness of the present system.  If we adopt an Electoral College system, let us use even the one hon. Mayengo said has its faults.  Let us use that system.  First, we know the candidates; second, the people vote at a lower level knowing very well whom they are going to vote for.  Further information is this, there is this feeling the women representatives will be overburdened.  They are supposed to service a whole district and I repeat Mr Chairman, if that is the case, they should be subject to those whom they are going to represent and that is proper and it is normal.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I am giving is in regard to what hon. Kanyomozi was saying.  The American system is the one I am familiar with.  Take the Presidential; it is an electoral college.  Even if you get 49.9 percent of the votes, the one with 50.1 takes all the electoral numbers.  In other words, whether they support him or not, they all go.  In other words, you get as close to a half the people not having their interests taken care of in the election of the President.  We even have interest in the cases where Shubert Humphrey had more popular vote than the guy who defeated him, I think it was Nixon.  Humphrey had a higher popular vote than Richard Nixon; Nixon became President of the United States.  Now ours I would say is even superior because the people go there and deliberately cast their votes instead of the law casting the vote on their behalf.  (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ssebaana Kizito, wind up please.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: Okay, I am going to wind up by saying Sir, that - Mr Chairman, in order to illustrate to this House that I am not talking from my own conviction, I am talking on behalf of the people of Makindye.  When we were in the CA where I was a delegate, the CA was adjourned for a period of seven days and we delegates were asked to go and consult the electorate on issues, one of which was the representation for women and all of those whom I consulted and I went to eight parishes and 12 centres.  They all said they want representatives of the women to be directly elected.  I have got that evidence on tape and if people want to hear this, I can produce the tape here.

MR KARUHANGA: Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I am grateful to get this opportunity to get a clarification because my mind is not quite made up and I think if I can get this clarification, it will help me to make up my mind on the issue that the hon. Member is raising in the House.  First of all, when it comes to the army, the army will elect their representatives.  When it comes to the youths, the youths will elect their representatives, when it comes to the disabled, they will elect their representatives, when it comes to women, men and women will elect - even if it is in the electoral college - will elect the woman.  

Now the problem I have which I would like clarified is that when it is universal adult suffrage and women only are standing, in itself that is affirmative action. My problem now is, if we were to say that women will be elected by Electoral College, which Electoral College will elect these women?  Is it the existing LCs or will they wait until the next Parliament makes the laws for the LCs and then the women will come in?  Now if this position can be clarified by those who are advancing the issue of having an electoral college by women and especially I was delighted that the Vice-President and leader of government business was in the House today, I would have been very pleased to know how this situation is going to be treated so that I can then stand on my feet and say this is the position. But if there was temptation to allow the existing LCs to constitute the Electoral College, to elect the next Members of Parliament, it would be grossly unfair and I think it would be in contradiction with the spirit of the new constitution which has left this business of election the LCs to the next Parliament.  If this Parliament were to assume the next five years of women representatives to be based on people who were elected in 1989, to me it would look like these women would not be enjoying the mandate of the population.  (Applause)  

However, Mr Chairman, if the law is permissive and the spirit is free and fair and this House feels that in its way of understanding things this is fair, then I would have to rethink.  The question of the United States electoral colleges being ignored - I have an example of my constituency and I have discussed it with my Colleague in this House where in the electoral college, the people who were coming to vote especially the women leaders did not know how to read and write and the one who was helping people to vote was -(Interjection)- yes, in an electoral college - the one who was helping was actually helping them to vote for the wrong candidate whom they did not want and that is the truth; and now I do not understand whether this situation - I am sure that hon. Matembe will bear me out on this.  So I would like to get clarification from the mover and the leader of government business.  Thank you.

MRS WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Thank you Mr Chairman for giving me the opportunity to clarify to hon. Karuhanga from Nyabushozi.  Mr Chairman, the argument that the electoral college which will elect women would be best representative if it was a college after new LCs have been put in place would also invalidate the fact that as we sit here or any Parliament sits, makes laws and whatever that will be governing the people of this country for a long time.  

Secondly Mr Chairman, he is saying that the women during the elections of the women to the CA, there was rigging because illiterate women were helped to vote for the wrong candidates.  Mr Chairman, I would like to advise him that let him multiply the number of illiterate women who voted in the electoral college by the factor of illiterate women in the whole district or in the whole constituency and you will see that this woman who would have been elected 50 times will even be a bigger problem than one who has been elected by fewer illiterate people than with all the illiterate people.  

So, this argument which brings in the issue of women not being represented enough because they have come through an electoral college is really something which I hoped that Members like hon. Karuhanga would have internalised by now and I think that is why he is being challenged by a woman.  Thank you.  (Laughter)

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Mr Chairman, I am glad to see that Her Excellency the Vice-President has now abandoned the issue of electoral colleges and she is going -(Laughter)- for universal suffrage because she has already declared that rather than standing in Kampala she has found herself a constituency where she will stand.  But we are not saying that women who are here because they were elected by an Electoral College, are not representing women.  What we are saying is, if we use electoral colleges at that time, that was the most suitable method to use but now times have changed and we can now implement the democracy which has been ushered in by the NRM Government; that is universal adult suffrage.  (Applause) Mr Chairman, I beg to support.

THE CHAIRMAN:  And with that, we have come to the end of today’s sitting.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 February 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)


