Tuesday 6th February, 2001

Parliament met at 3.01p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been told that last week the Speaker expressed disappointment at the lack of quorum to transact certain business and he was inclined to adjourn the House until we finish the Presidential Election. Apparently, the following day Members turned up and they were able to pass certain Bills.  

There is some work, which has been pending to dispose of because of lack of quorum namely; The Political Organisation Bill, 1998. You remember we passed through the Committee Stage and the only Stage we have on this particular Bill, is the Third Reading but we cannot do it unless we have the required number of Members of Parliament. 

We have another important Bill, that is, The Local Governments Act (Amendment) Bill, 2000 but I fear if we start on it we may fail to realise a quorum for the Second Reading.  My appeal to you, hon. Members, is that, we reschedule our work outside the Parliament and come here to transact the Business. At least, if by next week, we have cleared the Local Government Bill, I think the Chair will be able to give you more time to go and concentrate on Presidential Campaigns. But if we do not realise the quorum today and maybe tomorrow - definitely tomorrow if we do not have a quorum, then I think the Chair will be constrained to adjourn until the first week or second week of March. 

So I appeal to you to mobilise other Members to be present but if they are not, this is to put you on notice that the House will adjourn tomorrow afternoon.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I seek your guidance. This emanates from the statement you gave us earlier that the Speaker had thought of adjourning the House until after the Presidential Elections. That message coming from you regards the Order of Business and the decision to adjourn the House. Does this decision fall squarely in the hands of the Speaker or is there a Business Committee, which should guide us? 

I am asking these questions in all humility because I think it is a give and take situation. If there is no quorum, would not this be the right time or for many occasions, to seek why there is no quorum? Are there underlying root causes to this problem? Because this situation is similar to the day I go to Church and the Preacher preaches to the converted. The Members you are talking to now are the ones who are already here. Those who are not, whom we are being asked to mobilise, maybe are not here and this being a very heavy scheduled time for presidential campaigns, most of our colleagues are accompanying the candidates on Elections. So I need your guidance about our interplay and respect for each other so that when we are sent on recess we do not feel that it is on the whims and desires of the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I know the existence of the Business and Welfare Committee to which I am a Member. I also know that the Business and Welfare Committee sat and programmed the kind of Business we have to do before the election of the President. Therefore, there is nothing new necessitating us to call a Business Welfare Committee to probe into why Members are not here. But I am able to adjust today’s Order of Business and let us debate it here. The other one is a Committee; this is a full House. We can now debate and see why the quorum is not there and then decide accordingly.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: I thank you Mr. Speaker. This lack of quorum has embarrassed this Parliament for a very long time. But while we urge the Members of Parliament to turn up, if you look at the Front Benches, you feel more embarrassed. 

There was a Bill here that Ministers should not be Members of Parliament, the Ministers themselves fought so hard and defeated the Bill but they do what they did not intend to do. I wonder whether you could at your level take up this matter with someone in charge of the Cabinet. I thank you.

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, I want to provide some information following the comments made by hon. Okello Okello. At one time we had a quorum and we would have disposed of the Political Organisations Bill, if the Minister responsible had been in this House. On that day we had to abandon that Bill because the Minister was not here. So, I think it is important that Ministers, at least those that are responsible for certain Businesses in the House, should try their level best to be here and enable us to get rid of the Business that we have set ourselves to do before the Presidential Elections. The House cannot move on some Business without the Minister responsible being available. So this is a matter which must be taken into account Mr. Speaker.

MR.PINTO: I want to inform my colleague that when the Vice President was put to task to justify the number of Ministers, one of the reasons she gave was that the number of Ministers had been increased so that there would always be more than one Minister available at any particular moment, for any aspect of a Ministry under debate. This would also subdivide their workload almost to departmental level. Now if you deal with a Ministry where there are three or four Ministers but none of them is in the House, you can visualise the embarrassment they are causing us. I see how painful it is for you Mr. Speaker, to be talking about sending us on recess in a punitive way when you know very well where the problem lies (Laughter.).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no.  Hon. Member adjourning the House is not being punitive. It is because, first of all when we come here the public spends on us. Therefore, if we cannot transact business, it is better that we are not here and then the public will not spend. I think that is the reason; we are not being punitive. But I am happy that I think I now have the quorum and therefore, I will start with a matter that requires a quorum and that is, the Political Organisation Bill.  

As you remember hon. Members, we finished the debate, and we adopted the Committee’s report. It was after we had adopted the Committee’s report, before the Third Reading that some hon. Members moved for recommittal. But the motion for recommittal aborted and therefore, what I have presently is that the Committee’s report was adopted. We move to the next step.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to Move that the Bill entitled 'The Political Organisations Bill, 1998' be read a Third Time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members the motion is that the Bill entitled the Political Organisation Bill 1998 be read the Third Time and do pass. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. The Bill is passed. (Laughter and Applause.).

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED "THE POLITICAL ORGANISATION ACT 1998"

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you for having raised the quorum and for having disposed of this Business.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR.MWANDA JAMES (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you Mr. Speaker. The Constitution provides that Parliament shall make relevant laws for the establishment of an Equal Opportunities Commission, for the purpose of giving full effect to the principle of affirmative action. Would the Minister inform the House when he intends to bring the Bill to this House to establish the Equal Opportunities Commission?

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker there is absolutely no question as to whether or not such a Commission will be set up by law. That will be done. The only question is the consultations between two Ministries which would appear to be responsible for these. It is the Ministry of Gender particularly and possibly my own my Ministry. And once we have settled this issue of which Ministry is going to do it, the Bill will come here.

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, this is the second time this question has been put on the Order Paper. When it was on the Order Paper early last year, the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs promised that the Bill would be in this House in four months’ time from that time. It is now well over the period he undertook to bring the Bill. I see him shaking his head but we can even check with the Hansard. Today he has answered but he has not even committed himself as to when this Bill will come to the House! It is doubtful whether the Minister really intends to bring this Bill to the House. But this is a Constitutional requirement to give effect to the principle of affirmative action, which is supported by the Government and the people of Uganda. Could the Minister inform the House precisely when those consultations will be concluded so that we know when he will bring the Bill to the House?

Can he also inform the House why he failed to bring the Bill within the period that he had already committed himself?  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to request the Minister, who I understand is a very good Christian, to be sincere with us. The Constitution was passed in October 1995. We are in February 2001 and the Minister is telling us that he has been conducting internal consultations all this time! (Interruption)

MR.KYEMBA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I note that the hon. Member who is asking the supplementary question seems to imply that if you have a question, always be sincere and that if you are not a Christian you are free to tell lies or whatever you wish. I really do not think that is what the hon. Member is trying to imply in this hon. House. Could you help me to understand the question better?

MR.ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, I do not know whether I should answer, but since he asked I will try. First of all, it is a fact that the Minister handling this matter is a Christian. Secondly, he is not only a Christian but also a Born Again Christian (Laughter.). Thirdly, the ethics of Christianity demand that one is sincere. So, by referring to him as a Christian, I was not degrading any other faith or otherwise. I was merely trying to tell him that as a fellow Christian, he should live true to his faith (Laughter.). I hope the hon. Member is satisfied with my explanation.  

I was saying that it is now a long time since the Constitution was passed and this is the second time the Minister is talking about internal consultation. Is he really doing this consultation? That is why I am asking him to be fair to us and tell us the truth of what is happening.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I am supplementing my colleagues.  Most of the provisions in the Constitution were to enhance the fundamental change; and a provision such as affirmative action is there in order to realise the fundamental changes that the people of Uganda aspired for. That this has not been done from 1995 to now, and when you get a non-committal answer from the Minister like that, that type of attitude! For us to be able to move forward and give credence to our Government, it is because of its effectiveness and efficiency.  

All along, there have been provisions in the Constitution that require enabling laws. I remember that these laws have been driven by Parliament, instead of being fulfilled according to the constitutional timetable. Could the Minister now, knowing our concerns, itemise for us the steps he has taken, whom he has consulted with, where he is and where he is going? Otherwise, could we conclude that the Minister might be telling untruths?  

There are so many other regulations of Bills that we are expecting. For example, we raised here an important issue about the Armed Forces Bill, which was being brought in instalments. Up to now, we do not know where that is! And here we are – you can see, Mr. Speaker, that we are quite constrained.  May I now, -(Interruption-

PROF.KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thought the Rules of the House are very clear. Supplementary questions are asked specifically for elucidation on the subject of the question. But I have been listening to hon. Pinto and I am wondering whether the presentation he is making has got anything to do with the question that was put by hon. Mwandha! Is he in order to take the House to subjects outside the subject of the question that was asked? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Pinto, please, confine yourself to the question before the House.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, yes indeed. I wish the Minister in charge of General Duties in the Prime Minister’s Office to see the latitude with which the question that hon. Mwandha put. The question is on the principle of the affirmative action. It is broad affirmative action, which is not specified to the little confines my colleague would like to limit it to. Then I can see how desperate he is by not wanting me to ask about the Armed Forces Bill, because he has no answer; similarly he has no answer for the Members Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Pinto, the Armed Forces Bill has nothing to do with the Affirmative Action. Please!

MRS.BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We Members of Parliament representing marginalised groups are really embarrassed and ashamed before our constituents.  When this issue was raised in the House, and the Minister answered that this Bill would come in four months, we were very excited, we went wild and told our constituents that the Bill would be in place. Now Parliament is coming towards the end of its term of office but we have not seen this Bill in this House. 

This Bill is the hope of the marginalised groups. It is through this Bill that we shall fight for equality in terms of employment, education and any other thing. Without that Bill, it will never be put in place.

Today, I would like the Minister to tell us honestly whether this Bill will be brought to this House within the remaining four months so that we can tell the truth to our constituents. Thank you.

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Baba Diri for giving way. I am sitting here listening to Members saying that the provision in the Constitution for equal opportunities will never be actualised. But I want to comfort and inform the Members that this is contained in the manifesto of my candidate, Col. Dr. Kiiza Besigye. It is actually on page 45 of the manifesto, and therefore I want to inform the Members that it can be done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this Chamber is not assigned as a venue for any presidential candidates.

MRS.BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am not aware of the information given and that is the Member’s own feelings. Otherwise, I do not know what is contained in Besigye’s manifesto.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the first place, hon. Baba Diri had finished the question. So, the question of information does not arise unless some other person has got a supplementary question.

MRS.KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to add my voice to all those who have spoken and tell this House that we, the people from the marginalised groups expected a lot from the Equal Opportunities Commission. But when we stand here and we are told that consultations are going on, discussions are going on, we wonder how long Government needs to actualise some of these provisions in the Constitution.  

There is another equally important –(Interruptions)

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I am grateful to you and to my colleague for giving way. The statement I have heard “marginalisation” is very clear, but I wanted to know in which respect. Last week, the colleague stood up when we were discussing another item and said, “I am Captain”. She was speaking as Captain in the Armed Forces –(Interruptions)

MRS.KABAKUMBA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to put the record straight. I never at any moment mentioned that I am contributing on this Floor as a Captain. It is our colleague, hon. Omara Atubo, who was insinuating that I am a Captain, which I am not. But I will inform this House that I -(Interruption)- protect me Mr. Speaker.  But I will inform this House that I am married to a captain, - yes - of UPDF, former NRA. 

So, I would like to go back to my point. Is it in order for hon. Pinto to mislead this House that I said I am captain when I did not?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think in view of what you have said that you are married to a captain, you are regarded as one.  Proceed.

MRS.KABAKUMBA: Thank you Mr. Speaker but I did not mention it. 

Now there is another Bill, which we have a lot of hope in, that is, the Domestic Relations Bill. Promises were made in this House, but we have not seen it or heard about it -(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members let us restrict ourselves to hon. Mwandha's question. If you have any supplementary question arising from the answer, then you can. If you do not, please do not make this a general debate.

MRS.KABAKUMBA: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I was only laying a background. But my supplementary question is, since Government has been given a lot of time and it is being accused of lacking the will to put in place this Equal Opportunities Commission to help the marginalised groups, should we take it that Government actually has no will to put it in place? 

MR.RWAKOOJO: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. The last time this question came up, the question of accessibility to public facilities by people with disabilities was raised. For instance, there are very few public buildings that have access rumps for people with wheelchairs. If you went to our own lifts here, I do not think that hon. Baba Diri would be able to go to a floor she wants because there is no Braille and yet it is a requirement. In other countries, there are packing spaces dedicated to people with disabilities. We had asked the hon. Minister to make this a requirement especially in the new facilities that are coming up. Should there be any reason why a new building would not have a lift in this day and age? Is there any reason why some hotels are not accessible to people with wheelchairs? I want to know whether making this requirement also has to wait for the Commission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you asking the Minister of Works and Housing or you are asking the Minister of Constitutional Affairs?

MR.RWAKOOJO: Being a constitutional requirement for people with disabilities to have equal opportunities, I thought the Minister of Constitutional Affairs would have a fair answer.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, if we are to take hon. Rwakoojo's statement very seriously, and maybe we should, then it will make me a super Minister responsible for every aspect of Government. I do not think we should.  

Having said that, I want to re-affirm to the glory of God that I am sincere and that God is sincere and he makes me sincere. So, when I answered last time and I gave some timetable, I went back and I found that in fact the strong doubt, whether it is my own Ministry and not that of Gender and Labour who should actually be bringing this. I see the Minister of State for Gender here; in fact, he is nodding.  

So, this is really the problem. We still have to determine whether is it my Ministry or their own Ministry. As soon as we have done that, everything is going to follow suit.  

This time, since the Minister of State from Ministry of Gender, is also here, I am pretty sure he is going to take it up with his own Minister, hon. Janat Mukwaya. If they find that I have to help them by Legislation, drafting, we shall do so. Otherwise there is no question of the Government saying, ‘there is no way’. We do not take any comfort in seeing some people not being able to come up to Parliament because of status. We are hurt also to see people with disabilities not being able to do certain things. So, there is no question of Government not having either the will or the ability to do so. All I am saying is that we should resolve our problem between the Ministry of Labour and Gender and myself in this issue because I do not want to do work that may not directly belong to me. But I am saying that the Minister is likely to say something, - I do not know.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Dr. Kiryapawo Tomasi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I think the impression is that I am still the Minister of State for Gender and Social Development. I am making my stand clear and I will tell you who I am and what I am.  

I am Dr. Tomasi Kiryapawo; I am Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development. But having been in the Ministry of Gender, I could probably say something about this. 

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is definitely right. When I left the Ministry of Gender, we were still carrying out consultations whether it should be the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or the Ministry of Gender to bring the Bill here. But in the Ministry of Gender, which I left, there was enough consultation to bring this matter to rest. They had international and local consultations. What was remaining was to put it in a more specific manner to bring it here. Now that I have been taken unawares because I had not been looking back, I have a feeling that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is working this matter upon Order, Order. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there is no point of order because what happened is this. The Minister mentioned a Minister of State in the Ministry of Gender and certainly there is a Minister of State for Gender here. I think the Minister of Constitutional Affairs was addressing the issue to the relevant Minister of Gender.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS) (Mrs. Kakembo Nsangi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am in the Ministry of Gender as Minister of State for Youth and children. But I can also stand in for my colleague, the Minister for the Elderly and Disability. 

As far as I know, there are consultations that are going on with this Department and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. As far as this issue is concerned, I want to promise this House that very soon we shall come back here - The Bill is supposed to originate from my Ministry, not from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. As soon as we are ready, we shall come to this House and present the Bill before the expiry of this Parliament.

MR.PINTO: Point of clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have disposed of this matter, really.

MR.PINTO: But there is clarification, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, to whom? The question was for the Minister for Constitutional Affairs. You have heard from the Minister who is responsible for the Bill who is not Minister for Constitutional Affairs and who did not originally answer the question.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence to bear with me. First of all, there was a statement from the Minister for Constitutional Affairs that he is making consultations. When he was answering hon. Rwakoojo, he said he does not know whether it is Gender or Works or whatever Ministry. I want to know with whom he is actually making consultations.   

Secondly, there is a Government of Uganda, which has got various Ministries where issues must be co-ordinated. I thought that is why we have the office of the Prime Minister. Really at this time, for this matter to be answered by various Ministers, I am worried whether there has been any consultations in the first place, or whether there is co-ordination. We are talking of something that has been in the making for five years! This is the clarification I am seeking from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and his Minister for General Duties. Is there co-ordination? Was there actually, consultations, and with whom?  

PROF.KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much indeed. Members of the House have a right to question whether there is co-ordination in the Government or not. But there is co-ordination in the Government, and Government business goes on effectively.  

However, there are people who do not understand the magnitude of the problem in this subject. First of all, there are very many interest groups in this subject, very, very many. They are social, educational, legal, technical and financial. Therefore, nobody in their right mind is going to rush a legislative business in this House without due understanding of what entails to deal with the matter.  

Now, when hon. Pinto asks whether there are any consultations taking place, absolutely, they are there.    For example, supposing you are going to insist that all the buildings in Kampala have the type of stair way where wheel chairs can be pushed, how much money is involved in that? How many buildings would we close because they cannot afford this? All these issues have to be looked at very, very carefully and it takes a bit of time.  

I have listened to some people with kind of “push-button” ideas about how this country can be run. That is not how it is done. Therefore, to answer hon. Pinto and everybody, yes, the consultations are taking place and there is co-ordination of Government activities. I thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTRY OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much and the House for the opportunity to move the second reading of this Local Government Amendment Bill. We tried to move this Bill in the last two weeks, unfortunately we did not manage to raise a quorum. So, this was not a question of absence of any Minister from the Ministry of Local Government.  

I hope I am seconded as I move this motion, - Thank you very much, hon. Minister for General Duties, office of the Prime Minister. 

The Minister of Local Government tabled this Bill for the First Reading in June 2000. Following that, it was referred to the Sessional Committee on Local Government and Public Service for scrutiny. The Committee took into account the fact that the Local Government Act of 1997 is a major guiding Act to the administration of Local Governments and effecting the process of decentralisation, which is playing a key role in bringing services nearer to our people. As colleagues are aware, the Act gives more powers, responsibilities and services to the people in the districts and ensures smooth implementation of the decentralisation policy.  

Dear colleagues, you may be aware that from time to time issues have arisen in the districts that require to constantly make some changes in the principal Act, that is, the 1997 Local Government Act and Amendment Act.  

This Bill is relatively short with about 46 Clauses, but key Clauses concern the legal status of the Local Governments. Various stakeholders who have been consulted raised some issues that have also been taken into account by the Committee and the Ministry during the consultation process. 

Another key Clause in this Amendment Bill is Clause (11) regarding whether the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the District Councils should act on a full-time or part-time basis and the implications therein. Of course, this also required consultation with our colleagues in the Ministry of Local Government. Different Local Governments raised some issues regarding this particular aspect.

Clause (5) attempts to look at the office of the district chairman. In case it falls vacant, what happens? How do we fill this office? There is an addition to the principal Act to this effect. 

The other area, which I may also touch on very briefly, is Clause (6) of this Amendment Bill, which regards what proportion of the Council the Executive, should hold. In some of the districts, the number of Councillors is small and they have got that flexibility to appoint a certain number of Executive members in regard to the functions they might find necessary within that district. There is a proposal here that members of the Executive should not exceed a third of the Council membership. 

Clause (11) also talks of replacement of a chairperson or a member of the Executive. What are the grounds for replacing that member?  

Clause (14) of this Bill briefly talks about the minimum qualifications for certain categories of leaders. In this case, we are talking about minimum qualification for the leaders at various levels particularly at sub-counties.   This was a contentious issue. We had a very protracted debate and also carried out consultations from the districts. I think Members should discuss this with an open mind because it is a critical Clause that affects the availability of leadership at sub-counties where very many activities are currently being executed within the districts. 

Clause (15) is in reference to salaries and allowances payable to members of the District Service Commission, District Tender Boards and the Town Council Tender Boards, which are now being charged on the Consolidated Fund.  

Lastly, Clause (22) talks about certain aspects of revenue management within the districts and the money being submitted to the Lower Governments within the districts. An attempt is made here to bring in some ideas to rationalise and harmonise aspects of revenue collection and then revenue sharing at different levels of Local Governments. 

Clause (29) also attracted a lot of contribution from members of the civic society, urban authorities, local authorities regarding state of emergencies in districts or districts that have been taken over by the President where district government has failed to manage the affairs of that district. Again this attracted a heated debate and Clause (29) attempts to address it. Members of the civic society made some contribution to this and we should also have a debate on this with an open mind.  

Essentially, those are the main elements of this Bill which is attempting to amend the principal Act of 1997 which was earlier amended in the Local Government Act and Amendment Act of 1997. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms. Babihuga Winnie): Thank you Mr. Speaker. You will recall that the hon. Minister for Local Government moved the First Reading of the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2000 on 23rd June 2000. The Bill was then referred for scrutiny to the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Governments in accordance with rule 99(5) of our Rules of Procedure.  

Accordingly, the Committee began considering the Bill on 6th July 2000. It held a number of consultative meetings with the Minister and officials from the Ministry of Local Government. Other meetings were held with the stakeholders who included officials from the Decentralisation Secretariat, the Local Government Finance Commission, the Uganda Local Authorities Association, Urban Authorities Association in Uganda, Kampala City Council and the Chairpersons of Divisions.  

Prior to the meetings, the Committee visited a number of Local Governments to solicit their views on the proposed Amendments. The districts visited were mainly from south-western, eastern and mid-northern Uganda.  

The Bill seeks to amend the Local Governments Act, 1997 in order to give more effect to the decentralisation of functions, powers, responsibilities and services and to ensure the smooth implementation of the decentralisation policy.  

The Committee considered the Bill Clause by Clause and made a number of observations and recommendations, which I would like to highlight.  

    a) The Committee agreed to the Title of the Bill since it will be read and construed as one with the Local Governments Act, 1997.  

    b) It also observed that some of the provisions in the Local Government Act, 1997 were not comprehensive enough nor were they specific. This had in effect caused a lot of misinterpretation of the provisions of the Act and partly explains the frictions between Local Governments at different stages of implementation.  

    c) The Committee observed that the interdiction of a Chief Administrative Officer and/or a Town Clerk should be initiated by the Chairperson of the respective Council supported by a Resolution of not less than two-thirds of the members of the District Council, upon which the necessary supporting documents and Council’s decisions are forwarded to the Secretary of the District Service Commission. This is intended to limit political victimisation.

    d) The Committee noted the need to compel all levels of Local Government to work in harmony with one another.  It observed that the majority of Urban Councils and District Councils do not work in harmony since they are not accountable to each other. This causes unnecessary conflicts at the expense of service delivery, which is critical to improving the welfare of the population. The committee is of considered view that a linkage be established between Local Governments so as to foster accountability to one another. Consequently, it was agreed that every Urban Council makes a contribution of 0.1 per cent of its total revenue to the District Council and likewise every Town Council makes a contribution of 0.1 per cent of its total revenue to the county in which it is situated.  

    e) The Committee noted that the decentralisation policy devolved a lot of powers, function, services and resources to be handled by the district statutory boards and committees. However, appointment to these boards has been grossly abused. The Committee noted that such appointments were used as political rewards irrespective of qualification, integrity of a person being appointed and their capacity to perform. This arrangement has led to wastage of resources and public funds at the hands of poorly qualified board members.  The committee, therefore, adopted a considered view that positions on statutory boards and committees are filled by persons who have minimum qualification of “A” Level and a Diploma from a recognised institution.   

    f) The Committee observed that many chairpersons at sub-county level did not perform their roles effectively due to the inferior qualifications they possess.  After exhaustive debate and having given the Ministry of Local Government ample time to consult sub-counties, and stakeholders all over Uganda, it was agreed that the minimum qualification for chairpersons of sub-counties be Ordinary Level or its equivalent.  It is anticipated that this will promote efficiency and development in accordance with the Local Government Act. The Committee, however, noted that this provision will not affect the tenure of office of the current sub-county leaders but shall take effect at consequent elections.  

    g) The Committee noted the need to streamline the mandate of the Municipal, Town and Sub-county Chairpersons notably by separating the powers to preside over Council meetings. 

    h) The Committee was, therefore, of considered view to provide for an Amendment to cater for the post of Speaker and Deputy Speaker at sub-county level who shall be elected from amongst the numbers of Councillors and shall serve on part-time basis. The Speaker who shall not be a member of the Executive shall preside over Council meetings and shall not vote in any manner requiring the vote of the Council. It is anticipated that this will counter the practice of chairpersons who tend to manipulate council meetings as well as those who neglect calling council meetings.  

    i) The Committee noted the need to streamline existence of Tender Boards within districts so that conflicts are minimised during the award of tenders. It is the considered view of the Committee that there should be one Tender Board within a district to service the District or City Council, Municipality, Town Council and Division in a district or a city. It also proposes that each stakeholder contributes qualified persons to the membership of the tender board to take care of the interest of the electoral area. 

Recommendations:  
The Committee recommends that in consultation with the Committee of Parliament responsible for the affairs of local government, the Ministry of Local Government amends the Schedules of the Local Government Act, 1997 taking into account any new developments, experiences and needs of the Local Governments.  

I take this opportunity to thank all those who assisted the Committee with valuable information at the time of considering this Bill. Subject to the Amendments proposed by the Committee and any other Amendments, which may arise from the Floor, by hon. Members, the Committee recommends that the Bill be enacted into law. Mr. Speaker, I beg to report. 

MAJ.KAZOORA JOHN (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister responsible for this Bill, the Chairperson and members of the Committee for bringing this long awaited Bill. I urge my colleagues to do some good work as far as this Bill is concerned. 

As you are aware, most of these services are in Local Government and this was among the first laws we passed immediately after elections. Probably, with some bad experiences in the campaigns, and also considering that the current chairpersons of the districts are elected by adult suffrage compared when we were making this law to when they were elected through electoral colleges. What I am saying is that the current chairperson enjoys a wider mandate from the population. And now four years down the road, we have been in our constituencies and we know some of the hindrances that affect the working of these Councils. 

I agree with the Committee on page two, that there should be some disciplinary accountability to the people elected to represent their districts. When we were considering this law, there was a problem where politicians were victimising civil servants because the politicians had over stayed. When we changed this law, there is now a problem of civil servants sabotaging the politicians.  The politicians are popularly elected. They want to be seen to be working and moving and they are just sabotaged by the civil servants. There are several examples from very many districts especially between the Chairpersons and the CAO. So, here on page two where the Committee says that “The interdiction of a Chief Administrative Officers and/or Town Clerks should be initiated by the Chairperson of the respective Council supported by a Resolution of two-thirds of the members of the District Council”; I do not think will be solving this problem because what is happening is that these CAOs are very powerful. They are the ones controlling money and they determine what allowances and what privileges some of these Councillors can get. Therefore, it may be very difficult to get this kind of situation. You see, here in Parliament we call the hon. Ministers and we put them to task to cause some discipline among their staff.  Therefore, in the same spirit, the political leadership at the district must have some say in disciplining some of these civil servants. So, I am saying that it should not be only the Chief Administrative Officer or the Town Clerk but the entire civil service at the district and later I will be moving an Amendment on how this could be done -(Interruption)

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, hon. Member for giving way. These recommendations have been given to us this afternoon. The Amendments appear to be very important. I would like to ask that we be given time to peruse through them and come back and debate the matter thoroughly as you have heard even in the Committees the matters were so contentious. I feel we are hijacked to continue with the thing before we have actually read it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it the view that you have not yet read the report and, therefore, you need time?

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU: We are seeing it today.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Speaker, I am the Vice-Chairperson of this Committee. This report was given I think a month ago. So, Members should have it in their libraries or at home somewhere.

MR.KAGGWA MEDI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is true that some copies were given but some of us have actually just received them today. Since the other Members who received the copies much earlier are able to contribute, I think we can benefit from their contributions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, so those who can contribute can do so, then we can see how we proceed.

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, I was saying that it is very important that there is supervision by the leaders popularly elected to some of these bureaucracies. As Members know, we have passed a lot of money especially to LC III level. Recently, we passed the Local Government Development Fund of Shs.80 million per sub-county. There is the Shs.65 million that remains at the sub-county and this assists in decentralising services and in lessening the burden of the individual Members of Parliament who are requested to do everything in the constituency and yet we have already passed this money. So, it is important that from the district to the last level where this money goes, there should be some supervision and accountability by the leaders of the people.  

On the issue of education, Members will recall that we even went into division lobby about it. We had set some educational requirements but when the Bill went to the President, he returned it to us. Well, we said ‘fine’. But as I said, we have got four years’ experience now.  You cannot entrust all this money to somebody at the sub-county who only studied up to P.3 or P.4 because he is popular!  

I have a friend who is an army veteran in Luwero. He left the army and he is now an LC III Chairperson of one of the gombololas I do not want to mention. Recently he told he had gone back to school because graduates have been recruited at the gombolola. “Sometimes I sign things I do not understand and then they cheat me”. So, I think it is important that we do not put all these resources into the hands of people, who, though respected in society, cannot comprehend some of these delicate issues. 

As I said, the current District Chairpersons were elected through adult suffrage unlike the previous ones who were elected through electoral colleges. Some of these Chairpersons are of the high calibre because of their responsibilities at the districts. I think to subject them to being paid by the local collections of taxes is very unfair. Some of them actually had big jobs and some of us knew what was in these districts had the vision to get people of high calibre to run them, and they have since improved. But why should one lose his or her emoluments simply because he is doing a job for the society?  So, at an appropriate time, I will be bringing in these Amendments specifically. But it is very important that we consider this Bill soberly well knowing that the engine is now in these Councils. I thank you.

DR.NKUUHE JOHNSON (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee for the job well done. I think of all the Acts that we have passed, one of the most important is this Local Government Act because it affects the ordinary citizen directly. One of the most successful policies of this Government has been decentralisation. So, I take special interest in this Act.  

However, I am rather disappointed by the way this Committee has been promoting division and sub-division of districts and the creation of more new districts. Much as creation of some districts is justified, I still think that the unlimited creation of new districts has an implication on the resource envelope that has to be shared.  

The other thing I would like to see in this document is information flow, not only between the various levels of a Local Government, but also between various Local Governments. Adjacent districts have a lot in common, for instance, Masaka district with say, Sembabule and Mbarara, but there is no provision for this kind of linkage.  

I will now go to the Committee report. On Page (2), point (c), the Committee observed that “The interdiction of the Chief Administrative Office and/or Town Clerk should be initiated by the Chairperson of the respective Council supported by a Resolution of two-thirds of the members of the District Council …”. 

If you assume that a district is a small unit of Uganda this is equivalent to say that if Prof. Kagonyera has a quarrel with the Permanent Secretary in his Ministry, he should come here and get two-third support of this House before he can discipline that Permanent Secretary. You can imagine the implication of that. One is a Civil Servant, appointed by the District Service Committee, and now he should be answerable to the political leadership in the district. To come to discipline this person, one has to go to the District Council and even has the impossible task of getting two-thirds support! Mind you, some of these Councils are so small that two-thirds might mean six people; it might mean the whole executive. Some of them are so small they may have nine members and two-thirds is six. So, if I am a CAO, all I need is one or two people and then you are stuck. Therefore, I think there is a problem with this Amendment. I would like the CAOs to be answerable to the political leadership and this business of going to the Council is really irrelevant.

On page three of the report, the second sentence of the first paragraph says, “The Committee is of the considered view that a linkage be established between Local Governments so as to foster accountability to one another. Consequently it was agreed that every urban council, and here urban council means all these councils, makes a contribution of one per cent of its total revenue to the district council and likewise every Town Council makes a contribution of one per cent of its total revenue to the county in which it is situated”.  

First of all, what do we mean by situated? Because situated might mean where the building is situated. But in actual fact if a district headquarter is situated here, it does not mean that the functions of the people who stay in the city are all situated in that building.  For instance, Kampala, the people might be working in a Division within Kampala district but they might be staying in Mukono and, therefore, putting a lot of stress on Mukono district. Or, if a town Council is situated across two or three counties, or it might be situated at the edge of one county but in actual fact a lot of its people are staying in other counties. So, what is the basis of this?  Because if the people who are working in that town council are putting a lot of stress on the neighbouring area, then those neighbouring areas have a right to demand that they benefit from the taxes that that council is generating and therefore they should get some sort of revenue. It is a good idea, but I think it does not cater for all the concerns that we have.  

I thank the Committee for that. Let me give others an opportunity to contribute. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.
 
MR.LUKUMU FRED (Bulisa County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I will concentrate on the point which I feel was omitted. I feel that Members of this Committee did not adequately address the concerns which were expressed by Members regarding the present situation where Members of Parliament are de-linked from most of the activities that are vital to the communities they represent. 

Before this Act was put in place, Members of Parliament were Ex-official members of the district councils. Experience has shown that the vacuum brought about by the Local Government Act, 1997 has created a lot of problems and therefore, accountability and co-ordination have been lacking in most of these Local Governments. Sometimes it is not easy for Members of Parliament to know that the funds they voted have reached their constituents. As a result, these funds are mishandled because Members are not involved in monitoring. I, therefore, feel that Members of Parliament should be on the District Councils as Ex-officio Members.

On the issue of CAOs, I feel, under the arrangement proposed by the Committee, they still remain insecure. I do not think officers of the CAOs’ calibre should be subjected to only the district authority. They really feel insecure. We must also consider that many of these CAOs are already senior public officers, who, unfortunately, cannot climb any higher. You can see now that a CAO can only remain a CAO; there is no higher opportunity for him to be promoted. So, I feel that for CAOs to be secure, they should be appointed by the Public Service Commission. I do not see any contradiction here. To avoid complications of going through the courts of law, the long procedures involving two-thirds or so, of members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, do you realise the difference between Public Service and District Service? Do you realise the separation of functions, and that a district is a Government of its own? Now, are you suggesting that Central Government should supervise the staff of the district? Or are you suggesting that this person should be seconded because if he is seconded he can always go back for promotion? What is it you are suggesting?

MR.LUKUMU: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that guidance.  I think on the basis of secondment, if this can technically make our CAOs secure, I have no problem with it. As hon. Members know; if the CAOs are to be secure, they must be compromised by the district authorities, which is dangerous. Local Governments are doing most of the service delivery. So, if the centre has no say in monitoring and supervision of Local Government operations, I think we shall continue to suffer from poor performance as a result of the gap existing between the centre and the local authorities.  

I would also like to comment on the district councillors’ qualifications. The Chairperson and the Minister indicate, quite justifiably, that the responsibilities at the district are now enormous requiring competent representatives. Councillors are managing public resources. The political leaders – Mr. Speaker, could you please protect me from my colleague, hon. Nsambu here?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, do not disturb.

MR.LUKUMU: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your protection.  The Constitution provides that chairpersons of districts have a minimum academic qualification of “A” Level. This is agreeable because it is the same level as this House and the Presidency but the Local Government Act is silent on councillors and yet any of these councillors could be a vice chairperson, and yet the chairperson does not work alone. If we have a situation where we have a highly qualified chairperson but with mediocre councillors, what do you expect? So, I think they should be at the same level just as at the centre, where the qualifications of a Member of Parliament and the qualifications of the President are the same. I do not see why we think that it does not matter to have a district councillor who is illiterate as long as we have a well-qualified chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you suggesting that the councillor of the district should have the same qualification with a Member of Parliament? 

MR.LUKUMU: Mr. Speaker, already the chairperson of the district is required to have the same qualification as a Member of Parliament, so it follows. I remember when the President referred this Local Government Act on account of the fact that the qualifications set by Members of the House were too high. But I think even the President now has a changed attitude because he has sent graduates at the sub-counties now, and this was his directive. I believe he can no longer stick to his old stand that the qualifications set were too high for Councillors. He has realised the need to have high standards even at sub-counties.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you mean that the political leadership should be at par with professional leadership?

MR.LUKUMU: Mr. Speaker, for example in one of my sub-counties, the sub-county chief holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Economics and a Diploma in Education and the chairperson of the same sub-county is a P.6 leaver. It is Biiso sub-county to be precise. So we are talking from experience, Mr. Speaker. We are already seeing problems there. I do not imagine my chairperson effectively perusing documents presented to him by his well-educated Gombolola chief. So, similarly, I feel that –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am sorry, I should not have interjected at this stage, but my colleague from Masindi is giving the impression that this chairman of a sub-county who is a P.6 leaver may not have acquired extra skills, which may have propelled him to the equivalence of “O” Level. So, he is concentrating only on the P.6 graduate. We might be unfair to this particular chairman. So, I want a clarification from him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Hon. Minister, I think it is a question of principle. Do you subscribe to his principle that the chairperson should have qualifications equivalent “A” Level? If you buy that one, then the detail can come out.  But if you do not buy, then you take a stand instead of debating a particular person. But I think it is a principle, which we should debate rather than the personality of an individual.

MR.LUKUMU: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your guidance.  In the same vein, we are aware that very soon members of the sub-county council will be handling very huge budgets. But there is still silence over the academic qualifications of councillors. In the recommendation here, the qualifications refer only to the chairperson. It means, therefore, that we can have an “O” Level chairperson with even illiterate councillors representing sub-counties and various interest groups.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Speaker, I think the Member has got very ideal suggestions, but when you go to the ground, how many sub-counties will provide all these qualifications, with our illiteracy in Uganda? Let us face the facts. The chairman definitely should have some qualifications, but if we say that sub-county councillors must also be, for example, “O” Level holders, I think we have not yet reached that stage where we can fulfil all these in all the 920 sub-counties in Uganda, Mr. Speaker.

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I think it is unfortunate that Ugandans are trying to say that for somebody to be a leader, he has to have qualified with such and such a degree or such and such a diploma. Whether in America or Britain, people do not elect their representatives according to the paper qualifications. I think we must use another type of sieving and selecting rather than purely formal education. I cannot buy an argument, which says that, my grandfather –(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gagawala, I think you will have time to contribute. You see, I –(Interruption)

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I am trying to pass over some information to him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will give you an opportunity to make your contribution. 

MR.LUKUMU: I thank you for your protection, Mr. Speaker.  The issue of qualifications is a matter of principle.  Our Constitution makes this clear. It is from the experience we have gone through in this country that we emphasise the issue of academic qualification. The President, Members of Parliament and district chairpersons are all constitutionally required to have “A” level standard. I do not think this principle can now be disregarded. So, with decentralisation, obviously, responsibilities are being devolved and we need competent leaders to manage the provision of these services.  

I am actually one of those who sympathise with our naturally talented leaders who may be victims of these academic limitations. It is not my wish, to deny them the opportunity to participate, but at the same time, let us not bury our heads in the sand. With this commercialised politics, there is a danger that mediocres could take charge of public affairs. This would be detrimental to our communities. We, therefore, must remain principled and stick to the issue of qualification, it is important. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.OKULO EPAK  (Oyam South, Apac): Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister and the Committee for allowing a lot of consultations in the process of doing this work. I recall I requested this facility when we were debating the budget of the Ministry of Local Government and true, a lot of consultations were allowed. 

I also want to thank the Committee and I presume the Ministry agrees with them for accepting that there should be a minimum qualification for chairpersons of the sub-county councils and also for separation of powers at that level so that we have speakers and chairpersons. These were real problems in the management and operations of the affairs of the councils at that level.  

I am, however, a bit worried of the recommendations for urban councils to contribute towards the funds of the district and county council. I think it is an illusion to think that all urban and town councils, for instance, municipal councils have the opportunity to collect more money than district councils.  I think it is an illusion and it is a measure of the recklessness and inability in competence of the district councils to make use of the facilities available to them. They have what used to be called administration towns for which they should struggle to be gazetted for rating and then they collect a lot of rates from those councils. This would put them far ahead of the urban councils. 

In fact, both district and urban authorities are weak in terms of benefiting from the rating rules or property taxes. I think this is where they should improve. District councils have a lot of opportunity to benefit from transfers from Central Government much more than urban councils. Therefore, to try and deprive the urban councils of their limited bases for revenue by asking them to contribute more money to the district councils, which actually get a lot of money from the Central Government, would be very unfortunate. 

Of course, I sympathise with the county councils whose resources are very limited and could benefit from such benevolence from the urban councils in their areas. But we are also talking of a situation, which may not obtain. How many town councils nest within a county council? Very few, particularly with the limitation imposed in the Act itself for qualifications to be an urban council, there are hardly any. In the entire Apac district, for example there is only one town council. So, which town councils are we talking about, which counties in Apac district will benefit from? They are just not there. 

So, I think too much was expected out of this. But I appeal to the Committee and the Minister to look into this. I think we should not burden these people by making them contribute towards the funds of the district and sub-county councils. In fact, for the county councils, there is nothing to expect as far as I am concerned, if I have read this correctly.  

MR.RWABITA DEO (Ibanda South, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. While the Committee considered that we should have a linkage between, for example, a town council and a county or a municipality with a district, today there are some areas where the two have to work together. Take a district with road maintenance equipment, the town council will need that equipment. So, if some money is sent to the district, then it will be easy to facilitate the movement of this equipment. Or, when there is an epidemic, the district is supposed to act fast and you may find that that epidemic starts in the municipality. So, if the town council or the municipality has sent a bit of money to the district, then the district should come first to help in that crisis and it is not very big money. We have said, just 0.1 per cent of their revenue, so that it is a token of that linkage, Mr. Speaker.

DR.OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, this question of tokenism, which will involve a lot of administrative expenses, would rather be avoided than be insisted upon. As I said, in how many counties are there town councils? If you want, then you better lower the minimum qualifications for creation of town councils. Otherwise, as it is, it is a law of no significance. I believe that that relationship between the urban authority in a district like Apac with only one town council, one urban authority, cannot be strengthened by tokenism. I think the administrative linkages by which the membership of councils and committees or commissions, statutory bodies, already created is sufficient rather than this token. But I think if it was subjective to statistical significance, it would be so statistically insignificant that I think it is really creating a problem for nothing (Interruption.).

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. Okulo Epak for giving way. The reason why this was deemed necessary was that at these different levels, there are mandatory services the higher levels have to execute for the lower levels and it is normally at the expense of the higher level Local Governments. Some of these lower Local Governments have more avenues for revenue collection. Therefore, the Committee thought it necessary that there must be contribution from the levels, which benefit from the services rendered by higher Local Governments in order to improve the efficiency levels. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I am very familiar with the set up in the local authorities. That is where I worked for most of my life in civil service. Surely, the boundaries are so distinct that the construction of roads, maintenance of roads, garbage collection in an urban authority can never be the responsibility of a district council! There will never arise a situation where a district council would go there to facilitate.  

The equipment, which the Central Government gives to the district council, is one of those things I am talking about. Since these people benefit abundantly from the Central Government, an urban council, which has to buy its own equipment and actually cannot even afford it, should not be over-burdened with the little transfer. This money is not much. Most town councils could even have just one daily market from which it is supposed to collect revenue, and you compare it to the district councils with hundreds of markets! Some sub-counties have as many as five markets from which district councils collect money. You cannot compare those rural markets and auctions to the urban markets. I have a lot of reservation on that, and if it is really a token of establishing good relationship, then that diplomatic mission is missed.

I like the report where it emphasised the linkages between the hierarchy of Local Governments. But I think there is a serious omission. I remember when we debated the Local Government Act here, I was one of those who opposed the membership of Members of Parliament to district councils. But I have learnt, with a lot of bitter lessons, the degree of sabotage of programmes of Members of Parliament that abound in these local councils; it is abhorring. 

Most Members of Parliament will recall that when they went for my fundraising, hardly any member of the local authorities attended. They just did not attend, they even told the local people not to contribute towards that fundraising. The kind of relationship we have with Ministers is fantastic. That is not obtaining at that level. The district council may even try to sabotage any assistance a Member of Parliament solicits from the central Government to deliver services in his constituency. I have a typical scenario and a typical case. 

I have written to the Ministry of Local Government and the NRM Secretariat about this sabotage. And it is very serious. Now with insight, and very regrettably, I even want to advocate that we must improve the linkage between Members of Parliament and the local authorities in whatever small way. Even if it came to a token statement that Members of Parliament should be invited to participate in the budget discussions of the district, municipal and sub-county councils, and also to participate in scrutinising of the audit reports or the Public Accounts Committee reports to these councils. I think some kind of statement of that nature would be useful.  

I am glad I have a witness here who knows how much I have been suffering from this kind of sabotage, and it is really most unfortunate, most unpatriotic. As we approve the Political Organisations Bill and move into a multiparty politics, such a situation would be even more complicated. If at the moment, with all of us legally Members of the Movement, those of us who subscribe to multiparty spirit would suffer from that kind of sabotage. Unfortunately, these are engineered and encouraged by the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). Since the RDCs are part of the Local Government Act, I think it will not be good for me to touch on them in this matter as well. 

So I think I am now inclined to support, although not a very, very strong provision for allowance of Members of Parliament to be involved with activities of the district, urban and sub-county councils. I do it with a lot of hesitation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you should wind up.

DR.OKULO EPAK: I shall wind up, Mr. Speaker. The role of the Chief Administrative Officers (CAO) was a very, very difficult debate in the Constituent Assembly. In fact, it was a matter of compromise between the CAOs and the RDCs. The opinion then was that if the CAOs could be appointed centrally and posted to districts, then there would be no need for RDCs. Again I was one of those who insisted that a local authority must employ its own personnel and discipline them. But the way these district councils descended on the their civil servants is really bad. It was as if they all go there to fight them. 

I made this remark here last time that these are returning officers. They become Returning Officers of the Electoral Commission and some of these chairmen or councillors come with the idea that these Returning Officers were against them during the elections. The same thing happens with sub-county chiefs. 

So these people are suffering by being exposed to the electoral processes of people who are going to become their bosses. Most of them have had very little experience in civil service career and would like to treat these civil servants as if they are their household properties. I think something ought to be done to improve the relationship to a more practical, useful and permanent relationship between the top civil service in the districts and the councillors. We are here as Members of Parliament but we do not bother at all about permanent secretaries. I do not think Ministers even do that, and Heads of Department, and this standard should be copied.  We have a Local Government Secretariat, which I must blame for having failed to instil this standard and ethics in the Local Government system. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MRS.BIGIRWA BERNADETTE (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have thanked the Committee Members for doing a good job. 

I will touch on two or three points, one of which, is the issue of MPs not being ex-officio members of the district council. Last time when we were debating the Local Government Act, some of us felt strongly that there should be a linkage but some Members, especially Members of the Front Bench, opposed it saying that we were going to meddle in the affairs of the local councils. But experience has now shown that it is very, very important that we have a linkage with the local councils. I have held consultations with councillors in my district and they are not opposed to it.  

Recently, we had a problem within our council and the councillors were blaming us for not coming in and assisting to mediate. We told them that we were part of the council. How could we come in and mediate? But eventually we mediated and things have now cooled down, but, of course, it had no legal basis. We were doing it almost on ad hoc basis. 

So, I hope now there will be a change of heart for us to be able to have linkages with the district. Even as hon. Okulo Epak was saying, sometimes you solicit for assistance from the centre and when it reaches the district, because there is no co-ordination, we do not tell them what we are doing and they do not tell us what they are doing. It is just confusion. 

We had a case in our district where some ambulances were given to the health centres. When they reached the district, the Social Service sector decided to re-allocate them to hospitals against the wishes of the centre. By the time we went to cool down the situation, there were already a lot of tempers rising within the council. So, I still feel strongly that we should have a change of heart and maybe provide an Amendment to the effect that we become ex-officio members of the councils (Interruption.).

PROF.KAGONYERA: Thank you hon. Bigirwa for giving way. I am one of those people who opposed the membership of Members of Parliament in the councils and I was on the Backbench not on the Front Bench. But the clarification I am seeking from hon. Bigirwa is this – and she is an experienced decentralised leader. She has told us that the MPs went to Bushenyi, and she used the word  ‘mediate’. Surely, if you are already a member, how can you mediate? Could she help us establish how the Members of Parliament can have some relationship with the Local Governments but without being members? My fear is, if she has said that they went to mediate, you cannot mediate when you are already member. You are a part of the problem. That is the explanation I want, Mr. Speaker.

MRS.BIGIRWA: To answer hon. Kagonyera, actually, if we had been ex-officio members in the council, it would not have happened. We would have seen right from the beginning; the council would not have reached that level of almost exploding. And all the time we could see the developments and what was happening but because we were not part of it, we were restrained until it almost exploded. So if we had been there we would have followed the scenarios and we would have been able to advise appropriately.

I would also like to touch on the qualifications. Again, when we were debating the 1997 Local Government Act, there were strong feelings against qualifications, although some of us felt that they were very important.  With the experience that we have had after the elections of the Local Councils, a lot of money is injected into capacity building. You can only have capacity building if a person is able to learn and has got the basic, minimum qualifications. So you find that in a sub-county where the councillors, including the chairpersons, are of a higher calibre, it was very easy for them to internalise and make their work plans. But then you find another sub-county dragging behind to an extent that when we had the Local Government Development Fund, some counties were actually not ready to absorb it. I hope this time we are going to be firm and have at least the qualifications of the chairman to be able to understand what is happening in their surroundings.

I also saw in the Amendments Clause (11)(f) which says that ‘in case of a Chairperson, failure to call a Council meeting for more than three months without reasonable cause’, that is when he is supposed to be removed from office. We have a problem in my district whereby graduated tax is at only two per cent. Because of that it is impossible for the chairperson to call a meeting. You know very well that these councillors have now kind of commercialised the sittings. Without an allowance they will not come for a meeting. If they come and there is no allowance, the chairperson will have a problem. There can even be a vote of no confidence that day. So I do not know how we can protect a chairperson in such a case where they are supposed to be remunerated from the graduated tax and yet there is no money that is being collected. In Bushenyi we are collecting about two per cent from the whole district.

I am happy that these Amendments now provide for –(Interruption)

MR.PINTO: I thank my colleague for giving way. I am seeking clarification about the two per cent that is collected in Bushenyi. For our published knowledge, Bushenyi is one of the prosperous districts, or it is supposed to be. But as a marker, could the Member assist us to understand; is it due to inherent poverty? Is it a seasonal constraint that there has been no production? What is the cause? Two per cent merely means that you are not collecting any taxes. I mean, with two per cent you cannot run anything! What is the cause, because this may be true in other districts? Could I please have this clarification from the hon. Member?

MRS.BIGIRWA: Mr. Speaker, I have not yet carried out a research to find out why, but I am just putting across the fact. So I would not be able to give you the right answer now.

I was just going to touch on the elections of women councillors. During the last election, there was lining and it created a lot of confusion. In some instances the elections had to be postponed several times because there was no quorum because there had to be two thirds or half of people to vote. I am so glad that at least there will be secret ballots now. That one will not inconvenience them like last time because in some counties it took almost a whole month before the women councillors could be elected.

Finally, on the qualifications of commissions, especially the District Service Commission, you find that the chairperson may have qualifications yet some members do not. I do not know how they even arrive at a decision when they are interviewing because you look at the qualifications of some of the members and the experience have had, it is almost not there. But maybe because of politics they found themselves there. So I would strongly recommend that on Commissions, Commissions also should have the minimum qualifications. I thank Mr. Speaker.

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you Mr. Speaker, initially I did not want to contribute to this debate but it was the hon. Member from Bugungu who has instigated me to say something here (Interruption.).

MR.LUKUMU: Bugungu is no longer an administrative unit neither is it a constituency just like Busoga is not. So the county I represent is called Bulisa, although it is predominantly inhabited by people called Bagungu.

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I am proud that I said Bugungu because I still believe that you will never change your blood from being a Mugungu and you are still a Mugungu much as you are the hon. Member for Bulisa. I apologise if I have not named properly.

I think there are weaknesses in our administrative structure right from the district to the Gombololas. We have tended to politicise administrative jobs like CAO and Gombolola chief. I think these jobs are supposed to be accountable for what goes on in terms of development and finances at the Gombolola and district level. But if a Gombolola chief is going to answer only the whims of popularity, then we are going to miss the target of development. 

I think we must separate the administrative line and say that a CAO is a professional person and is answerable professionally to other people who also understand what professionalism means. This is what I expected the chairman of this Committee to bring forward. That we must separate a professional person like a medical or veterinary doctor rendering services to the people at sub-county level in the district. If we start judging them on our political will or popularity of performance, we are going to throw away all the resources being sent to the sub-county or district. Because it is only the popularity, whether it is good or bad as long as it is popular for the day, that is what is going to be the base of decision. 

I think we have to revisit this and make sure the professional people in the whole hierarchy, either administrative professionally, or financial or medical or engineering, are given a line of performance and they should be ethically answerable for this specifically as a separate line. I beg that we should not have a lot of chaos when a Chief Administrative Officer is not performing. It should not be the politicians only to say.   It should be somebody on ethical performance rather than political will. I would like to – (Interjection) 

MR.TOSKIN: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like the Member to clarify to me. The CAO, for example, is supposed to implement Council resolutions. Is it not, therefore, the Council, which should know whether what they passed has been implemented or not? How then can they avoid judging whether the CAO has performed or not?  

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Yes, I will answer you. If I go to a hospital with a complaint of the body, surely it is not the popular will of my relatives or my family members to tell the doctor that this man should stay in the hospital. It should be the professional person to tell the Council that this is what should be done.  

MR.LUKUMU: I seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor. Does he, for example, think Committees like the Public Accounts Committee, which are comprised of politicians should not go to supervise or monitor activities of public institutions like hospitals or even Ministry of Works where he could have been working one time? Does he not think that the competence of such Committees comprised of politicians is necessary to ensure that these state institutions, whether they are composed of professionals or not, should be monitored?

DR.NKUUHE: Following the example of a doctor, suppose the doctor happens to embezzle the money that the patients paid, will it not be in order for the Hospital Administrator, who is not a doctor, to call that doctor to order?

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Yes, I am not saying that the politicians in the whole set up have no role. They have a role but they are not the only ones who have a say on the issues at hand. What I am trying to say is that earlier on, one of them who is here, I think it was hon. Okulo Epak, said that the Permanent Secretaries have performed very well. They are not being ridiculed at that level.  They are censured according to the Public Service Standing Orders. So I am saying that we should also limit even the lower cadres to the same state so that we have harmony in performance of Government affairs.  

The second point I would like to draw the attention of the Members is the issue of urban centres and town councils contributing money to the county or to the district. There is a town board in my constituency. I do not know why the Ministers refused to change it to a town council because I am being forced to demand for a district if that is the only way I can get a town council. 

Why should a town council send money to the county when the money, which is being sent to that county has not been accounted for, for the last three years? Money is being sent by taxpayers from the different sub-counties to the county and nothing shows what that money is doing and you are now asking a small town council to send money to that county, to do what? I think you have to clarify to me what that money is going to do in order for us to contribute that money to the town council. In fact, a county is actually an administrative unit. It does not handle money. So why are we sending money to the town council when they do not even have an account for the county? Because the money has got to honour – he cannot tender, he cannot do what, so why are we sending the money to the county for that matter? I would like clarification.

On the issue of qualifications, I think this is where I wanted to clarify the hon. Member from Bulisa that it is very unfortunate for us to start taking paper qualifications as the criterion for judging the performance of politicians. I think there is no -  (Interjection) –

MR.MED KAGGWA: I thank you Mr. Speaker and the member for giving way. Do I recall the very member holding the Floor wanting to set qualifications for Presidency and now he is the same member saying that paper qualifications should not arise? Could he explain further?  I thank you.

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Unless you crosscheck with the Hansard, I do not think I tried to set the standards for the President of Uganda. What I am trying to say here is that even your grandfather who was just a Muswezi like my grandfather, who had never been inside a classroom, defended the territory of Uganda against the colonialists who even had books of 1000 years. 

So, for you to say that our grandfathers or those who never entered classrooms do not have any intelligence to make decisions about their political future is wrong. We should look into the person more carefully than just paper qualifications. We know guys who have four, five degrees who are worse than somebody who has never been inside a classroom. I think we must focus on the criteria for judgement. We are looking for the family background, personal discipline, behaviour, and we should maybe ask somebody to be trained, to pass through certain examinations. People say, ‘ah the man can perform’ rather than looking at “O” and “A” level qualifications. I think this is pathetic.

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the chairperson at sub-county level is the political head of the sub-county and must ensure implementation of Government programmes and monitor the accountability therein. The recommendations that the Committee has advanced to the House actually came from the Local Governments themselves. Realising the inadequacies and the amount of fraud that has taken place due to the inadequate capacity at Local Government level; the Committee thinks it is prudent that we listen to the players on the ground and help them to put a legislative framework to protect the interests of the sub-county. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: I am seeking clarification from the Member holding the Floor with regard to the imputation that education is not important. At whatever level, that is, if “O” level is a superstructure of academic knowledge acquired from primary seven. Education at “A” level is a superstructure of academic growth from “O” level and the University degree will be considered a superstructure of academic attainment above “A” level.  Could the member give clarification as to how he perceives education being irrelevant in the management of our society? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but I think what the hon. Member is saying, if he had the opportunity to amend the Constitution, he would delete anything referring to education qualification. I think that is what he is saying.

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Yes of course, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will start by answering hon. Okumu Ringa.  Okumu Ringa is a highly educated man. He was once holding the franchise of Peugeot in Uganda. He actually failed to perform on that franchise -(Laughter)- and somebody who is much less in intelligence by the name of Gordon Wavamuno is still running the franchise of Spear Motors. I am not bristling to him this -(Order, Order)- what I am saying here is that when you are looking for quality by the management – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member you are out of order because this is a personal attack. We are not on personal attacks of anybody.  

PROF.KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  The Speaker is in charge not anybody else. I was irked by what the hon. Member said about the person who is not a Member of this House and he is not able to come here and defend himself.  

Two, the hon. Member is not able to tell this House whether he has carried intelligence tests on hon. Okumu Ringa and the person he referred to, and has been able to establish that that person is less intelligent than hon. Okumu Ringa. Therefore, is the hon. Member in order on those accounts to make such an utterance about a person who cannot defend themselves in this House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already said the hon. Member is undoubtedly out of order.

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I apologise, Mr. Speaker, for having branched into that sort of discussion and I withdraw what I was saying. But the point I was trying to emphasise was very simple, that we should not equate education per se. I was trying to make an appeal that even if somebody is not very highly educated, that person can be a leader and use people who have been professionally trained. That is why I think some of the biggest businessmen in the world may not have degrees or “O” level certificates, but they can be good chairmen of a big board in the whole world. I think that is the point. I am sorry to have mentioned my colleague because we have been in this type of business with him for some time!

I would like to wind up by saying that I agree that MPs will have a role. It is important at this stage for the Local Government Bill to address the issue of what the role of MPs is in the districts, and how we are going to relate. I do not agree that the best way of MPs relating with these districts is by us becoming ex-officios. I think this is going to do more harm than good. But certainly I agree that at this stage of amending this Local Act, there is now space for us to clearly define what our role should. But our role should not be that of ex-officials. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS.BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the Committee on Local Government and Public Service for bringing back this Local Government Act. This Act was passed in a hurry and a number of issues were not fully exhausted. I am happy that it has been brought back.

I have three important issues to raise regarding the constituency I represent and some in general. First, I would like to comment on the Executive Committee of the district and sub-county council. When we are debating this Local Government Bill, we Members representing people with disabilities persuaded this House to include Secretary for persons with disabilities. That time we failed, and we said, “Okay let us see what is on the ground with time”. 

I have been to my constituency in various districts, people with disability are not represented anywhere among the secretaries. There is social service, gender, youth, and rehabilitation Committees, which do not cater for the needs of persons with disabilities. As a result, the issues of people with disabilities are not adequately addressed. It is only in districts where people with disabilities managed to be on the Executive through their own efforts that are able to put across the issues of people with disabilities. Where people with disabilities are not on the Executive, their issues are left out. For example, in Apac, they do not know where to put people with disabilities because it is not mentioned anywhere.  They are saying may be the CAO will think of where to put them. Some say, let them be on the Health Committee, others say let them be on Rehabilitation. We do understand that issues of people with disabilities cut across sections, but there must be somebody to remind the different sections about them.

We have a good example here in our Executive Committee at the national level. We have a Department of people with disabilities. Our issues are fully addressed. Why not have the similar structures at the district and sub-county councils?

I am happy that in the report we are increasing the number of secretaries depending on the size of the district. I am not sure whether they will give one Secretary for persons with disabilities. I am therefore, -(Interruptions)

MR.NASASIRA: Mr. Speaker, I want to inform hon. Baba Diri that we have put that into consideration in Amendments; that in these Statutory Bodies like Tender Board, District Service Commission and even on the Executive, at least one person should be represent people with disabilities.

MRS.BABA DIRI: Okay, that one is fine, but we would love to have a Secretary for people with disabilities to address issues of people with disabilities fully.  

The next issue is the conditional grants from the Central Government to the Local Governments. Our people with disabilities do not benefit from these conditional grants because it is stated clearly that this money is for roads, housing, communication, and education, but does not specify issues of disability. The problem is people do not understand that disability cuts across all these sectors, i.e. health, housing and education all have an element of disability. The problem is that the local authorities do not understand that. As a result they do not apportion money for issues of persons with disabilities in the various sectors. 

I am, therefore, requesting this House that as we amend the Local Government Act, a certain fraction of conditional grants must be given to address issues of disability in all sectors. If you are talking of roads, some amount of money should be allocated to ensure that we have got wide pavements for people with disability to move around. In education we need a certain fraction to address issues of people with disability such as accessibility and educational equipment. If this is written in the Local Government Act, definitely, it will be implemented and we shall benefit from the conditional grants.

Another important issue I would like to mention concerns the welfare of the Local Councillors in general. The Local Government Act is clear that when you are working you have to resign from your work because you cannot be a decision-maker at the same time an implementer. Well, that is fine. But when a person has been a teacher and he has no other source of income and he becomes a councillor, he resigns being a teacher and does not get any money at the end of the month. Paying school fees for his children and maintaining the family becomes a problem and yet as a councillor you have to be presentable; you have to dress well. Can you put a provision here to ensure that each district allocates a monthly salary for councillors so that they have something to depend on?  

A good example is here in Parliament. We have been surviving on Shs.60,000 but when we saw things were difficult we worked for ourselves and we got a reasonable salary. I think the same thing should be done to the Local Councillors.

Lastly, people with disabilities who are educated are very few. Some of them are teachers, others are nurses, but when this issue of people who are employed resigning from their jobs came up, many employed councillors with disabilities left the council. We feel that affirmative action should be exercised in this area because if you are disabled and a Councillor, you get money only when there is a sitting. If there is no sitting you have no money at all. As a result people who are coming to represent us are not well versed and educated enough to put across our issues. Therefore, we should consider this issue concerning persons with disability so that those who are working can still be councillors. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.TOSKIN BARTILLE (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to thank the Committee for seeing it fit for these Amendments come in at this time. The failure of the Local Governments to do their job in a number of ways has been blamed on the Members of Parliament who passed the Local Government Law. Some of the things, which have been addressed, are actually pertinent. But I believe and I hope the Committee will still continue, only that our term is soon ending. We should still continue to look at some of those very touchy issues, which have risen out of the Local Government Act. 

The issue I want to start with is the harmonisation of the relationship of the civil servants and the Local Governments. This one has been exemplified by the fact that so many cases have gone to the courts of law to try to resolve the issues of civil servants, particularly, the CAOs and their Local Governments. I think the problem starts right from the framing of the Constitution whose framers at the time thought that by the time of establishing Local Governments, we would have already built enough capacity for the Local Governments to be neutral enough to appoint civil servants who would be able to work for the districts without being biased by political affiliations and so on. But this has proved to be a serious problem, it has been proved that it is very difficult for these civil servants to be influenced politically and as such there are many problems. 

One of the problems is the victimisation of the civil servants where the CAOs fail to compromise or to be compromised by the Local Governments. Definitely they have found in problems in performing their duties. Some of them have been illegally and summarily dismissed and their only way out has been to go to court. And you know what court procedures are; they take so long and consequently paralyse the activities of the districts. 

The other problem has been the CAOs who insubordinate the council and there is nobody to mediate other than the courts of law. This has frustrated the work in the districts. It is upon this Parliament to look into this matter. Whether it means amending the Constitution to allow the appointment of some of these top civil servants from the centre, it would be necessary to do so for purposes of harmonising the running of the districts. 

There is also the question of qualification of the boss. I still believe that the appointment of the chairmen of these boards have also caused problems in many districts.  Most of them have been appointed on political affiliation and in so doing they have not done their job neutrally and this has affected the whole appointment of other cadres of civil service up to the sub-county chiefs. If the chairman had been appointed from the centre, then perhaps things would be different. People would have been considered for jobs on merit but now one must affiliate to some politicians in order to access a job.  

On top of that, the issue of tribalism has also come in, in the appointment of civil servants. It is very difficult for a civil servant to move from one district to another, in spite of the professional qualifications a person may have. The only salvage is for the Committee to come in and put a minimum qualification of 'A' level or diploma, which these people should have some. This may help to solve a few of the problems civil servants have been facing. 

When you get District Service Committees composed of retired Grade II teachers, some outstanding opinion leaders, and they are supposed to interview doctors or engineers, you can see the whole mess. I think we should have people with some minimum qualification who can be able to comprehend what happens in the various professional lines so that proper people can be appointed into these positions. I have had some experience personally as a member of the Public Accounts Committee as we moved around to various districts. We found people who could not understand the auditing process yet they are members of the Public Accounts Committee! They are supposed to understand the Auditor General's report and interpret it - you can see the mess. So it is necessary that these people have some minimum qualification so that we can appoint people who can truly study the books, interpret the Auditor General's report and be able to come up with solutions to the problems which have been addressed.

Hon. Baba Diri has hinted on the quality of district councillors or even councillors at the lower level. What disturbed the quality was the issue of not allowing people who are employed by the Local Governments to also serve on the Local Councils. When this one was implemented, almost all district councils lost some very useful, very articulate councillors because they were either primary school teachers or being employed Local Government. This has affected the quality of councillors at the districts; and because we did not also tag a qualification on the district councillors, then you can see the sort of thing, the people have low qualifications and their output is equally poor. I do not know whether the Committee will have to consider this also.  

Finally, I support the view that de-linking the Members of Parliament from their district councils has had a very negative impact on the business in the districts. In many in Kapchorwa district, for example, we have no direct role as Members of Parliament. There is no way we can come in despite the numerous political problems at the district. The local people want to call on Members of Parliament to step in but there is no way we can enter and solve the problem. So, we have also become observers, we have watched and seen things go wrong, and this has not helped us at all. If we have the power to institute this, I think this is the right time to do it.  

When we were debating the Local Government Bill, we did not know how things would move. When we talked about the qualifications, we thought we were so patriotic but now the mess has come. When we thought that by Members of Parliament participating at the district councils we would be interfering with them but we have seen the problem. Since we are now evaluating the performance of the Local Government Act, we should be frank and brave enough to amend so that we can rectify things, which have gone wrong. I want to thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have only two Members who want to contribute. I suggest that we start tomorrow with hon. Chebet then hon. Okumu Ringa, then the chairperson and the Minister will wind up. Okay, then hon. Medi Kaggwa and -(Interjections)- Okay, I will record you but that is how I am going to - The line will be hon. Okumu Ringa, hon. Medi Kaggwa, hon. Butele, hon. Sembajja, hon. Chebet and then the chairperson and the Minister. I think with that we come to the end of today’s proceedings. I thank you for having sat for so long and for having passed the other Bill, now we are proceeding very well with this one. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.38p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7th February 2001 at 2.30p.m.)

 

