Wednesday, 6 February 2008

Parliament met at 2.27 in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I thank you for having turned up yesterday in big numbers after recess. I do not know what has happened now, but I must say, hon. Pulkol is watching you and it seems from the reaction I receive from people, they believe in his report and his assessment. Please, let us not give them an opportunity to negatively assess us. 

I want to appeal to you Members; let us be honest with our electorate. Let us guide them about the procedures we use here rather than the electorate guiding us with the procedures. I think we have the duty to inform the members how things are done here.

There was a term used, “Kusimba kuuli”, that is to block somebody when you are playing on the field. There must be a ball on the field before you can do that. You cannot block another player when there is no ball to play. Our duty is to make laws and we can only make laws when the Bills are with us. That is Article 91. So, you cannot legislate outside the Chamber. The Bill must come here and then you reject, you assess, or you change. This is what we should tell the people who elected us that that is the only way to do it. But if you mislead them saying, “Well, we can block a Bill which has not come here” they may believe that you are telling them the truth when it is not. You are just bluffing them. So, please I appeal to you to guide our constituents as to how we transact business here. Thank you very much.

2.30
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising up on the issue of great public importance, which concerns the instrument I laid on Table yesterday and I did make preliminary submissions on it. I would wish to proceed to make my case on this issue, which is of great national importance and it directly touches the basic fundamental rights and indeed our obligation as Members of Parliament to always interact with the electorate.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, I did not want to interrupt you. In fact, I had expected you to proceed with this business but what do you want to do with that instrument? Do you want it to be studied? Do you want it changed? Don’t you think you would bring it in form of a motion of what you want actually to be done on the instrument? But you can proceed. I only thought it is better if you can prepare a motion, where you state what you want to be done on the instrument so that even your friends here can meaningfully contribute to that kind of motion. I do not know – it is up to you.

MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is an instrument which most Members of Parliament may not know about yet. It therefore makes it very difficult for them to discuss it if they do not know the content. Statutory instruments are made by Ministers. Parliament may not know about them but they affect the day to day lives of everybody. Sometimes, we authorise Ministers to make these instruments without consulting. Sometimes we ask them to table them so that we know the content. I think this issue would offer us a very good basis for discussing this whole issue of statutory instruments in detail. 

The issue he is raising is urgent but I think it would be in the best interest of the country if it came in form of a motion to say it is something which should be either rescinded or whatever and then Members discuss it fully in light of other statutory instruments, which are everywhere and affect us, but Members and even the country do not know about it. If my colleague could take the cue from the Speaker and find a way of bringing it in a manner which will make it discussed by everybody, it would be very good for all of us.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard about this statutory instrument but I have not touched it with my hands. I have not read it. I think it would be better if this document was circulated to Members of Parliament to study so that when it is brought here, we are all familiar with the document and give our input. At this stage, I do not see how I am going to participate in the debate because I do not know what the document is all about. I have just read about it, I heard about it. Thank you. 

DR STEPHEN MALINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, you really took time to explain to us procedures in Parliament. I do not think there is anything so important and so abnormal as to have made us divert from the normal parliamentary procedure. The Bill is now in the committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No! Honourable, maybe let me explain to those who were not here. Yesterday, honourable Member for Kampala Central wanted to raise a matter of importance namely, statutory instrument which was signed by the Minister of Internal Affairs concerning holding rallies in gazetted places in Kampala and other municipalities. He thinks that it is unfair and therefore he wanted us to debate it.

But maybe it was the first time for Members to know about its existence because it had come earlier but I had not seen it myself. So, he tabled it here and advised that maybe it is better when all Members have seen it so that he can move to do what he wants to do. Apparently, I think Members have not yet got the copies but I will ask the Clerk to use public funds to photostat this instrument and issue to the Members.

Now, the point was that he wanted to move a motion and I thought that it should be a formal motion where we will know what he wants so that when Members start contributing to it, they also have an idea as to how they can help the situation. So, the contribution from hon. Kawanga was to assist him to make his decision on that one, and so was the other one of hon. Okello-Okello. 

The Bill is now with us; so, you can kusimba kuuli (you can block it) and so forth because the thing is now on the football pitch. But this is a different subject. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate that the ghost of yesterday’s debate on the Land (Amendment) Bill is still haunting the minister -(Laughter)- but having said that, I do appreciate the guidance given by honourable members and yourself. But unfortunately, if I stay this matter, or if this matter is stayed pending presentation of the formal motion, it creates another predicament that some of us were already victims of this instrument and we are in a situation which is difficult in nature because we cannot access the electorate.

Personally, it is a bit difficult for me to do so. So, I do not know; with this kind of debate, if I could raise it as a matter of great national importance and urgent in nature, the debate can ensue from that presentation and subsequent to that, we can get guidance from here on what can be done. Parliament can pronounce itself on this matter and it can be couched –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What I am saying is that, we can dispense with a time given for the notice. But what you should do is to put something in writing directing us as to what you want us to do, so that when Members get the copy because I think the clerk has heard - he has probably started the process of producing the copies. But you write something so that they have a copy; you do not have to give many hours. You have already given a notice that you want to move on that motion but please, put it down and the prayer that you want to make. That is all, but as you said, they are not ready and they said that they do not have it; will they be able to assist you meaningfully? 

2.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank you for the advice you have given my honourable colleague, and also the advice that we have received from our other colleagues. I know that the honourable member has been a huge victim of the statutory instrument but that should not make him do what does not help the situation. I think the advice you have given that he prepares a formal motion will be very useful. The honourable member has done very extensive research on this matter and he will be able to put the key elements of what he has researched, as a lawyer, into that motion so that we are actually even legally guided on how we will debate the matter. So, I will make an appeal to my honourable member to accept the advice you have given and to expertise his preparation to bring forth the formal motion, preferably on Tuesday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: After all, tomorrow is Private Members’ Business; you can go and work on this and give it to us.  The Clerk has been requested to get copies for Members, but you write it down. 

MR LUKWAGO: I accept that, Mr Speaker, but I am not so sure whether I will not be behind bars tomorrow. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: For what? I am appealing to those who could put you behind bars not to, until the matter has been resolved. (Laughter)
MR LUKWAGO: For your information, as I was entering here, I got information that there is a warrant over my head. Anyway, I hope I will not be behind bars by tomorrow. The copies will be available –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the Clerk is following what is going on here; he will direct the staff to produce the copy.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I raised a matter which is closely related to the question of the statutory instrument, in the sense that I did bring to your attention the problem where the Police put announcements about Parliament, and which seem to contravene the independence of Parliament and the rights of Ugandans to access Parliament without undue barrier, and you had promised that you would follow up the matter. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, today is an important day – Tarehe Sita Day- I think a number of officers and citizens are in Masindi attending this function. Therefore, I was not able to access the person I wanted to talk to, but I still remember it and I am following it up. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.44
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs has had urgent assignments out of the country. He is therefore unable to appear before this House and deliver the statement today, but we are in touch with him; he should be able to make this statement on Tuesday next week. I pray for the indulgence of this House.

2.45
MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the Leader of Government Business’ explanation but as you are ware, this is a very sensitive matter in a sense that it is not affecting Kenya alone; it is affecting our daily lives, our people. In addition to that, aware that we are moving in the East African Community spirit, issues of Kenya are so vital and actually since Parliament was scheduled to open yesterday, Government was well aware of this matter that Members of Parliament representing their people would wish to be updated and to be explained the circumstances and the way forward. So, I do not take it kindly of the minister to say that the responsible minister is away. If it was a statement, it must have been prepared and he, I am sure, is in good capacity to present that statement to this House. 

When the minister is away, the office is not on leave as well. Can the honourable minister give us a convincing explanation rather than urge us to sit back idly when we are seeing the situation getting out of hand in Kenya? Can you, Mr Speaker, request the minister not to take this country for granted? Let him come up and explain to this country what is at stake.

2.46
MR JOHN OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It seems Parliament has reconvened too early. Yesterday Parliament had to adjourn early because a number of documents were not ready.  Yesterday a promise was given on the Floor of this House that the Minister of Foreign Affairs would come today and make a statement but now we are being told that the minister is not around.  The minister has gone flying out of the country with the office. The office is here. The minister is not alone; there are others in the same ministry.  

Yesterday, there was a very important Bill tabled and everybody was here, as if the Queen was around. Mr Speaker, I expected the senior minister to come and table that important Bill. What happened? The minister apparently fled; the Leader of Government Business fled; the Vice-President fled and a junior minister took the responsibility to come and present that deadly Bill.  What is wrong with a junior minister in Foreign Affairs coming here and just read a statement prepared by civil servants in that ministry rather than being told that we are waiting for the minister who is flying somewhere?

Mr Speaker, I think this Parliament should be taken seriously. Otherwise, we waste our time here. We come here; we sit; no business to do so we adjourn and tomorrow it is the same thing. It is very unfortunate! I thank you.

2.48
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I am also equally disappointed.  This matter is not a matter of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs only. It is a matter of Government and, therefore, if a minister is not around or all the ministers are not around, Government should be able to present a position on this very important foreign affairs issue. In any case, the minister is working on behalf of the presidency.  

Mr Speaker, we are reading so many things in the media and as a country we are concerned. We read in the media that our President went to Kenya and we thought we would come and get a formal explanation. This week we are reading in the media that a peace-keeping force is being proposed and ministers of foreign affairs in the region have all gone to Nairobi and yet we are not formally informed and are, therefore, not aware of what is taking place. It is as if a decision is being taken by individuals on behalf of this country and this is completely unacceptable and really unfortunate! We should, as a country, have a common position on what is taking place in Kenya because it is affecting us. I think the Leader of Government Business should really be able.  

Yesterday another Leader of Government Business gave us a position. Today a minister, representing the Leader of Government Business is also giving us another position and yet yesterday we were given all the assurances. I think, Mr Speaker, the country needs to know what is taking place in Kenya. Even us, as Members of Parliament, we have been concerned.  We are aware that a lot of things are taking place in Kenya. We should also involve ourselves as a people and as a country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.51
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Mr Speaker, when you left Masaka and I left Arua, we came here to represent millions of people and we expect that you and I and everyone else in this House will be taken seriously. We have more than 60 ministers and we even have ministers of state in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and besides, these ministerial statements are usually prepared by technocrats. It is even a matter of at times reading it.  

Now, you and I and everybody in this House, have seen spears and arrows on people’s heads in Kenya.  We have seen mothers being slain before their children, and here we are contented and a whole well-resourced ministry fails to appear to give an explanation to our country that is yearning to discuss what is going on in Kenya. It is not going to be too long before such an issue may happen in this country, Mr Speaker.  

But what even goes further to itch is that you can gather all the courage and time to come here and tell us that the minister in charge is not around. So, why are you here for that matter? To tell us and this House that the minister is not in place and therefore the office has ceased to exist and therefore we must sit back and relax as Parliament? I think the Executive is just scratching us to censure the entire Executive because this is criminal. 

If we, as a Parliament, cannot pronounce ourselves on the issues that are happening in Kenya, and even our leadership goes ahead at times to acclaim what is going on in Kenya, how will the world see us?  This is going below our own level.  It is taking us for granted and taking your office, for that matter, Mr Speaker, as the head of this institution, for granted. And I think this must stop. The Leader of Government Business is here and he has to give us an explanation.  

Mr Speaker, now that yesterday’s Leader of Government Business has come and today’s Leader of Government Business is here, and I see them reconciling notes, I think they have an explanation to give to this country and particularly to the mothers of this country and East Africa as a community at large. Mr Speaker, you are watching them comparing notes, to me they must give us an explanation as immediately as now.  Thank you.

2.54
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Mr Speaker, you are very much aware that when this incident happened in Kenya, we as Members of the Opposition, we were very much concerned. And indeed our leader did write to you - in fact, by then we were even suggesting to reconvene Parliament before its due date. 

Mr Speaker, one of the reasons why we were asking Parliament to be reconvened was our concern about what was happening in Kenya; about the lives of Ugandans in Kenya; about even the business in Uganda being affected by what is happening in Kenya. 

Today, the Minister of Foreign Affairs is not here; even the Minister for East African Affairs who would have at least supplemented, being the minister in charge of East African affairs, is also not here. Mr Speaker, the minister in charge of Government business today is telling us that they will be able to give a statement next week.

If you read the papers today, the number of people who have died in Kenya has reached 1000. Mr Speaker, is Parliament serious? Can we really get an explanation because the Minister of Foreign Affairs has got about three or four ministers? As hon. Okello-Okello said, the junior minister yesterday tabled a very important Bill. Why then can a junior minister either in foreign or in East African affairs not be able to explain to this House? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise just to inform the House that I apologise. The Minister of Foreign Affairs was not able to present the statement today. This is because the minister, hon. Sam Kutesa, I had not known yesterday when I spoke that he was leaving for Nairobi where they are going to have an East African meeting and the summit following the Ministers of Foreign Affairs meeting. 

Hon. Isaac Musumba is in the Gulf preparing for the forthcoming organisation of Islamic conference and as all of you know, the hon. Okello Oryem is in Juba in the discussions with LRA. So, the statement was ready but because we had not had the time to organise it that is why it delayed in getting someone to present it today. But tomorrow, definitely this statement will be presented to this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Then if it is tomorrow, I think let us wait and get the statement. There is nothing more to add because it was a statement of the minister, which was supposed to be given today but it was not given. We had been told it would be given on Tuesday but now we have been told tomorrow. So, why do we not go on to other business? 

2.58
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before we went on recess on December 11 2007, this Parliament passed a resolution and the resolution was as follows: “That the relevant ministries that were charged with the preparation for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) provide the required accountability and table it before this Parliament within one month from this day.” Since then, one month has elapsed but by the time the month elapsed, we were on recess so they could not table it before Parliament. Now that Parliament is duly convened, when are these ministers going to table this kind of accountability that Parliament passed a resolution on? 

Mr Speaker, you know very well that Cabinet has a habit of disregarding resolutions of Parliament and the resolutions of Parliament are very important. If we sit here and pass resolutions and they are not going to be respected by Cabinet, then we can as well pack our things and go home. 

So now, Mr Speaker, I think we need to prevail over the ministries responsible to table what we asked for because it was a resolution of Parliament and there should not be any excuse. I need to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: I have understood the problem, I will look into it.

BILLS
 FIRST READING

THE BUSINESS, TECHNICAL, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING BILL, 2008

3.00
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training Bill, 2008” be read for the first time in Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, I also lay on Table the certificate of financial implications, duly signed by the Minister of Finance. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and subsequently report to Parliament.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA TOURISM BILL, 2007

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that “The Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007” be read for the second time. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, Uganda is a country gifted by nature! Churchill called it, “The Pearl of Africa.” To optimise the development of tourism, there is need to put in place physical infrastructure as well as the necessary legal framework.This Bill is part of that legal framework. 

The object of the Bill, Mr Speaker, is to reform, consolidate and streamline the law relating to tourism and in particular to set standards for service within the sector; to provide for licensing, regulating and controlling of the tourism sector; to give effect to the implementation of the tourism policy for Uganda, which was put in place in 2003; to reconstitute the Uganda Tourism Board and make it private sector driven; to establish a tourism development levy; to establish a tourism development fund.  The Bill designates the board as Uganda Tourism Board. 

As of now, Mr Speaker, the law on tourism is spread out in several enactments in an uncoordinated manner, hence the need to promote a new Bill to rectify the situation. 

The Bill seeks to repeal the Hotels Act Cap. 90, the Tourists’ Agents Licensing Act Cap. 100 and the Uganda Tourist Board Act Cap. 333. The Bill, however, saves the statutory instruments made under the enactments being repealed.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, part one of the Bill deals with preliminary matters namely, the commencement of the Act and its interpretation.  Part 2 of the Bill continues with the existing Uganda Tourist Board under Cap. 333, to be called the Uganda Tourism Board; the composition of the board; objects of the board, its functions and committees of the board. While part 3 generally deals with the licensing of tourists accommodation, tourism facilities and persons operating in the tourism sector and part four, deals with the supervision, monitoring and coordination of tourism. 

Mr Speaker, part 5 deals with the finances, the board provides for the establishment of the tourism development levy and the tourism development fund. It also provides for the management of the fund, the preparation of estimates and preparation of the accounts of the board, and the auditing of the accounts of the board by the Auditor- General.  

Part 6, Mr Speaker, deals with the general matters: liability of tourists’ accommodation and facility owners and operators. It also deals with the common seal of the board, annual reports, exemptions from liabilities and so forth. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, when this Bill is passed, the tourism sector will play its vital role in the development of this country.  Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, chairman of the committee- where are the Members of the committee, could you please read the report?

3.07
Mr John Kawanga(DP, Masaka Municipality): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007.

Introduction

The Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007 was read for the first time in Parliament on Thursday, 10 May 2007. The Bill was thereafter committed to the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and considered according to Rule 133(a) and Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.  The honourable members will be able to see the methodology because it is normally the one we follow.  

Objective of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to reform, consolidate and streamline the law relating to tourism and in particular to set standards for service within the sector; to provide for licensing, regulating and controlling of the tourism sector; to give effect to the implementation of the tourism policy for Uganda, 2003; to reconstitute the Uganda Tourist Board to make it private sector driven; to establish a Tourism Development Levy; to establish a tourism Development Fund.  The Bill re-designates the Board as the Uganda Tourism Board.  

As of now, the law on tourism is spread out in several enactments in an uncoordinated manner, hence the need to promote a new Bill to rectify the situation.

The Bill seeks to repeal the Hotels Act Cap. 90, The Tourists’ Agents Act, Cap 100 and the Uganda Tourist Board Act, Cap 333. The Bill, however, saves the statutory instruments made under the enactments as the Minister has indicated.

Observations

1.	First, the Bill when passed into law will help uplift the tourism sector considering its importance as illustrated below.

•	Tourism revenues currently contribute in excess of 25 percent of Uganda’s export earnings of over $320 million per annum.

•	Over 70,000 Ugandans are employed directly and indirectly in the tourism sector and this is equivalent to 16 percent of the total employed workforce.

•	Every new room accommodated creates at least one new job.

•	Every five in-bound visitors results in at least one direct job being created. 

2. 	Uganda needs and deserves an efficient, up-to-date and effective Tourism Board if the full potential of prospective growth is to be achieved in today’s competitive world.  The bill caters for the newly established Uganda Tourism Board.

	The Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007 provides the legislative framework, which will allow the board to fulfil its rightful role.  No tourism promotion can be successfully undertaken unless it is based on a quality assured set of tourism products and services put before an ever more discerning public be they in Uganda or in one of the source markets.
  
3.	It is a fact that apart from the information available on Tourism, Uganda’s web site, the most reliable source of information on Uganda’s tourism product is in a handful of other commercially produced guide books.

	None of these sources are based on a register of products and services which have been assessed and approved as meeting basic minimum standards of customer safety, health and service. Such a register can only come into being with the weight of the law behind it.

	The Bill enables and instructs the Uganda Tourism Board to set up a register of all tourism products and services and to licence operations which meet basic minimum standards. In carrying out these activities the board will create a database of all products and service and annually license them. This activity will therefore, have an on going quality assurance role for our visitors, for tour wholesaler operators within Uganda and for tour wholesalers operating overseas.  Increasingly, consumer’s protection legislation in our source markets demands that the tourism product on offer in the market place is better regulated and monitored.  In that regard, we have no choice but to act and to be seen to act as if we are to maintain growth in the sector.

	The process of registration and licensing will be undertaken at a scale of fees to be determined in consultation with the various sub sectors of the industry. The objective will be to make the process self-funding as soon as possible and therefore ensure its sustainability. 

4.	Regulations are being drafted as subject to the coming tourism law. The intention is to commence dialogue with the various sectors of the industry in an effort to reach an agreement on the implementation of the regulation as quick as possible after the passage of the Bill.
 
5.	Also significant is the creation a tourism fund and the introduction of a tourism levy.  Tourism promotion has been severely restricted in the past due to lack of funding. Had it not been for the support of donors such as the World Bank and in particular the European Union, whose soon-ending Uganda Sustainable Tourism Development Programme has been the sole source of marketing funds for the past four years, Uganda would not have achieved exposure and therefore the growth which has been acknowledged by the industry and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. 

	The idea of the introduction of a tourism levy is not new. The intention under the Bill is to have the Tourism Board recommend its introduction as a contribution to the running costs and the marketing costs of the new Uganda Tourism Board. 

	Uganda can learn a great deal from the experiences of other countries in Africa that have such skills like our neighbour, Kenya and Namibia, which has already pledged it’s help and support in developing a Ugandan version and learning from our experience. 

6.	An empowered Tourism Board as envisaged under the Bill can be instrumental with the correct strategy direction to ensure that the indigenous Ugandans also become part of the sector. Not just in terms of employment and provision of services but in terms of ownership and sharing the fruits of success. 

Subject to the proposed amendments attached here with, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Kawanga, I want to thank you for enabling us to proceed with this second reading of the Bill, and I want to thank the committee for making this report. Thank you very much. Now debate is open.

3.15
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwa):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I stand to support the motion and to say that it has taken us a bit of time. Uganda definitely, as the Minister has already said, has really a lot of opportunity. Uganda has been endowed with a lot of resources; resources really which are much better than any of the countries in Africa. But unfortunately we do not seem to have taken advantage of this at all.

Mr Speaker, the report also says that Uganda should have copied – should learn to copy from what has happened in our sister countries like Kenya and Tanzania. Indeed, these countries have really advanced so much in the tourism area and they are earning quite a lot of money out of it. But why has it taken Uganda this time?  Kenya is not far away; Tanzania is not far away! Why has it taken Uganda this time? 

Late last year, I and some other Members of this Parliament managed to visit some of the tourism areas in Tanzania. We managed to go to Lake Manyara; we visited Ngorongoro and also part of Serengeti. What struck us most was the infrastructure that has been developed in the areas of tourist interest. Something you cannot see here. All the roads leading to Kilimanjaro, to Lake Manyara, and all these areas are all tarmacked - fast class roads! And you find the tourists from outside flocking in these areas in large numbers day after day. It was something that we wondered why our Ugandan Government had not taken on. 

Mr Speaker, I come from the Mt Elgon area - really a beautiful area – where everybody goes and wonders. But there is so little that has been done towards development of tourism in that area. When it comes to climbing Mt Elgon, there are very few people who climb Mt Elgon and those who go there really suffer because the facilities are not there. It is only the Sipi Falls, which a private investor has tried to improve but there is little – no hotels, you know. 

So, when you go beyond Kapchorwa town where the tarmac stops, it becomes impossible to reach the end of the road, that is, Kapchorwa - Swam road, which is impassable. But then that is the most attractive area where you have the highest side of Mt Elgon. On the other side in Kenya, tourism is really on the high side. 

So, Mr Speaker, as I support this motion, I would like to say that it is high time that Uganda really took advantage of the benefits that God has given us. I thank you.

3.19
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support this report and I just want to confine my comments to No. 5 of the report.  I note from the report that one of the reasons or the impediments, which the tourist board was facing was lack of funding and it has commended the World Bank and the EU for having supported the little that they did. 

But I am left wondering what methods of promotion of tourism this board has been employing. I am wondering because Uganda as a country does have embassies in a number of countries in the world. I thought that these embassies would have materials from the tourism board to promote Uganda in their countries of representation. 

But, Mr Speaker, I was actually taken aback sometime in June last year when on a delegation to China we discovered that the ambassador actually did not have any materials on promoting Uganda, and the little we carried got finished since we spent two weeks visiting many places. We found that very little was known about Uganda in that country with a population of 1 billion plus.  So, if we are not doing well in tourism, it means that even the little we have we are not exploiting as we ought to.  So, I am glad that a new body is being reconstituted and one can only hope that it will do a better a job than what has been in place.  

No.5 also goes on to say that we are going to learn from our neighbours Kenya and Namibia who have done very well.  But what has stopped us learning from those neighbours? Because, I think Kenya is so near that if one really wanted to copy from them, you would not need a lot of money to be able to learn from them. So, I think something has been fundamentally wrong; it is not fair for us to keep on saying that we are gifted by nature and yet we are the only people who seem to know our gifts and we are not helping other people to know about these gifts so that we can earn from them.  

So, I am glad this has come and we pray that having passed this, it will be within the lifetime of this Parliament to see that what we are going to pass brings real benefits to Uganda in terms of tourism.  I thank you.

3.22
DR SERUNJOGI KATENDE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am standing to support the motion, and I am very glad that Uganda is now coming up with the Bill to be able to implement a policy on tourism, which was set up in 2003; and well knowing that tourism is one of the main sources of foreign exchange for Uganda. 

And also in support of this motion, I am noting very happily that one of the areas emphasised is area No. 3 regarding hotels, which actually in many cases are the backbones of tourism. I am noting that the Bill is setting up standards on the physical safety of the hotels as well as on health hazards, which could be threats to the tourists. This is very important noting that Uganda, especially at this past time of CHOGM, has had a number of hotels coming up and in these two areas, physical safety and actual safety on equipments, foods and facilities are very important if we are to keep our tourism running.  

I note that there will be annual licensing of the hotels.  But what I see as a missing peg there is the need of constant monitoring on these standards. I know that in this sort of arrangement, once one has accessed a license, one could relax on the standards and this could lead to threats and hazards. And there is nothing worse in tourism than a tourists being infected through say negligence in the hygiene standards of utensils, food and so forth. So, I propose that the area of monitoring should be emphasised. But I support the motion and thank the chairman for the report.  Thank you very much.

3.25
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and I am extremely excited that at last the Tourism Bill is being considered by this Parliament. I spent a lot of time in the tourism industry and I can tell you that with 50 percent of the world’s gorillas and 7 percent of the world’s mammals and 11 percent of the world’s birds, Uganda has no equal in the field of tourism if we took to promote it.  

I would like to put in context this information, for instance, for Members to appreciate just how much we have.  Uganda, with an area of 93,000 square miles has 1,500 bird species. The United States, with 3.6 million square miles has 600 bird species; that is how rich Uganda is in terms of bio-diversity. 

Mr Speaker, tourism can be the most important sector in this country if it is properly natured. Tourism can significantly enhance the growth of agriculture. We are trying to develop agriculture because we keep saying 80 percent of our people are employed in agriculture. We put a lot of money in agriculture to grow things to take them to Europe. Where we are taking them to Europe and America in AGOA and EBA, they have much superior products. But if we grow our tourism industry, we can bring all those people here to eat our pineapples, drink our milk, and eat our potatoes right here in Uganda. In effect, we would be importing the external market to Uganda.

Mr Speaker, during my time in this field, I visited over 50 wildlife parks around the world. And one of them that caught my imagination was a wildlife park called animal kingdom in Florida. Animal kingdom is a huge place that has a section on Africa. In that African section, they tried to create Africa in Florida. They did it so well to the extent of having potholed roads; they created potholes deliberately and they created ramshackle vehicles; I am sure the idea would be good but the appearance is ramshackled. 

I also saw them creating cobwebs in some hotels; of course the cobwebs would be plastic, not natural. But the impact is that people who do not have the time or the money, or who just want to relive Africa or to get a feel of Africa go to Animal Kingdom. Animal Kingdom actually receives 7 million visitors per year, just to go and have a feel of Africa.

So, Mr Speaker, if we have prevented – the reason I am saying this is because we tend to think that developing tourism is about spending big money, big hotels, tarmac roads and expensive things as if the Europeans would come here to see another large building which they left in the United States in the first place.

So, the challenge that we have is to be innovative and to brand Uganda, not to recreate New York in Uganda, not to recreate London in Kampala but to have Kampala, which will have its own character, which will cause people to come and see Kampala because it is Kampala which does not look like New York. 

While I am very much in support of this motion, I think that it will take more than this Bill to get us where we want to be in the world of tourism; it will take a lot of innovation. There are very many people who come to Uganda to attend workshops and seminars. I attend these workshops and see us serving sweets and mints because that is what is done in the whole world. We have saucers and beautiful China and we put in sweets and mint for people when we could actually put in coffee and brand our country as a coffee eating country. Therefore, Mr Speaker, this Bill is a good step but it is a long way off from getting us where we want to get if we will not put in a lot of innovation. 

My sister, hon. Beatrice Lagada, captured it very well and said there must be a problem if the beauty of Uganda is known only by ourselves and not the other people. I was shocked, at London Airport at the Arrivals, I saw coffee and other things from all over the world, except Uganda. We overemphasise the lack of funding but it is not the lack of funding; it is the lack of initiative and innovation. I do not know whether it is because we do not have the right people in the right places or whether it is training or whatever it is; there is a problem, which is much more than funding. We can do a lot of work with funding. Besides, even the little money we have is not always put to proper use.

Mr Speaker, I support this motion but I think that the ministry needs to do a lot more to support this motion in terms of building the tourism sector. I thank you.

3.33
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I am happy to debate this committee report. I thank the committee for having come up with some highlights, which intend to make our tourism sector more viable. The report highlighted very well that the tourism sector is able to generate funds for this country as well as give employment to our Ugandans. This emphasises the point of it being viable. The only problem is that this important sector has not tapped this wealth, which is lying idle and with this report we look at how best we cannot only get the US$ 320 million and employ only 70,000 Ugandans but more than that. 

Therefore, the idea of licensing to me is welcome and I think if we take on that, more competent firms and more competent managers in this field will be attracted to come and add value in this sector so that it is vibrant; so that the gold we have been leaving down is unearthed. I commend the committee for this proposal and I support it.

It will also help some people who, like us, think that if a resource is not well utilised- and we are there to defend it, probably instead of going to the streets we shall go into investing money so that we become stakeholders and put all our energy on how best we can get out of this. 

In addition, when they say that they are going to create a fund, I think this is welcome too. The dependence syndrome is one of the things which drag us backwards. If somebody gives you funds he has an upper hand to dictate, and if we let this important sector of ours create a fund to generate funds and it is able to meet its daily operations and costs rather than depending on hand outs, it is able to stand on its own. It will not be swung left and centre and I think that is when we shall have in place management, which will be able to say no to what is not good for the sector. I think we should all support mostly these two moves.

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to advise the ministry that they should not treat this in isolation. The tourism sector does not operate in isolation. They should cooperate under a network with other related sectors because on its own it will not be vibrant. They should network and look at - for example the forestry sector must be coordinated, the land sector will also have to come in and other related sister sectors so that if they are going to work together there will be no conflict and once there is no conflict between the related sectors, you are sure this sector will give us the money or the revenue the country has been longing for. 

And I would like to highlight this, for example, if you looked at untapped resources in the tourism sector, which I think with this report should quickly be re-examined, I have highlighted of course my baby Mabira forest, the water bodies, like Karuma falls; if we really went out and gave professional people to manage these sites, we shall go a long way.

Lastly, I would like to draw the attention of this ministry to the threats posed to the wildlife and the tourism sector at large. We have so many natural resources in place from which we can earn revenue and employ people but they are all under threat from various factors that include industrialisation. For example, Queen Elizabeth National Park is being threatened by Hima Cement Factory, which is threatening the eco-system around the park. 

There should be a harmonised position that industrialisation should not destroy the very resources we are trying to tap and earn money or revenue from. There is also the example of Mabira Forest, which I will keep on emphasizing because it has potential for tourism. If we put all our efforts together and license this place for tourism, you will find that the revenue earned will be more than what we can earn from sugar. 

Let us all look at the threats to these resources and let the ministry quickly address them because you cannot invest in a resource, which is being threatened and which will disappear after a short time. This is a resource, which can keep us going longer than industries. These industries also rely on natural resources. This is my humble submission and I ask that we support this report while harmonizing the position that we need to earn maximally from our natural resources. Thank you.

3.41
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the acting committee chairperson for presenting the report. I am in support of this tourism day because I think that guided by the Bill, we will be able to deal with policy issues and work towards actual implementation. Before I contribute to the report, let me lament on the Floor of this House. The last time I tried to visit the Uganda Tourist Board, I found them in a basement somewhere; I do not remember the name of the building but that is the face of tourism in Uganda. The office is situated in a basement. Maybe now the honourable minister will tell us that they have secured money and shifted them to a good building. 

What I really want to say is that if we are to benefit, we must take tourism very seriously. As long as we continue to treat tourism lightly and expect it to generate money for us, it will not. As a country we must put our money where our mouth is. I will give you a comparison. Available data from Kenya points to the fact that the Tourist Board in Kenya gets about KShs 1 billion to run its limited operations. As a result of their activities, Kenya gets about KShs 60 billion from tourism. But we are keeping the Uganda Tourist Board in a basement so that nobody can see them yet despite this, they are able to generate for you US $320 million! I believe that if we bring them out of that basement, give them a face and funding, we will be able to get more money from tourism.

One thing that I would like to see after the passing of this Bill is funding being made available to the ministry for promotion. The only thing I have heard the few times I have gone abroad is the statement, “Uganda, gifted by nature” and that is all. If you walk into Entebbe or any other part of this country, it is as if we do not have potential for tourism. Therefore, as long as there is no aggressive marketing strategy or promotion, people will continue to come and go as if they did not visit this country despite all the potential that it has. 

Furthermore, I do not see the involvement of the masses in matters concerning tourism. Some years back there was talk about eco-tourism but I do not know what happened. I do not see communities doing much. I would like to urge Government to lift tourism from the level of chance and make it a priority sector. It will be heart warming to come to this House next budget season and see Government proposals to this effect and the outcome. 

The way we treat agriculture in this country is proof enough as to why we are not getting much from the sector and the same is happening to the tourism sector. By passing this Bill, we will be giving them the paper work that they need but a Bill without sufficient funding is not going to help the ministry at all. There should be a deliberate effort concerning funding as well. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.46
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I stand to support the motion brought forward by the Minister of Tourism. I would like to echo my colleagues’ worries and fears about the ministry. In spite of the fact that the ministry generates revenue for this country, it is in bad shape. When the report was being presented, it was mentioned that tourism contributes revenue in excess of 25 percent. I am worried, however, because the permanent secretary of the ministry mentioned to the committee – and what was in the press was true - that our tourism sector, or the ministry is highly indebted to the World Tourism Organisation and therefore is about to be struck off the list of the subscribing members. 

I do not know if we shall manage as a country to market ourselves as we say we are gifted by nature when we are single handed. I thought it would be better for us to market ourselves when we are united with other countries. But if we are generating this much and we cannot even subscribe to the organisation that is supposed to help market us, then I am worried. 

I just want the minister to possibly clarify - as he clears the other concerns by hon. Alaso - on whether it is true that we are about to be struck off the list of the subscribing members to the World Tourism Organisation. 

Then like other Members have said, this Bill would be rendered irrelevant if for sure the tourism sector is not accorded the attention it deserves. This is a sector from which we are generating resources but if you compare the appropriations given to this sector with other departments, then you realise that little attention is given to it. 

I read the Appropriation Bill, 2007 and on page 2 of the Bill you realise that the Tourism sector is given Shs 10.2 billion only as compared to the Defence sector, which is given more than Shs 390 billion and yet this is a cost sector if I may call it so. The Tourism sector is helping us to generate some revenue and we are giving very little attention to it. I humbly request that due attention is given to this sector as we look forward to getting more revenue from it. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

5.50
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity this day that we are debating a very important Bill as reported by the committee. I want to thank the committee for the good job done and for a precise report on the Bill. This is a very important sector definitely contributing to our economy but looking at the report, it looks like we as a country have invested very little in the industry. The little achievement that is being registered now is on the basis of a contribution from the World Bank and the European Union. 

This earning of US $320 million from the sector is our own achievement and our own revenue, but I want to know exactly in what area these funds have been invested because for a long time, even the funds that we received from the World Bank and the European Union were just to promote the industry; no establishments and no infrastructure; and I know that on page 1 of the report under the object of the Bill, we are expected to hand over the industry to the private sector. It is supposed to be a board, which will make it private sector-driven, but this has become a slogan. 

I remember when the Ministry of Agriculture wanted to promote the fisheries industry, in a way they wanted to hand over Lake Victoria to some investor, and the people who are living in Kalangala expressed fears that if the whole lake was handed to the private sector, their survival would be at stake. I, therefore, want to know what section of the industry will be handed over to the private sector. 

Out there we know the hotel industry is now in the hands of the private sector. Even when the law under Uganda Hotels Act is being repealed, we are not yet sure of the status in which this law was put in place and how the hotel industries performed and how they are performing now. I, therefore, want to know from the committee and the minister what it is out there that will be handed over to the private sector. Is it the animals? Is it the parks? Is it the lakes? Is it the hot springs or we are going to have certain areas, which should be clarified to us, that will be a preserve of the private sector? The private sector definitely will go in for profit making. 

You can see that the hotels are mushrooming in Kampala. Upcountry, the local communities are busy constructing only lodges and small eating rooms, which cannot be able to attract foreigners as tourist sites. I would like to know exactly: which components from this industry will really go in the hands of the private sector? 

The other concern is that very little is going to be done in this reform by the law, which will be enacted. What I have seen is that a tourist board will just be re-designated as the tourism board. What value will this add to the reform? 

Finally, this new law is going to repeal a lot more other laws and about this, I think we need to be very cautious. I imagine that not a number of us in this House are acquainted with the policy which was presented in the Seventh Parliament and we do not know what is contained in the policies and more so the statutory instrument, which is being saved. Probably we should have had an opportunity to have some light thrown on those key areas, but definitely this is a welcome step and I urge our colleagues that with all those clarifications, I think we should support this motion. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.56
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for I have finally got the opportunity to speak. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the minister for coming up with this Bill, which of course seeks to promote tourism, and of course adds to the efforts and the goodwill of nature.  

I do not intend to speak for long, but I have two concerns to emphasise. Mr Speaker, when you look at No. 3 on page 3 of the report, it talks about scattered tourism information that you often find on the website, and some other information from commercially produced guide books as stated. This is very serious. Sometimes even these commercially produced books misinform people outside Uganda. When you are on one plane, you find this book speaking of one thing, and when you are on the other, it is different, and a tourist cannot be sure of the facts and figures of the tourism industry of Uganda. 

So I am very happy that a Bill that seeks to strengthen the tourism board will also allow the board to have the role of doing research and disseminate the right information - not only the right information, but the actual information - rather than misinforming people or giving them little information. To me this is the very important point that makes me support this Bill.

Another concern, perhaps not necessarily about the Bill but related to it and which I think the minister should capture is of other Government departments that reinforce tourism efforts. My constituency happens to share borders with and even houses parts of three national parks and game reserves. 

Queen Elizabeth National Park touches my constituency, part of Kibaale National Park is in my constituency and so is the Katonga Game Reserve. My community has been having a problem with the park authorities and we have been negotiating with them on why they take for granted our communities when their animals are damaging people’s crops. But Kibaale National Park has been very responsive and they indirectly compensate the communities; they bring money and put up hospitals, which is a good gesture because you are also involving the communities in appreciating the tourism potential. 

Unfortunately I would have informed this Parliament separately but I did not, for I felt the concerned minister was handling it. Last year, officials of Katonga Game Reserve shot dead an old man from my constituency, who had innocently and of course unlawfully gone to the Game Reserve to illegally harvest honey from the beehives he had quietly put there. That was unlawful but he did not attract that punishment. You can regard him as a poacher, but should you shoot him on sight? You can see the insensitivity of some of the officials employed in the tourism sector!

So as we strive to support the Tourist Board with such an enabling Bill, other departments of Government should be sensitive. If the communities around the tourist attractions are not receptive and are not convinced that these natural-given sites are worth it, then this recommendation No.6 of the committee, that Ugandans will own the sector, may not be true.  

As I wind up my submission, I call upon the responsible sectors: Internal Affairs, Tourism and Trade, and the Wildlife Authority to be mindful of the concerns of the communities around those tourist centres. Yes, we want to have more tourists coming in but we also want to maintain hospitable and receptive communities around the parks. That way, tourism will go on unhindered, especially after having proudly hosted the big event, which many expect to reap from now and for ever. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.01
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to speak on this report. I stand up to support this report and to thank the committee for producing it. I think it is good that we should be discussing this Bill right now because it is the right time - because we had to prepare ground for us to invite the world to come and see Uganda. We cannot forget that our colleagues in the region, Kenya and Tanzania that we tend to compare ourselves with all the time, had all the time to build and re-build themselves and the system, to invite tourists and allow tourism to thrive in their nations. 

It has taken us time to refurbish the lodges and hotels, to build new ones where there were none, and of course we cannot forget that we had a problem in Bwindi at some stage, which again upset our tourism. But I wanted to disagree with my colleague, hon. Toskin, because I do not think that we have been doing nothing. We have been doing some work and this is the right time to have this law put in place to support tourism.

I want to say to my sister, hon. Kamya, that really I do not think we need to romanticise cobwebs and potholes in Africa because we still have many lodges and hotels with cobwebs and people do not go there; tourists do not go there. While those countries may do that and get people to go and look at them, we as Africans cannot really look at that and say, “That is okay.” We should continue –(Interruptions)- can I finish so that you bring your information? I just wanted to support this and say that this is the right time and this is the right environment and opportunity. Thank you.

4.04
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to thank the minister, the chairperson and the entire committee for the report. I also rise to support the motion and the report, which has been presented to us. 

I come from Kigezi and when we talk of “Gifted by Nature”, you can use Kigezi as an example. I am happy that even the acting Prime Minister is here and he is from Kigezi. We want to appreciate what has been done to promote tourism in this country but on the other hand when we -

THE SPEAKER: So I take it that you will be speaking for Members from Kigezi. You are a representative of the Members from Kigezi.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Ok.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is fair that way.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, Mr Speaker. People are wondering where Kigezi is. Kigezi is in south western Uganda. We do appreciate what has been done to promote tourism in this country. On the other hand, when you want to study the neglect of tourism, I think Kigezi again becomes the right region to study because much as we are gifted by nature - when you talk of mountain gorillas and all these other resources, they are in this region - we do not see much investment in terms of infrastructure to promote what we have there. Therefore, I want to agree with a number of colleagues who have said that we need to do much more in the field of tourism to be able to tap the resources and the potential that we have as a country.

I just want to emphasise two points because a lot has been said. One, I hope that after the Bill the ministry will be able to translate it into an implementation plan which will be costed so that when you come to us as Parliament we are able to vote and appropriate money to facilitate you to do what you want to do. Like it has been said, mere passing of the Bill will not be adequate; it is not enough. You must translate this into interventions which are meaningful, which must be costed and then we pass the money so that tourism can be boosted in this country. 

The second issue that I want to emphasise is the issue of collaboration with other Government sectors. We cannot leave the issue of tourism to the Department of Tourism alone. For it to be successful, it must benefit from other sectors, for instance, the Works and Transport sector. The easiest way you can access the gorillas in this country is through Kanungu. We have stated this before in this Parliament. It is very difficult to access Kanungu. Most Members of Parliament even fear to visit me in Kanungu because of the nature of the road that gets there. We have made an appeal to the ministry but the road is impassable. So, how do you expect tourism to be boosted in Bwindi unless -(Interjection)

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give is that while we appreciate the problems of Kanungu, a Ugandan investor, James Musinguzi Garuga, in trying to promote tourism by trying to put up an airstrip in Kanungu, is finding it extremely difficult to get licensed. I understand that his frustration comes out of various political associations. I say that without a doubt. But if we are serious about promoting tourism, and if we are serious about supporting investors, Ugandan investors such as James Musinguzi should actually be helped. Thank you. (Applause)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you honourable member for that information. I actually had it as one of the issues and I want to confirm that what she is presenting is true. Some members of the community in Kanungu have also petitioned me that Government is not assisting Mr Musinguzi Garuga to enable him complete the airfield, which he had started. It is difficult for us, and even the visitors who go to Kanungu, to travel by road and Mr Garuga is trying to assist by constructing an airfield, which can accommodate even bigger planes. He had also told me that he is frustrated and that he is not getting adequate support from Government. Therefore, I want to call upon Government to assist private investors who come in -(Interjection)

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I thank my brother, hon. Baryomunsi for giving way and for this important information. Mr James Musinguzi Garuga happens to be a voter in my constituency -(Interruptions)- it is true that Mr Garuga Musinguzi has an idea and a plan of building an airstrip. The information I want to give you is that I support that project -(Applause)- as the MP of the area. 

Secondly, we have had several meetings with Mr Garuga Musinguzi. Everyone knows that we have had competition, political competition, but this has not dented our personal relationship. I have had several meetings with Mr Garuga Musinguzi -(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister who is holding the Floor, it is known, competed against Mr James Musinguzi Garuga in two elections. In the first election, Mr Musingunzi took him to court and found him guilty of electoral malpractices. In the second instance, many things happened. The order I am raising is that, is it in order for the minister who certainly has a conflict of interest in this matter, to be the one to give clarification on this matter? Doesn’t the minister have a conflict of interest in this matter? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think there is nothing out of order because he is a minister but he is also the leader of the area where this development is taking place. Therefore, he has a right to answer on the development of his area. 

On the question of having gone to court, this is what I have been telling you honourable members: the fact that we have two sides here should not prevent us from socialising together, travelling together in the same vehicle, having a glass of beer somewhere and talking to each other. I think we are becoming mature. The kind of politics we had in the 60s is not the politics we have in 2008 -(Applause)- and I encourage you to do the same. Proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have had several meetings with Mr Garuga. We have sat as a community from the area and agreed that we must support this project. I have personally talked to the CAA - in fact, in two weeks time, I will be leading a delegation including the MD of the Civil Aviation Authority, to visit Kanungu to look at that site and other possible sites with a view of promoting an airfield in this area and obviously we are going to have Mr Musinguzi Garuga who has an interest in investing in this. I want to repeat, Mr Speaker, that the rivalry and competition between me and Garuga does not in anyway hinder my practice of leadership of the area to promote development from whatever source. 

I would like finally to say that because it is in the border area, there were security concerns and the CAA did ask for security clearance of this airstrip. I am happy to inform this House that security, which as you know I am in charge of, has cleared it. It is not true that I was found guilty, as said by my dear sister hon. Kamya, of electoral malpractices (Laughter). It is absolutely not true and I would like to invite my sister to read the judgment because if I had been found guilty maybe I would not be here with you. Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank hon. Chris Baryomunsi for giving me this opportunity. This is just to inform the honourable minister that we welcome the clarification he made and that we encourage him to continue working with Mr James Garuga for the development of their constituency. 

MR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I want to appreciate the information given and I want to assure the House that the relationship between Mr Musinguzi Garuga and hon. Amama Mbabazi has greatly improved –(Laughter)- and is very cordial because I talk to both of them. Actually, Mr Garuga has said that he has withdrawn from politics and he is concentrating on business.

I am happy that hon. Amama Mbabazi has clarified that security has cleared the construction of the airfield because that was the concern; because CAA had requested Mr Garuga to get security clearance. The district security committee could not handle the matter and it had been referred to the Ministry of Security, which hon. Mbabazi definitely heads. So, there was suspicion that probably it was not being cleared. But through Parliament, we have got the clarification and I am sure the people of Kanungu are very happy through this debate.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, on the issue of the road, we want to appeal to Government, particularly the Ministry of Works and Transport that it is very difficult to go to Kanungu. We have received petitions, for instance, from the tea factory that the heavy vehicles, which transport tea from Kayonza, cannot actually go to Kayonza because the road is narrow and impassable and members were even threatening to demonstrate so that maybe the ministry can listen. So, I just want to put it on record that we want to request the ministry and Government to consider tarmacking the road to Kanungu so that we can promote the tourism sector in that part of the country.

I thank you very much and I stood to support the motion and we wish the ministry very well, and we are ready to support even the passing of money so that tourism can be promoted in this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I appeal to those who are coming to speak to be brief because there are many Members who are interested in making a contribution, and I want to conclude this debate today.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the Bill and I want to thank the minister as well as the committee for the work well done.

I also support the idea of a private sector-led Uganda Tourism Board and also the Tourism Development Fund, which will attract more funding from different sources for the tourism sector. I support this because there is a lot of tourism potential in this country that is completely untapped. Particularly, Mr Speaker, I want to bring to the attention of this House the recovered vegetation and wildlife in Northern Uganda. It is unfortunate that the people in Northern Uganda have suffered wars for several years but the wilderness, which was left undisturbed, has had a lot of vegetation that has recovered. But we do have a number of other potentials there including water systems, rare species but also hot springs especially in Amuru and Adjumani. We have very beautiful hot springs that are really unknown to many people in this country but also to people out there. 

So, I really support this and I would wish to restate that we, Members of Parliament, support the re-established Uganda Tourism Board with sufficient information on the potentials that we have in our different areas, particularly on the available products and the services.

Mr Speaker, the multiplier effects of the tourism sector is so wide because first of all, promotion of tourism improves the attitudes of our people towards conservation. When people realise that there is money in tourism, that there are opportunities for jobs, that there are people who are coming to visit them because of the eco-system that they have, then they will also work in support of conservation of those areas.

It has been mentioned here that about 60 percent of the people employed or the workforce in this country is employed in the tourism sector. This definitely has a multiplier effect in that these 70,000 or more people have their purchasing power increased and therefore they can also boost other sectors. They are employed as tour operators; we now see a number of tour operators being registered. We have a number of people trained as tour guides; a number of people are able to talk to animals and tame them and really this is very beautiful.

As it has been mentioned here, it also boosts agricultural production, goods and services and cultural tourism because Uganda is rich in different cultures. So, having people realise that their culture alone is a product that can be sold to tourists, I think, will help the whole country develop in terms of tourism. 

It also facilitates the manufacturing sector because we intend to see the interests of tourists and note the goods and services that are required so that we can also manufacture those specific goods.

Mr Speaker, tourism also improves our infrastructure because, for example, we are now hearing of the people of Kanungu crying for the roads; it is because of the potential of the tourism there. So, I look at tourism as a boost to infrastructure development, education and scientific research.

Mr Speaker, in a number of these national parks and forest reserves, there is a lot of research that is going on because tourists come, not just to see what is there, but to study what is there too. We have endemic species. Endemic species are those that can only exist in Uganda. It is also known that Uganda is a country that is blessed with five different climates. For example, we have snow on top of Mount Rwenzori and grasslands; Uganda has tropical forests; Uganda has dry areas with all the beauty there. So, during these different types of climates there are different things that attract tourists. We also have the different ecosystems that exist with different endemic species and many people who would like to see how these things look like have to come here. 

Mr Speaker, tourism also promotes peace. Last year, we did sign an agreement at my Ministry of Tourism with the Southern Sudan Government. In that agreement, we identified tourism as one factor that will promote peace across the border of Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan. Indeed, there is a lot of potential in that area. If only our people could realise that there is such potential then they would support the peace process in the area. 

Therefore, we as political leaders in Parliament, in the districts and local areas need to get together to support the Ministry of Tourism and the Uganda Tourist Board, in sensitizing our people on the opportunities of tourism, not forgetting the dangers of some of their practices. I am saying this because practices such as burning bushes are dangerous because they destroy the ecosystem, the grass, animals and birds which end up migrating. So, if people could understand the importance of tourism then they would stop such dangerous practices. 

Our people should also have interests for domestic tourism. Domestic tourism is something that is almost dead in this country because very few people go to visit and see what is available in our national parks. Even in Entebbe, just near here, if we took a survey I do not know how many Members of Parliament would be able to say that they have gone to the Wildlife Educational Centre to see what Uganda offers to our visitors. You would be surprised! We only get a few visitors coming here. For example, yesterday I got a call from a friend in Spain who was asking me whether planes still land in Entebbe Airport because of the problems in Kenya. They would like to come and tour Uganda but their fear was that there is insecurity in this area. So, the problem of insecurity is really a big one. 

In that regard, I would like to call upon all of us to ensure that we support the tourism in various ways; in promoting our own cultures; in promoting local products; in educating the people as well as supporting the ministry. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.29
MRS FLORENCE SSEKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for the opportunity and I want to appreciate and thank Government for the Bill that seeks to improve the tourism industry in Uganda. I would also like to thank the committee for the report.

I did expect the committee to make an observation on accessibility of the facilities in the tourism industry. Of recent, in Uganda, with improved medical services, we are getting many senior citizens and they wish to access and enjoy such relaxation and areas of tourist attraction, but accessibility to facilities in hotels, restaurants and other areas where people go for relaxation are not good enough especially for the older persons or senior citizens as well as for the people with disabilities. It is therefore, important that the committee takes note of this and ensures that mention of the same is made in the Bill as an amendment.

It is also true that within our own parliament here, of recent, we have had our colleagues who have had to use wheelchairs at some point. Those would also wish to access such places to relax as it is sometimes recommended by medical personnel that they should go to the beaches and walk on the sand, but are not able to do that because when you go to the beaches it is not easy for you to access that sand. So, that is why I am raising this.

I am also concerned about our airport. People should be able to get onto and off the planes with dignity. People should be able to get out of the planes on wheelchairs because there are such accesses. All these facilities should be provided so that when we get senior citizens even from overseas – those who come as tourists – they are able to enjoy and spend money. When you go to, for example, our zoo in Entebbe, there is no provision for even a motorised wheelchair, which someone can make use of at a cost. And how much does that cost? So, we get friends who would wish to go around and visit but they cannot and yet when you go to the developed world like the US and go to their tourist attraction areas, you will always find that there is provision for you to access wherever you wish to visit and be able to enjoy yourself. 

So, when I talk about facilities, people should really take note of bathrooms, places of convenience and all those other areas where people go to enjoy themselves. This country has a law in place and our Constitution provides for non-discrimination. It can no longer be acceptable in this country. All committees, even those committees that do not have people with disabilities on them should take note of this and always take it as a point to look at the concerns of people with disabilities, senior citizens and other people who will need such services like women who are pregnant and about to deliver. They also need to enjoy and relax; there should be facilities. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.35
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion but with reservations. When you read the object of the Bill, is to reform, consolidate and streamline the role relating to tourism. But I am taken aback when I read on the amendments of the Act, it is all about substitute word with, “from 14 put there 30, from et cetera put there others…” –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, that will be in the committee stage. That is when we shall consider the proposed amendments. 
 
MR BANYENZAKI:  Mr Speaker, the point I am making is that, even when we amend this Act it may not achieve the desired effect. For example, if the motion carries the day, are we going to see reformation within the tourism sector? No; why? It is because there is no meaningful reform that has been proposed here. And if we were to turn around this sector, there must be a meaningful reform. A meaningful reform is when Parliament appropriates money to that sector, that money must be utilised effectively but not mismanaged. Can anybody explain to us here what happened to the Shs1.0 billion deal of CNN? What did it do? Ugshs1.0 million was given to Whitaker, what did it do? 

Mr Speaker, even this report talks about lack of funding in the sector but for me I feel it is mismanagement within the sector. So, if we are to achieve meaningful revenues within tourism, there must be proper management of the resources we are going to give them. 

MS MARGRET MUHANGA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I want to give you simple information that the Ministry of Tourism has really tried to build up a picture now amongst people who work in hotels especially towards CHOGM. Today I had an opportunity to meet some people from the Ministry of Tourism. They spent Ugshs 1.3 billion on training hotel managers, waitresses and all service providers in all these hotels. 

If you go to the big hotels in Uganda right now, I do not think they are really mismanaging the money they are getting. You really see a different picture. You would enter a hotel in Uganda and would not find anybody smiling; they would look at you as if you are really part of the problem in that hotel yet you would have gone there to spend. They have taught people how to deal with internationally exposed people - delegates, tourists and visitors to this country. So, if you look at the picture, you really see that the money the Ministry of Tourism gets is at least trying to do something that can change our attitudes.  

However, there are some places that you need to liaise with other ministries especially at Entebbe Airport. Last week, I came from South Africa; it was raining. I had my mother and she could not walk and getting her out of the plane was a problem because they do not use the bridges. The airline had provided us a wheelchair but because the bridges are not used, we almost failed to get out of the plane. While in South Africa, they lifted her into the plane. When you look at such facilities, you can really tell why people would rather go to South Africa than come here and find mayhem. These bridges were brought during CHOGM; we visited Entebbe and I was so happy that Uganda at last has bridges. You get to the plane when you are dripping - wet- by the time you walk on the tarmac to get to the plane.  

Some of these things at least liaise with CAA and get these bridges working. They say the airlines rejected them because it is very expensive. It is not about the expense; how come they use them elsewhere? If these are facilities provided at the airport, you must pay for them. How come they pay for ENHAS to handle their cargo? That is the information I wanted to give that the Ministry of Tourism is not wasting the money. They are putting it to good use but we only need to do a little better in order for this Bill to work. I thank you my dear colleague.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, maybe to clarify myself, when I am talking of mismanagement I am talking of even the little resources that are available and put within the sector. I asked a question for somebody to explain on the Shs1.0 billion CNN deal;   that was mismanagement of the little money that was available for that sector. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, now that you have those concerns, I think when we come to dealing with this Bill, part 5, I think that is where you should put emphasis to ensure that in future funds are not mismanaged.  Should you need to make an amendment, you can prepare one so that there are no loopholes of where funds are going to be passed. I think this is the opportunity for you to help the situation. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Okay. Mr Speaker, then the next point I want to touch on a bit which my colleague hon. Baryomunsi covered somehow is the issue of infrastructure. If you want to milk a cow, you must feed it. So, if we are talking about “gifted by nature” Kigezi is really the basket of gifts of Uganda in terms of nature. You find there Lake Bunyonyi with beautiful islands, mountain gorillas, the fauna, and the birds we are talking about; that is where they are.

But if you see how much money goes to Kigezi to support that sector – nothing! So, that means that we are reaping where we are not sowing; we are just taking advantage of the people within the area. And that brings me to the point of hon. Tumwebaze, in Bwindi impenetrable forest, which is in my constituency, where the mountain gorillas are, the elephants often go out and invade people’s crops, and poverty has ruined my people because of these animals. 

And once the fund we are talking about is created, I would appeal to the ministry to create a fund to compensate the people who would have lost their crops due to these animals. We know very well, for those of us who have our own animals at home, that if they go out and invade people’s crops, we pay back. So why are we not paying back these citizens of Uganda? If they have grown their irish potatoes and the elephants destroy them totally, why don’t we compensate them?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Member for giving way. The Member has said that nothing goes to Kigezi in terms of infrastructure yet it is a hub of tourism, and that it is gifted by nature. But I want to inform the Member that from Kampala up to Kabale, there is a tarmac road, and this tarmac is being extended to Kisoro.

Secondly, in this country, we have got only four tarmac airfields: Entebbe, Soroti, Gulu, and the fourth is in Kigezi at Kisoro. And it was specifically done for tourists. Further information is that, all tourist roads in Kigezi and specifically in his constituency are being upgraded and he knows very well that we have already procured contractors to upgrade those roads. 

The same Member knows very well that the road from Kabale to Bunyonyi is also going to be tarmacked. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you for that information. But much as I appreciate the information about that road, how long will it take to have it done? We have been here shouting on top of our voices, but we are yet to be thankful for that project because many times, projects have started and collapsed midway. So, we hope that this one will not.

Mr Speaker, about giving quality services, if we are to improve this sector, Government must lead; not the private sector which we are talking about. There are some sectors that you cannot leave to the public to manage because the public might not go into such sectors more readily. Business people would readily go to Kikuubo where they will get their returns immediately; but how many people would go into tourism where the dividends are not in sight? 

So in this case, Government should take the lead, for example, in training of management in hotels. We should be having a university in tourism and hotel management by now. But what I have heard is that, even the school we had in Jinja is being sold. How are we going to improve the quality when we are not investing in this sector? 

Mr Speaker, another thing, which I call the minister to take on seriously – we are lucky the minister comes from Kigezi, which is the Switzerland of Africa and much gifted by nature. Let us zone these tourism areas and put in more money. Hon. Byabagambi is talking about an airfield, which was constructed at the time when we were in Congo and we wanted services to quickly reach those people.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, is the facility there?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, Kigezi airfield was tarmacked before we went to Congo, and the Member knows that very well. Is the honourable member therefore in order to insinuate that it was constructed purposely for airlifting the timber? On top of that, that airfield cannot accommodate any cargo plane; it is an airfield for light aircrafts for tourist only. A MIG cannot carry timber; I have never heard of that. We should not make fools of ourselves. Therefore, is it in order for him to exhibit his ignorance about the usage of airfields?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not think that we need to inquire the circumstances under which the facility is there. The fact is that the facility is there and they are lucky that they have it. There are many areas that would like that facility, but they do not have it. So let us not exploit this.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, those were his words, but much as the facility is there, the facts are known.

But finally, I call upon my brother, hon. Sarapio Rukundo, to take charge and transform this sector. Take charge brother. And do transformation because we have trust in you; you know how much we have transformed Kabale together. Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I ask you to be very brief so that I can cover as many as I can. 

4.49
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD, Central Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only three points. But I should first say that the Bill is fine, I support it. The report is excellent. I salute the chairperson of the committee and the honourable members of this committee. 

The first point is on accessibility. My sister, hon. Florence, the honourable member for Kayunga has articulated this issue in her submission. I only wish to offer some advice to the government and specifically to the minister. Accessibility has now become an international norm in world tourism. Most tourist, whenever deciding on tourism destination must inquire about accessibility. Worldwide Uganda is ranked amongst the poorest countries in terms of providing accessibility in the tourist sector. Because we are ranked amongst the poorest we scare potential visitors, potential tourists. Every year we lose billions of shillings because we scare away potential tourists.  

Mr Speaker, this Parliament has done a lot to help people make money. It has done a lot towards the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and other departments of Government. By enacting the Tourist Agency Act of 2006, we resolved the question of accessibility. All the requirements, all the guidelines for making our tourism accessible are contained in the Tourism Agency Act.  Therefore, I want to give my free advice. You do not need to pay for it but my advice will earn you billions of shillings in tourism. Go and read the Persons Aids Act and apply its provisions to our tourist sector and then you will see how you will make money. You will come and thank me for my free aid.

Secondly, somewhere on page 2 of the report there is mention of more than 70,000 Ugandans employed in the tourist sector. This is a big figure. But I have two big questions; one relates to the status of these workers. We have heard that some of these workers we are talking about live in pathetic conditions, live in deplorable conditions; they live in abject poverty and withstand unfavourable terms and conditions of employment, with the employer with the right to fire and to hire at anytime and sometimes no compensation.  We have heard that some of the key players in the tourist industry do not allow employees to join trade unions. It is a violation of human rights.  

Some of the workers or the Ugandans we are talking about here live in very poor health conditions. They clean all sorts of things with no protective gear. We know all this. Honourable members you know. Now, my biggest question is, what mechanisms are in place to ensure that you check this form of violation of rights of our people and also to be able to address this form of denial and violation of the rights of the people you call employees?  Yes, they are employees; we are happy to look at the numbers but we are also interested in their living conditions. How are you going to protect them?  

Lastly, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am also a man of equal opportunities. Where you mentioned 70,000 employees or 70,000 people benefiting from the tourist sector, I would be able to know how many men, how many women and etc so that we are able to know the distribution of opportunities. Thank you very much. I support the motion.

4.55
MR JEROME KADDUMUKASA (Independent, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I first thank the committee for this wonderful report and I stand to support the motion.  However, I have concerns which I would like the honourable minister to address. 

First, to have a well developed tourism industry, we must have tourist attractions. These tourist attractions must be very rare species. Among other things those are flora, fauna and others. But in this country, Uganda, those rare species live in specific unique environment. To be precise, they live in tropical rain forests. As I speak now, the biggest percentage of tropical rain forests has been cleared. 

If you take Masaka road, you see a signpost reading, “Mpanga Forest Reserve” but the forest reserve is no more, it has been cleared. There is extensive lumbering. In fact, it is not lumbering; it is forest clearing. If you go to Kalangala Ssese Islands, once upon a time there were forests there. If you went there today, you would only see palm trees -(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I just want to give information as regards to Mpanga eco-tourism forest. It is in my constituency and it is not true that it has been cleared. It is there and if anything, it is the only forest actually which is now preserved in that place. Therefore, I want to clear that allegation. It is not true. The forest is there and actually I request the ministry to put more emphasis on developing that place.  Thank you.

MR KADDUMUKASA: Thank you, hon. Mutuluuza, for giving that information.  But maybe you do not go deep into that forest. In some areas, the tropical rain forest has been cut; they have planted eucalyptus trees and pine trees. That is not a tropical rain forest. These rare species live in tropical rain forests and they cannot survive in pine forests and eucalyptus forests. (Applause)  

MS JESSICA ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform him and also the House that the central forest reserves do have management plans and all these forest reserves are zoned. In each forest reserve, there is a specific zone which is left for sustainability and no activity at all is encouraged in that area. 

Some parts of these forests are for production zone. So, some of these areas especially the ones that have already been encroached on and so forth and especially those that are in the production zone, these areas are licensed to potential tree growers and they can grow any species including pine because, Mr Speaker, timber product in this country is getting smaller and smaller. If we do not grow fast growing trees in this country, we will run short of timber in a few years. This is one activity that is really thriving in this country.

To inform you about Ssese Islands, it is true that Ssese Islands had a lot of tropical forests but I would like members to differentiate between the gazetted forest reserves and forests that were on public land; that is Mailo land and individual land. As I speak, even the savanna grassland forest reserves that were identified for growing palm trees have not been cleared to date. Therefore, the insinuation that forest reserves have been cleared for palm growing is not true. I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable Minister in charge of the resource under dispute. The Minister is laboring to say that we have policies and planned activities for each natural resource. As a country, we are suffering because of diverting what has been set for natural resources to other activities. Therefore, if the minister in charge of the forests for which we are all laboring and paying for is telling us that what has been diverted and what we are fighting to reserve is not true, can she clarify to the nation that what we are agitating for- for example, part of Mabira has been designed to be preserved as a tropical forest reserve but we are fighting to preserve it. I thought that you are now with us but you are telling us that the change concerning that part of Mabira is as a result of your consent. 

In my district, Abera forest reserve is so bare because it has been cut down and pine trees have been planted instead. As a result, the eco system is being changed. Is that part of the original plan or are we doing something that the minister is not in agreement with? These are some of the contradictions that are stopping us from making headway.

THE SPEAKER: I suggest that the Committee on Natural Resources deals with this particular matter and reports promptly. This is because this is a subject that can be handled by that committee. This was a by the way, but it seems that we can exhaustively deal with it there.

MR KADDUMUKASA: As I conclude about the same, Mr Speaker, if there are ecological imbalances even the ecological niche is affected. 

I was still giving examples on that ugly road from Kampala to Mityana. There used to be tropical rain forests in Bujuko, Nswanjere and other areas but when you go there now, there are only eucalyptus trees. I wonder whether sometimes government is just adamant. This is because in Bujuko, I remember that a group of the so-called veterans went there, cut down the whole forest and everyone kept quiet. They later brought trucks and carried away the timber. The DPC Mpigi Police later came to stop these people from cutting down the trees but they had already finished. 

Five years ago, I was in Kooki and there was a rare species of birds that I saw there. However, when I went there recently, I could not find the birds. I was told that some birds died while others had to fly to neighboring countries because the forests where they used to live no longer exist. I was also told that they eat very special plants, which are supposed to be in tropical rain forests but are no longer there. 

I ask the hon. Minister to give me assurance that the natural environment will be protected so as to improve the tourism industry in this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I suggest that you take five minutes or less? After five minutes I will switch off the microphone. This is for those who are going to make contributions. 

5.06
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that this has been a very enriched debate. I want to thank the committee and the Minister for the report. I support the Bill but there are issues that I need some clarification on. As the report was being read, the challenges that were encountered by the Uganda Tourism Board were not highlighted for Members to appreciate the amendments and intended interventions. I think the report should have reflected this. 

The other issue is about the synergy between the Uganda Wildlife Authority and UTB. How do they intend to work together to achieve an improved industry? That was not reflected in the report and I would like the Minister to clarify because Uganda Wildlife Authority has been thriving at the expense of a weak UTB. Now with an empowered UTB in place, how will Uganda Wildlife Authority, as an independent parastatal, work with the Uganda Tourist Board? 

You have talked about the tourism levy and what it intends to do but I would also like to know how URA will collect money from the tourism sector. Will it be on top of what URA is charging hotels or will there be a concession from URA that this levy will have an impact on the Uganda Tourism Board? I do not know how this will work. The direct surcharge should be on the hotels who are the direct service providers. 

I would like also to talk about our local tourism on the side of Uganda in the diaspora. We know that with the dual citizenship, more Ugandans in the diaspora have been coming back home. However, we have not encouraged them because when they come in, it is like we take it for-granted that this is their home and they know they are supposed to come back. Well, they are tourists because when they come home, they have chosen us over other destinations they would have gone. But they are saying that the government or the tourism industry has not harmonised the charges around the hotels.  In many countries that are improving the tourists sector, like in the USA, they try in the tourist season to liaise and harmonise the charges vis-à-vis the services those people provide.  

We also have information - I am glad that they highlighted the information that is out there with the commercial magazines. Many people have been complaining that what is advertised on the internet is very different from what they find on the ground - even the charges. Well, they are already here, they have booked and they cannot go back. I think we need to harmonise and I thank the committee and the ministry for recognising the need to harmonise the information that is out there in this country.

I would like also to urge government, as the committee highlighted countries that have been successful, like Kenya and Namibia - but these countries involve ordinary people not necessarily those in the tourist destination, but around areas that have potential to accommodate people. 

An honourable member of parliament just highlighted that big hotels are mushrooming in Kampala, but upcountry there are small lodges. We need to encourage these people to raise the standards.  They try to innovate, but may be they need to be guided because these countries like Namibia and South Africa use bed and breakfast. Bed and breakfast are encouraged because this caters for all categories of people; those with small pockets, those who are ready to spend, but they are all tourists. I do not know which ministry that falls under - is it National Planning Authority? - to encourage those people who are constructing, even homes so that these people can be accommodated in people’s homes who convert part of their facilities to accommodate these tourists. 

Most of these tourists are not willing to pay the money we assume they want to pay. They zone tourist destinations and say this is a low cost tourist destination, and that will bring in more people. But if we have the exorbitant prices - people complain that our hotels try to emulate the standards that those people are used to and charge even higher than those other countries with the same facilities. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

5.12
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support this report, but I have points to make, which I think the committee chairman and also the Minister will be able to answer. 

The objective of this Bill is to reform, which is good. We have not been told what kind of reforms are going to take place in this sector. For example, those of you who followed the events before CHOGM, we were told that we had to bring people from outside to be in our hotels because our local Ugandans could not serve the foreigners who were coming then. So, we should have been told how are you going to reform, say the training of Ugandans to be able to manage these institutions? 

Mr Speaker, if you go around all the hotels we have today, I can assure you that the majority of the people employed there are foreigners. If you want I can table all the hotels -(Interjections) - not only managers. I know where even the waiters are foreigners.  

Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to reconstitute the Uganda Tourist Board to make it private sector driven. I thought if we want to make it private sector driven, we should not even call it a tourist board the way it has been; we can call it even an authority, for example, Uganda Tourist Authority so that it can be able to harmonise all these sectors related to tourism range. We have had a tourist board before. I propose that we should make it an authority to be able to achieve the objectives of these reforms.

The previous speaker, hon. Odit, did mention that this Bill seeks to repeal the Hotels Act, Cap.90, the Tourist Agency Licensing Cap.100 and the Uganda Tourist Board, Cap.33. Unless we have these Caps here, we are now just going to support this, repeal the other and yet we do not know what the contents of these laws were. We expected you to attach the parent Acts so that we do not just pass things blindly.

Mr Speaker, also significant, they have said that this Bill is going to create a Tourism Fund. They have not told us when you create this tourism fund, where are you going to get these funds? Of late we created the Land Fund, we had the Contingency Fund in the Constitution, which you know very well. We have the Road Fund, and none of these has been operationalised and we are creating another fund. Can the Minister tell us or chairman concerned how you are going to raise the money for this fund.  

The idea of introducing a tourism levy is good.  But we should be told - you see when you talk about tourists, we have local tourists and foreign tourists. We should have been told- Just passing this - we have local tourists, when you put this levy, what is going to be the percentage of your levy? We cannot just say that we are passing a law - the board has been given power to put a levy and then even our local tourists cannot afford to access these facilities.  

Mr Speaker, our President is on record for giving free land to attract investors in this country.  Instead of wooing tourists in this country, we are now putting a levy to deter those tourists that would be coming here. Now, I can see a contradiction there; if the President is giving free land to woo investors in this country and you are putting a levy on tourists to come, I think there is a contradiction between you and the state. 

Last year, with a few Members of Parliament, we did visit one country in East Asia, and we found that that country has come here and taken what we would call special species, which you cannot find anywhere other than in Uganda. I am wondering whether the ministry of tourism can put something like a patent or a trade mark, so that for a product to be moved from here - even if we find it in America, China or India - then you know that this product is from Uganda. We did visit a tourist attraction and I can assure you that most of the things we saw are some of the things transplanted from this country yet we could not say that this is from Uganda because they have it either in green houses or in their packs. So, I am wondering whether the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry has that objective of putting patents or trade marks on our products. 

Mr Speaker, lastly, when you visit foreign countries and see the Ugandan Flag, you definitely know that this has something to do with Uganda. Recently, there is a company called Air Uganda. Air Uganda is a flag bearer of Uganda and they are carrying Ugandan colours with the emblem. I would like to know from the Minister, the relationship between Air Uganda and the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry because if this plane lands anywhere with Ugandan colours and the national flag – because you see in tourism, there must be an office associated with selling you. We have several airlines here, Eagle Air and the others, but none of them carries the Ugandan Flag and the emblem. Can the ministry also tell us about the relationship between that company and the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry? Thank you, very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to inform you that so far, we have received 18 contributions. Is there any new material that is going to come? Is there anything that has not been mentioned? I will curtail time so that I just give you three minutes only. 

5.21
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I thank the members of the committee. But I would like to help them close a gap which I have identified here. 

One, on the data on tourists, from which countries do most of Uganda’s tourists come from? If you want to improve tourism, you cannot do it alone as a country. You can have the best hotels and the best conditions, but if the place where the tourists come from is the problem, they may not come. So, if you have a drop in the income, or a drop in the revenue from tourism, it is not necessarily because you have the bad conditions. So, we have a question of data on tourists. This question is also very important for the tourists come to see Uganda. If this question is answered, it will help us in the area of diversification. 

The common impression, which is a wrong impression that most of us get when we talk of tourism is that when you talk of tourism, you talk of wildlife. You talk of lakes and forests but you forget artificial tourism. Some of you have gone to see parliaments abroad. A parliament is not an animal; you have gone to see industries in Japan. So, can Uganda also think about developing tourism here on the basis of artificial human development? 

This brings us to area No. 2 of my concern, which needed to have been included here; conflicts between the ministry of tourism and other ministries or other sectors. For example, the Ministry of Health and the ministry of agriculture. Assuming that there are tourists from wherever they come from who are interested in coming to see mosquitoes, (Laughter)– yes, and may be to see Tsetse flies or the animals responsible for the spread of Ebola, and they pay all the money required in the income sector of the ministry of tourism, will you not have a conflict with the Ministry of Health because of the diseases associated with Malaria? 

With that area of conflict, I would like to take you briefly to Obongi. In 1962, there was a place called Lomunga - it is a parish now – that was gazetted to be a park that was a source of the White Rhinos that you heard were taken out of Uganda to somewhere. Unfortunately, they died from there because that is not their place. After that, in 1965, Lomunga with a Notice No. 184 signed by the then Minister of Animal Industry, the late J.K Babiha, Lomunga was de-gazetted. Today, we the people of Obongi are saying that we support tourism but not on the basis of coming to Obongi to spectate or to watch animals. 

There is exploration of oil taking place there. You can come to Obongi and see people mining oil, assuming oil is discovered, but work is going on right now. Mr Speaker, there is a very big conflict between the people settled in Lomunga Parish and the ministry of tourism because there was an attempt made to chase them away from that area on the assumption that animals, which were there, need to be preserved yet there are no animals in that place. 

So, I am suggesting to the ministry of tourism that avoid areas of conflict. Therefore, Lomunga, which has been de-gazetted from being a game reserve, should be respected. That does not mean that we, the people of Obongi, will not support tourism. We support tourism of human activities and oil exploration but not of animals. I thank you. Move away from Lomunga and do not disturb us there. 

5.25
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the Bill –

THE SPEAKER: But use three minutes, please. 

MS NAMPIJJA: But my concern is the concentration of so many hotels in Kampala. Of recent, Government demolished a school to create room for a five-star hotel, which they did not construct. The government should put into consideration the setting up of hotels in areas far away from Kampala. This will enable especially areas where there are tourist attractions and natural resources.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, this Government is good at attracting foreign investors who cannot even employ more than 10,000 people in Uganda. Why don’t we give priority to our local investors? Our country, Uganda, shares resources with many bordering countries like the DR Congo, Rwanda and Kenya. I think we should set standards. We should also try to sign protocols to sustainably utilise and conserve these resources in order to boost our tourism industry. 


Mr Speaker, tourism is a key sector in Uganda and it has contributed a lot to the development of our nation.  If the government gave it priority as far as allocating a huge amount of money is concerned, that would help us boost our tourism industry.  Mr Speaker, all my points were mentioned.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.28
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This Bill should have come in 1987 or 1986. In fact, it is long overdue and if I become Uganda’s president tomorrow, I would immediately abandon the NRM strategy of industrialisation- yes, building industries as the President normally tells us- and concentrate on tourism. Uganda is a country that has been defined as one gifted by nature –(Interruption)

MR. GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: I would like to apologise to hon. Mabikke for interfering. But in a situation, Mr Speaker, where unemployment is rampant among the youth, and where what is happening in Kenya is a result of unemployment, is hon. Mabikke who has got black hair and who knows that the youth are coming in big numbers without employment, in order to suggest that the issue of creating jobs through industrialisation is awkward and therefore we should just import tourists into this country? Is he really in order to propose this to this country and yet he is aspiring to be a president by his remarks?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I cannot rule him out of order because I think he is suggesting that tourism would bring more employment than industrialisation would. 

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, Uganda has got comparative advantage over many African and European countries in regard to tourism. I think that the National Resistance Movement Government should have concentrated more on developing the tourism sector than any other sector. In fact, had we injected more money in tourism, the economy would be doing better. And as the Speaker has said, the youth and many other jobless people would have been more involved and absorbed. 

Mr Speaker, the strategy on industrialisation is failing and you can bear me witness that it is failing. When you compare our tourism sector with that in other countries like Egypt, you find that the Egyptian tourism Minister is more powerful than even the minister of foreign affairs. This is because his job is to go out and market the Egyptian tourism potential. I think tourism in Egypt is the third biggest foreign exchange earner. When you visit Egypt and you compare it with Uganda, I think our potential is far bigger, far wider and far more varied. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Does he have the time to get that clarification?

MR MABIKKE: No, I do not have the time to get clarification, Mr Speaker. 

MS MUHANGA: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague and friend for giving way. I wanted just to get a clarification from you because I know about Egypt and its potential for tourism that you are talking about. But, if you look at the world, the global picture is that most of the countries which are in the First World, like we call it, have industrialised.  The only country, which thrives on tourism maybe and is a First World country is Indonesia.  

All the countries, even the Asian Tigers, have industrialised in order to enter the First World. China is getting there- they have no tourist attractions.  But, I think, though, you have a point that tourism can boost our economy, I do not think we can compare it with industrialisation.  So, I want to get a clarification from you. What is your strategy for Uganda? Do you think really if we boosted only tourism without industries we would get more money? I do not think so.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, honourable for that clarification you have sought. I think it is just about grasping the economic terms and strategies very well. I have been talking about comparative advantage. With comparative advantage, countries concentrate on doing those things that they can do best and on which they enjoy more advantage than the others.  I can tell you that Uganda came so late in its industrialisation strategy and there is no way Uganda can now compete with goods from China; you cannot compete with Malaysian goods; you cannot compete with Indonesia. You cannot produce cheaper goods as far as industrialisation is concerned.  But that is not my main focus today. My main focus, today Mr Speaker- (Interjection) - but you have been distracting me. 

Mr Speaker, as we now embark on redevelopment of our tourism sector, we must ensure that we develop our hotel infrastructure. This point has been made but I would like to add that in many countries the hotel industry has been well developed and it is actually very cheap. In fact, they do encourage both local and foreign tourists. I know for instance of a country like Switzerland, where every weekend locals must go out to do tourism and sleep in hotels. And it is now a culture that families leave their homes and sleep in hotels. So, as we focus on redeveloping our tourism sector, we should also look at developing our hotel infrastructure. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, development of tourism comes along with the development of a proper, cheap and affordable national airline. Part of the boost for the Kenyan tourism industry was that they invested in a very good national flag carrier, the Kenya Airways. Kenya Airways has done a lot to add onto the tourism potential of Kenya. Unfortunately with our National Resistance Movement, the first thing that you killed was our national airline. The next thing you did was to sell off all our hotels. Wake up now and Uganda will be back on its redevelopment path as it was in 1960 and 1970. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and I want to take this opportunity, hon. Mabikke, to congratulate you on your recent graduation from Makerere University with LLB; congratulations. (Applause)

5.37
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Mr Speaker, this Bill seeks to create a tourism fund and also to introduce a tourism levy. I want to seek clarification as follows. Madi-Okolo in Arua district is a host to a tourism site in the names of Ajai game reserve. In this game reserve, a visitor, tourist or even anybody who just wants to transit will get in and get out without paying a fee. 

In my case, when I want to take the shortest route to Madi-Okolo, Kafu, Masindi, Paraa and Pakwach, I pay handsomely at the gate of Murchison Falls National Park. Eventually, part of this fee that I pay is extended to the surrounding community. Now, my people are not benefiting for being a host to a tourism site. I have inquired with the wildlife authority whether collections from other gated reserves and parks can be shared with those who are unable to collect. I was informed very sternly that the law does not allow this. I am very pleased today to see a fund and a levy being introduced. Can I hope that the interests of my people will be protected and taken care of by this fund? I thank you. 

5.39
MR YOWASI BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for availing me the opportunity. I am standing to support the Bill. I represent a constituency which is surrounded by national parks: Mt Rwenzori National Park, Queen Elizabeth National Park and Virunga National Park in the DRC. When I look at the Bill, it is targeting those areas as tourist destinations.

Mr Speaker, I stand here to inform the Minister and the community that little has been highlighted about the welfare of the communities surrounding or neighbouring these protected areas and tourist attractions. I will give an example, in Kasese, presently we are in the period of harvesting cotton; at the current price farmers fetch between shs300,000 to shs400,000 on an acre of cotton. But in this season, elephants from Queen Elizabeth National Park destroyed over 100 hectares of cotton. I wanted the Bill to highlight how the welfare of these neighbours of the national park - the tourist destinations - can be protected in situations like these. 

Secondly, the tourists we are talking about –

THE SPEAKER: Only to protect and not benefit?

MR BWAMBALE: And to share the benefits accruing from the revenue in the national parks. Mr Speaker, in my parish, there is some little money that we get from the national park. In the last financial year, my parish got shs400,000 but again the elephants destroyed crops worth over shs3 million in one month, so we really do not benefit.

Secondly, the tourists that we are talking about are in various categories. Many Members have spoken here saying Uganda is gifted by nature therefore naturally tourists should come here. We have people who come here to sunbath; others come to watch animals, trees and butterflies. Others come for mountaineering; others come just to look at our trees; others come to the casino to gamble and there are also researchers. But when you look at all these categories of tourists, very few of them are rich and our tourist attractions do not attract the very rich tourists who should be coming here. 

There are countries, which are gifted by history like Egypt – one member talked about it, tourists come to look at the pyramids and they pay money. But what I am saying is that we should be more innovative. I have been to Virunga National Park in Congo, there is an institute of Ecology in that national park. Every year it attracts over 5,000 students from Europe and America. 

We had an institute of Ecology in Mweya in Queen Elizabeth National Park but it is virtually closed so we cannot attract researchers; we cannot attract rich tourists; the gamblers - we do not have good casinos here like those in Sun City in South Africa. 
Sun City is not a national park; it is just gifted by technology and innovations, not by nature. So, what I am saying is that we should be more innovative. Let us develop our research centres in the national parks so that we are able to attract more people and rich tourists who can give us more money, other than getting these students who come for mountaineering and some fellows who come for adventure, yet they do not have the money that we are yearning to earn from the tourism industry. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before you contribute, the Leader of the Opposition has to attend the Ash Wednesday service and wants to say something before he goes. So instead of coming to you, I will allow him to say something. But before I do so, I congratulated hon. Mabikke and our other good Member, Janet Okori-Moe, Member of Parliament for Abim who also got a masters degree from Makerere University. I also want to congratulate you and all the others - whose details I did not have - for the achievement they got recently.

5.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A lot of the things that I had wanted to say were said, but particularly reflecting on what hon. Odit said, allow me to say that when you come to the long title of the Bill, I do not know whether we should leave it as, “The Uganda Tourism Bill” or not. I am saying this because that is so long and yet there are so many aspects to tourism. When you look at this particular Bill you realise that it is about managing tourism or the elements of management. So at some stage I do hope that the committee will consider this so that the long title reflects the content of the Bill and the subsequent law. This is because if we want to do an aspect of development, we can only do that when we focus on management. 

Anyway, my main concern is about the funding under this, which is in part 5 under finance. I have a very big problem structurally in getting clause 19 before the other clauses 20 and 21 because the original intention of placing it this way was really to create some fund that you can justifiably put under the Tourism Development Fund and yet clause 21 (1) is a very emphatic thing because it states thus: “There is to be established a fund to be known……..” Now when you are establishing a fund, the purpose is very specific. So when you put money, which is administrative as part of this fund, then you are not establishing a fund in the sense that you sharply want to focus on in dealing with the problem. If you want to promote tourism development that has to be very clearly spelt out. So, I wish that the specifics of what those funds will be composed of are spelt out. Do they include an annual contribution by government? How is it done so that we know we have funds that we can pin the Tourism Board for its successes or failures, clearly on? 

The other element is the levy that is proposed. The problem with the levy is that I do not know whether the levy is meant to go to the Ministry of Tourism or to the body that will manage tourism. It is said that the minister will formulate a statutory instrument to deal with this, but the minister could as well issue a statutory instrument that could put all the money generated under the levy for its own use. In that case you are actually doing what ordinarily is a budgetary proposal by the ministry as a normal routine we deal with. 

So I imagine that even this levy is intended to serve a specific purpose and if it is so then we should spell it out here as the primary purpose of the levy so that the minister is not just allowed a floating situation where he will create a statutory instrument that undermines the purpose for which the levy is created. I think it would be very important to do that.

Last is something which was a very small aspect but that kept me wondering because I have traveled upcountry and shared lodging facilities with tourists: such a facility may not necessarily be a tourist facility yet when you go to clause 13(a) and you say thus: “A person shall not operate any accommodation or other designated tourist facility for the purpose of payment from tourists…,” then I wonder what you are saying. Does it mean that if a tourist came to a lodge which originally was just an ordinary lodge and he/she decides to pay, the owner will run into a problem? I am saying this because obviously it happens and I do not know whether - I am not a lawyer - but this has bothered my bald head very seriously. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.50
MR STEVEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to speak on behalf of the Bunyoro Parliamentary Group, which is attending the Tarehe Sita celebrations in Masindi. As you know, the mother Kingdom is largely endowed with tourism potential. What has not been mentioned here is the fact that the riches, the potential in Rwenzori, in Kigezi, in Bunyoro are a part of what is called the Rift Valley graben. It is the richest, ecological place in the world so we are actually sitting on potential. The Virungas in Congo are benefiting because of that. Even in Rwanda it is the same graben. So, we are sitting on a graben and I can say that we are not even exploiting 10 percent of that potential. 

Therefore, I would like to support this Bill because we need to find money; we have just hosted CHOGM and have been marketing Uganda and so we need to create the preparedness to accommodate and provide facilities for all that big demand. Our neighbours in Kenya, before they messed themselves up, had been employing a lot of people in the tourism industry, but we have not even done 30 percent of what Kenya has been doing. I would therefore like to request that when we talk of the tourism fund, we should vote for it the CHOGM way. 

Our problem as Parliament and as government is that we are sprinkling our resources over every sector without impact. If we think tourism is the way to go, we must put the finances in place; we must put the infrastructure in place because God has given us the nature. What is lacking is man-made value addition. 

I come from a region which, right from Kyoga, Karuma falls, Murchison falls, the Lake Albert delta, the Lake Albert itself, the Rift Valley escarpment, the park, the Budongo Forest, the Kibiro hot springs – but are you aware that accessibility to most of these places is a problem? So, how can we promote tourism if we are not working on the tourism circuits? Honourable minister, they started talking about the tourism circuits some time in the 90s. I would want to know the plan of developing the tourism circuits, and the cost. 

I have done some logistics in tourism; the cost of moving tourism in Uganda is increasing because you have to come from Kisoro to Mbarara – the Rift Valley itself does not have connectivity. I am talking about accessibility; I am talking of moving from one tourist site to another without coming to Kampala; without coming to the main roads. That is an area we must invest in - the infrastructure; the connectivity of this area. 

The other area of transport which we have not mentioned is air transport; we need to look into the air transport. Lake Albert to Nimule to Pakwach; we used to have water transport, which collapsed with the floods in 1962; we need to look into that area. 

There other area is logistics. Not all tourists who come to visit sites in Uganda want to come to Entebbe; come through your jam in Kampala to go to Murchison Falls. How do we address the issue of direct air connections to these tourist destinations? How are we going to solve this problem? 

Honourable Speaker, just because of time, we also have other problems with licensing. I think the area which was given to Madhvani in Murchison Falls is too big. He is holding back other would-be investors. We need to allow competition in these areas because Chobe and Sarova is under one person and the speed of construction at Chobe is very slow. I think if they were multiple investors we would be doing better. 

The other point is about training; it is true we had a CHOGM smile on our workers in Kampala during CHOGM in terms of customer care. We still have a lot of excess capacity in terms of training our hoteliers in order to attract our guests. 

Finally, we have a challenge to review our policy in terms of the role of the state in the tourism industry. As a young boy I used to enjoy the Uganda Hotels; I still remember how those facilities were of class. Don’t you think that it is about time that we found money to invest in some infrastructure in all that we think are important sites? Whether the management is by Equatoria, Sheraton or Hilton it is a secondary matter but government must find money to invest in the infrastructure and then we can debate the management or even later talk about privatising them. 

Last year I sent people to Murchison Falls and they said, “Honourable, how can you have such a rich place without even a place to buy a soda; without even a decent toilet; without even where to change from?” So the magnificent Murchison Falls does not have a room; does not have a good toilet; does not have - and that is what we should be speaking about. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.  

5.58
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would hate to twist the words in order to repeat what my colleagues have said because the report has highlighted all the important points and all my colleagues have done so –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Kisoro, are you going for a service now or what? 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: No, I am around.

THE SPEAKER:  It is alright.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate what the minister has said that actually tourism is one of the major sources of income for Uganda and that if this Bill is enacted; it will contribute greatly to Uganda’s economy. 

I would also like to appreciate what one of my colleagues has said that actually Uganda was recently publicised in the newspapers that it lost its seat in the World Tourism Organisation. I am wondering why. I would like to raise this question: I would like to ask the government why it is having a double face as far as tourism is concerned! If you really believe that tourism is one of our major sources of income, why don’t you pay your dues to the organisation; what is the reason?

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose, as my colleagues have said - and as perhaps it has been proposed - that we since we are to have a tourism fund, could we have a specific percentage of the collection from tourism go towards the industry so that it is self-sustaining? This is my contribution; I want to find out from the government. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.00
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am from the Central region, which has high potential for tourism. I would also like to support the motion and also thank the Ministry of Tourism for having come up with a Bill, and the committee for the report, which I think ought to have been done yesterday. 

From my observations of this debate and what the ministry is doing, there is emphasis on the flora and fauna as the only potential for tourism in Uganda. This leaves out other areas, for example, the museum. The other day the museum was rotting. It has just received a fresh coat of paint during CHOGM but now I pass there and the grass is over growing. When you go to the museum, there is almost nothing to see. Historical sites are forgotten; in Central Uganda here we have a lot of historical sites that are undeveloped and yet there is a lot of potential. 

Our culture and customs; traditions and practices need to be developed. So really my contribution is that all these things should be looked into and developed as a holistic package. I thank you.

6.02
MS ANNE AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report. I stand to support the motion even though my constituency really does not benefit directly from the tourism industry as has been mentioned by previous speakers; it is in a region where tourism has not really been developed. 

My concern is that we share borders with Sudan – which is another country - and my district lies along the border where Sudan has its national, wildlife reserve. Seasonally, you find large herds of elephants crossing to my district and causing a lot of havoc and destruction. A number of times we have raised this issue with the Ministry of Tourism. Even the Deputy Speaker went to Moyo District, and the Vice-President, but we have got no responses. So I want to take this opportunity to ask the honourable minister whether the ministry has any policy in place to protect the people of Uganda from wildlife, which is coming from another country?

Lastly, hon. Fungaroo has raised the issue of Lomunga. However, there is not a single wildlife specie in that reserve. I do not know whether the ministry is spending human resource and labour in deploying wildlife authority officers in that area. We would like our people to benefit at least from the use of that land and that is why I support this motion such that the ministry should be able to look into that matter and reverse the land use. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

6.04
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I thank the committee for the report and I am here to support this Bill. Speaker after speaker has expressed disappointment about the delay of this Bill. My brother, hon. Mabikke has said it should have come in 1987 but government has come to learn - it was misadvised in the 80s and it spread thin but there were no results. 

They changed course and concentrated on a few and did them well. This is why we went in Defence and did a good job. We went in Education and our people are now educated. You know the NAJ - we are seriously there. Now the government has come out to handle the issue of tourism. We are not going there blindly; we are going in prepared. We are going to start tourism on a good foundation. 

Mr Speaker, you have seen that the issue of safety is paramount to us; the issues of health standards - if we had rushed, we would have made mistakes. But now we are moving slowly and surely; and we are going to do a good job. So I appeal to my colleagues to forget the past. We are starting on a good foundation and things will be okay. You can even see here that they have talked of levies for self sustenance of this matter. They are forming a fund equivalent to the Road Fund. We have just passed the Road Fund, and you know the beauty and benefits of the Road Fund; this is exactly what is going to be in this fund that they are talking about. 

And also for these tourist areas, let us not talk of forests only. I have been to many countries in this world where there are no forests but plenty of tourists: you go to Israel, it is a desert but with very many tourists. So let us concentrate on the things we have here. List them and see how we can develop them. 

I am also very pleased to see that it is well documented here that after this Bill is passed, regulations are being drafted to operationalise this Bill. You can see that people have worked; they have thought through to see that this thing moves on very well. So I support this Bill and I am very pleased with the committee and the minister in the way they are approaching this issue. Thank you very much.

6.07
MS ROSE IRIAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance. I strongly support the motion. I know that tourism regulation is an aspect that enhances tourism attraction to the country. I am happy that through tourism regulation, even the indigenous people like the Karimojong have benefited. For instance, we have a game park in Kidepo, but on the other side of the coin, we have game reserves in our places. For example, I have one in my constituency in Nakapiripirit District, in the sub-county called Amaru and it is called Upe. This reserve has caused conflict between the pastoralists and the officials of the game reserve because it is located near the Manyatas. 

You know, when allocating a game reserve in a place, you should first of all know the activities those people are carrying out. For instance, where do you put the pastoralists? They need adequate land to graze their animals. Then in addition to that they need to cultivate. I know very well that many people think that Karamoja is totally dry but that is not the case. So my advice is, when allocating a reserve, you should very well know that it should be far away from the Manyatas where people are settled. Thank you, and I strongly support the motion.

6.09
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been craving to speak because I belong to Kisoro where we have rare mountain gorillas and other animal species. Therefore, I have some practical experience in this regard.

I would want to see a law in place that is friendly to the people around that area. The practical experience we have now is that the communities around these parks are not happy. Some were displaced to create a buffer zone between them and the animals of the mountain. They left behind some resources including structures like churches on the mountain range. For several years now, they have not been compensated for those structures and the gardens they left behind.

On that mountain range we have sources of water, which are a shared resource and which come down by gravity. It is unfortunate that people who use that water are not allowed to go to look after or maintain the kind of systems that are in place. You have pipes; you have reservoir tanks and so on. Yu have to clean the places where the water comes from. That to me is a problem.

Until recently we had people in Kisoro town who were running tourism lodgings. They had hotels, they had their transportation and had certain rights and a license but as we speak now, that business has been franchised to an external investor for many years. People feel dispossessed in terms of business and are politically bitter. I want to advise that this law looks into those problems and takes care of those concerns so that we come up with a law that will defend the people. Otherwise, I support the Bill.

6.12
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for this report. I strongly support this motion and I think this Bill has come at the right time more especially when we have just had a very successful CHOGM where the whole world was focusing on Uganda. 

I want to make an input on multi-sectoral collaboration, especially on ICT. I am on the National Select Committee of this Parliament on CHOGM and the other day we had the Minister in charge of ICT. He told us how advanced we are now after CHOGM. In fact, I would like to request the Minister in charge of Tourism, Trade and Industry to liaise with the Minister of ICT and see how we could use ICT to boost tourism.

He told us that we have a backbone fibre network covering almost 28 districts in the country. There is a lot of advancement in the field of ICT in this country and I am sure we should exploit this opportunity and see how we could use ICT to promote tourism, more especially to the international community. 

When I was in Sydney, I interacted with some of those senators there. They knew very little about our tourism potential here. In fact one of the investors had wanted to promote Uganda - he wanted to come to Uganda to promote what we have here and yet now the world is a global village. If we really exploit the development of ICT we have in this country, we can move a long way ahead in advertising our tourism potential in the international community and this will attract people here. 

On training, for us to boost this tourism we definitely need a human resource. I would like to request the Minister for Tourism, Trade and Industry to liaise with the Minister of Education and Sports to make sure that in our institutions of higher learning we develop courses that will help us to develop effective and efficient human resource that will help us to boost our tourism industry. I am aware that at Makerere University we have courses like Leisure and Hospitality, we have Tourism, we have Hotel Management but some of these courses could also be offered by other public universities and even private universities so that we have trained human resource to help us boost our tourism. 

For research, hon. Bihande has just talked of training. We have a biological research station in Kanyawala and a lot of research has been going on in the disciplines of entomology, botany and zoology and this Makerere University biological research station has attracted very many scholars from the international community. In fact, it has also been a way of attracting tourists to come and view the special flora and fauna in the Kyanyawala biological station.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, definitely I would like to agree with my brother and learned friend, hon. Mabikke, that it tourism is really an area full of potential and if we concentrate on it, if we really re-channel our resources to this industry, I think now that Uganda’s image has been cleared as a result of this successful CHOGM, I am sure we are going to have increased revenue collection. 

We are talking of 25 percent now; with US $320 million but I am sure if we really focus on this industry, we can more than double this revenue collection. Definitely in the employment sector we have 16 percent employment now but I am sure if we re-channel our efforts to this tourism industry we are going to have – we shall move a long way in alleviating the problem of unemployment in our country. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity and I strongly support this motion and it is really timely. I am sure it will move a long way in improving our national economy and our tax base such that we are able to provide services to our grassroots communities, funding the local government sector, the USE, the UPE, and other crucial government programmes. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before I put the question, do you have any brief remarks to make?

MS JESSICA ERIYO: No.

THE SPEAKER: If you do not, then I put the question. The motion is that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now it is time for the Committee Stage but I think we will do that tomorrow. Honourable members, I want to thank you for the contributions you have made. I think we have had over 32 Members contributing on this Bill. Thank you very much. Tomorrow we shall embark on actual legislation in the Committee Stage. With this we have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m., and adjourned until Thursday, 07 February 2008.)

