Wednesday, 2nd February, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992

(Debate continues).

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. KABUGO: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order, for this House to start deliberating on the Motion when the substantive Minister is not in the House?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister is here. (Laughter)

DR. MAGEZI: Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, to call a new Contributor when the last person to speak yesterday has not yet finished his deliberations?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Where is he?  Proceed hon. Lubega, please.

MR. LUBEGA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity given to me to contribute towards this Bill.  I stand to support the Bill because the intentions are quite good although the implementation may be a bit difficult.  Having said that, I want to give a few comments on this important Bill.  In the first place the pension scheme in Uganda needs overhauling because the people who are supposed to benefit from this scheme have lost interest.  During the colonial time when they introduced the Pension Scheme in Uganda, Uganda currency was quite strong and the people who retired during that time benefited but now with this inflation somebody working up to the age of 60 and after sweating for all that time he gets so little that he become useless.  That is why I am suggesting that the Minister thinks about overhauling the whole scheme and introduce a package, which can be given to a retiring officer.

Another comment is on corruption.  We are talking about corruption in the civil service.  Corruption has a cause.  People serve the government and at the end of their service they get nothing thus we hear that there is a lot of corruption in the civil service because when those people retire they get nothing, they get almost nothing that is why they resort to corruption, misappropriation of public funds.  I think the Minister should think about this before we continue talking about corruption in the civil service.

Another important comment I want to make here, is on the poor planning in the government. I am wondering whether the Minister can tell us exactly the number of people who are supposed to get their pensions.  I do not know whether he really knows the people who are supposed to be paid a pension and, worse still, I do not see any logic for the government to prepare a cheque for Shs. 300 for a pensioner who has traveled miles away to the district to collect a small cheque of Shs.300.  I am wondering why the Minister cannot really send this money to the sub-county headquarters and this is a small amount and yet it is not forthcoming, it takes years for somebody to get Shs. 300 for his pension.

Training; the Government because of the poor planning in some of these Ministries, you see an old man who is about to retire sent on a course which is very expensive and on his return when the government has spent a lot of money on his training, he is retired.  Then you wonder why such people are sent.  Somebody is sent for training for two years and when he comes back he serves for only one year and then retires or he is retired, the government loses a lot of money in such programmes prepared by some ministries.  So I think, at this juncture I would like the Minister to be very observant if somebody is a bout to retire he should not be sent on such a course because the government is spending a lot of money on those people and if need be let them be hired on a contract other than retiring them after spending a lot of money on them.

Another point, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MRS. SSEBAGEREKA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that not only do they train those who are nearly joining the club of senior citizens, they bar those who are young, who have just joined the service from going for training.  Thank you very much.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA:  Thank you very much for that information which has really stressed my point. I do not whether the Minister has really considered the reasons why the people who have been retired do apply for employment on contract.  The reasons are very simple.  It is because those people have nowhere to go.  They have very little opportunity to get outside the world, they are used to this small government salary and yet when they are retiring they get very little and at times they have no where to sleep so that is why they continue applying to the government to employ them on contract.  I think the Minister responsible should consider giving them a package.  When somebody gets a package he will go and start a small business in an area but if he is just retired and get nothing, that is why you see all of them applying and even knock at the doors of the Ministers asking them to recommend them for employment. (Interruption)

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to avoid misleading this House about contract terms, normally it is not very common that a government servant would be retired and brought back on contract without good reasons.  You will find that most of the people who have come back to the government on contract terms are people who have reached the retirement age but their services are still required by the government and normally you ask him whether he can accept a contract but it is not a normal practice that somebody would read a retirement age and then out of the blue the government says can we employ you contract terms?  I am definitely sure you as hon. Members who have been in the service have known exactly what type of people come in on contract terms.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA:  Mr. Chairman, I know some people who were retired and they are applying for employment on contract.  I know them.  They have been in the service for so long, in fact, they were in Buganda Government, taken and then up to now they keep on applying for employment on contract.  I am not misleading this House; I have facts. (Interruption)

MR. SSEBAGEREKA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I think the Member holding the Floor is definitely misleading this House.  My Colleague has just explained the reason why we get people back on contract.  There are special cases where their special skills are rare and we want them to continue, say, for a couple of years but it is not automatic like the hon. Lubega Waggwa is dogmatically putting it to the House.  It is not quite true and I am the employer and I know what I am talking about.

MR. LUBEGA WAGGWA:  Mr. Chairman, let me continue and I am not going to have a dialogue with the Ministers but I have facts that some people were retired and they are now applying, they were not requested.

The last point I want to make, is the job security. People in the civil service have no security on their jobs, especially when they are about to retire.  When they think of the outside world that is when they start misbehaving in the civil service because they are not secure on the job they are doing, and again they are not sure whether they are going to be very comfortable outside.  So, I think the Minister responsible should also consider the job security for the civil service otherwise, those people are going to ruin this government.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to contribute.

DR. TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, before I make contribution on this substantive Motion I would like to make two observations, in fact one observation.  In yesterday’s newspapers, in the Monitor and Daily Topic there were reports that have got very far reaching political implication on this country.   One was that the government intends to involve the District Administrators in the management of CA Elections.  I would like to use this opportunity to ask the government to make some kind of clarifications as to whether these statements are correct or false because the country is definitely worried about these statements.

I would like now to talk on the Amendment Bill.  I will start where my Colleague has just ended. (Laughter) I would like to use this opportunity to welcome the hon. Minister of Education and Sports. (Laughter) 

I want to talk about job security.  Ordinarily young people decide about their career, a young man or a young woman decide that he will become a police man or a nurse or a doctor and these decisions are sometimes related to family interests or to individual interests.  In the current retrenchment exercise a person is retrenched at the age of say 35 when he has been in the government, in a job, in a profession he has chosen.  People are now at a loss as to what to do.  If you are trained as a nurse and you are retrenched at the age of 30 or 35 what do you do! Do you go back to college to train in another profession or you just stop there! This has been the main reason why many Ugandan professionals have left this country and gone to other countries because this country does not sometimes cater for the profession they have chosen for their life career.

In addition to this interruption on the individual choices, we also have a problem of the government spending so much money, say, twenty years educating a Ugandan, say; to become a Vet. Doctor and he serves only for five or less than ten years around there and he is just told to go.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the government to review this exercise.  If people are retired, say; at the age of fifty -(Interruption) 

DR. MAGEZI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that he is raising a very fundamental matter but I am of the opinion that Uganda as a nation, if we can plan properly, we should discard the mentality that it is only the public sector, the civil service which can recruit or employ our people.  In fact, going by the numbers and population of this country we should be looking at the private sector. Government should provide such framework, basic frame work which can enable the professionals, many of whom are Veterinary Surgeons, for instance; doctors, engineers and so on and so forth to be able to be recruited in the private sector and render the same service rather than looking at the civil service.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am glad, I am informing an hon. Member of the House who has been in the teaching profession for a long time that retrenchment is like people in the Ministry of Education who have been like Dr. Adonia Tiberondwa who would second a child to be dismissed from a particular - because the performance can come with the standards of the school and that child has got the courtesy or privilege to apply in any other schools where they can afford his standard and understanding.  If he thought that retrenchment couldn’t be analyzed in that category, then the government will be in problems of having to retain everybody for the sake of retaining them. Let people find an alternative where they think they can perform better. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  May I inform my Colleague and neighbour, hon. Tiberondwa, he was using the example of veterinary doctors, as a Minister responsible for Education, veterinary doctors are trained to look after animals and the government is not the biggest owner of animals in Uganda.  I think his complaint would be valid if these veterinary doctors had no cows or dogs and cats to look after and we should abandon this mentality that to be a veterinary doctor you must be at Wandegeya and the DVO’s office rather than being where the patients are and those are the animals and I am sure hon. Tiberondwa’s cows do not regularly see a veterinary doctor, and those retrenched ones would do better if they went to see him and the people like him who own animals so that we remove away this mentality that if you are trained the government must give you a job.  If you are trained as a nurse there are many private hospitals, there are many clinics.  So, this mentality that if you do not work for the government you are not employable or employed, I think hon. Tiberondwa knows it very well. For example, you stopped being a teacher long time ago, but you are still very useful to us in the Ministry of Education. 

MR. SIBO: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that actually the figure that is being worked on as an optimum size of the civil service including teachers is 145,000 people.  I am not quite sure whether I agree with this figure myself because I think it looks very small, if the teachers are supposed to be 60,000 and the normal civil servants are only 50,000, I believe 60,000 is a small figure for the hon. Minister of Education.  Anyhow, the total figure is 145,000 it is a very small figure as required by the hon. Member.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Members for these very useful pieces of information but I would like to point out that this question of retrenchment has come suddenly Many of our young people went to schools and colleges and to universities expecting to be employed in various services many of which are government services and the private sector is not yet wider enough to accommodate so many of our young people. We cannot just wash our hands off the whole exercise and appear as if we have no responsibility for catering for our young people.

I would like now to point out that there are also various professions that cannot be easily privatised unless you want to privatise the Civil Service.  For example, there are young men who really feel very happy to be policemen.  Now, I do not know whether we have got very many private police units.  The army, for example, very many of these army people had been retrenched and consoled with iron sheets.  I think there is some problem in our human resources planning because even where people are employed we get about three quarters of the people paid and we are told the computer did not include their names.  It does appear as if we do not even know how many people we are employing in the civil service because we have some people in the civil service, in the teaching service not paid for so many months and we are told that their names have been left out by the computer.

I would like, therefore to use this opportunity to request the Government to respect people who are already in the civil service.  When you join the civil service or the public service you have got conditions of service under which you work and retrenchment exercise has actually neglected all those conditions.  If, for example, a person is told from the beginning that you have come from the university, go and look for your own job, that is well and good but there are people who have joined the civil service on specific conditions and terms of service and these are being violated without consulting the other partner in the agreement.

MISS NAMUGENYI: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member that even those who were on permanent terms were retrenched.  I want to inform him further that in Mulago Hospital, the wards are completely empty.  There is no staff and there are so many patients.  In Kalangala District, we do not even have a medical assistant in the dispensary.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

DR. TIBERONDWA: I am grateful for that information. What I am really trying to emphasize is the respect by the government for the terms and agreements the government makes with these workers. You just do not wake up over a night and tell people to go, pay them packages for which they did not plan.  Even contract officers, we have, for example, the Vice-Chancellor of the Islamic University in Mbale whose termination has caused problems because since the government does not seem to be interested in the affairs of the people we employ, whether they are local or foreign.  

Now, coming back to the services and the remunerations, I want to express concern about civil servants who work in areas away from their districts.  We have, for example, mainly policemen and prison officers who are posted in the districts far away from their homes where they have no opportunity to engage in other income generating activities.  We have a pathetic example in Bushenyi where policemen and prison officers who do not come from that area actually labour for food in the neighbouring areas.  You find their wives and children labouring for food in banana plantations and carrying food from neighbouring areas and it does not look very nice because they have no opportunity to  -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the point being made is so important in the sense that in other countries, policemen work near their homes even junior civil servants.  It makes the government in those countries, like the United States, Germany and a number of countries, to put up an infrastructure for those people.  For instance, they would get food from their homes, assist them with loans to build homes and, therefore, you do not have people to be involved in collecting money, especially these traffic people. They do that because they have very little money. I am just saying that it would be in the best interest of our government and especially when we are trying to restructure the Civil Service to get people to work near their homes except those senior civil servants and Policemen.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Finally, I want to re-emphasise the point of these public servants who are working far away from their homes in particularly the Police men all that we are doing we complain about their corruption we accuse them of -(Interruption)

MR. RUTAROH: Point of order. Mr. Chairman, I stand on a point of order the hon. Member on the Floor who is the champion of the none retrenchment exercise and he is proceeding to tell us that Policemen who work far away from their homes who probably do not earn enough should not go and do labour do work to earn their food, is he in order to plead for people not being retrenched to rationalise and be able to earn enough and yet when they do not earn enough he does not want them to supplement that income.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is quite in order. Proceed, please.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, all I was trying to say is that public servants who are not in position to engage in other money generating activities either because of the places where they have been posted or for some other reasons should be given special considerations instead of really labouring for food, these include nurses and policemen, instead of spending all our time accusing them of corruption we should also examine reasons why some of them get corrupt it is because they just cannot live on the salary which they earn.  

I would, therefore, like to ask Government to consider seriously strengthening the human resources planning unit so that we know how people we are employing, we know how many people we expect and we will also work out a well known method of terminating civil servants’ services and also get them know in time because right now the people working in these offices, even in this very building, - talk to some of these people; the secretaries say they have attended interviews and do not know whether tomorrow they are going to be retrenched from this very building. So, they feel very insecure because any time they may be told to go.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also stand to support the Bill but with reservation over the following; that although I have not worked as a civil servant, I see a lot of risk in the Civil Service.  How are we going to convince the young people to join Civil Service?  I thought before everybody had been retrenched this Motion would have been Tabled, especially a side which allows you to resign when you know that you calculate your risk and say, I think, let me self resign or calculate my risk and stop working for somebody who will just kick you in a days’ time. 

For example, I have seen people from up country with poor homes retrenched, and they cannot pay the children’s school fees and this is a man who has been serving. I have a case of a Police Officer who once upon a time worked with CARE and then joined Police in Radio Section, the man has a problem of children although he is still very smart, he cannot pay school fees for his children, he cannot maintain himself as a civil servant. One time he came with four cheques for the last two years, which had taken him a long time to receive; but he cannot even draw that money out of that cheque. One was containing Shs.200, and another was Shs. 300, since 1991/92.  You can imagine! How can somebody be expected to be a very good servant if he cannot get a bright future after his Service?  

So, I think the Minister should know that it is not by people who are going to be retrenched now or who have been given pension, who should be considered. Let us look at the future of Uganda so that the young children now, who would like to become civil servants, should calculate their risk before they join the Civil Service.  Unfortunately, in this country, although we said there are private enterprises, relatives man most of the jobs you can find in Kampala here. But how many children come from UCC Soroti or UCC Aduku without work because they cannot find any room, unless Government has a way of making sure that the people with proper businesses have job opportunities for these people who are roaming about like school students. Really, it is unfortunate to take a son or daughter to a UCC, and after qualifying she or he has nothing to do for this country, when we need Accounts and business transactions to be made. So I think, there is something to be done apart from this pension business only.

Secondly, job security is a must.  I have also moved in some other countries; job security is very important, so that your children do not suffer, and you do not also suffer as a civil servant after serving your nation peacefully.  I appeal to the Minister to make sure that there are job opportunities created to enable Ugandans find where to go. Otherwise there is no purpose of educating children only to find that they are just not able to fit in the nation.  

What farming system do we have in Uganda, for instance, which is good? I have been a farmer, and even if you grow your food who will buy it?  The market is - nobody arise for markets we are left like people who do not have where to go, I have found it impossible to sell my cotton, cotton weighing 6,000 kilos cannot be bought! 

Yesterday when I talked to the Minister, he was referring me to the executive manager who cannot even stand up and buy this cotton.  So, you can imagine, now if a man who is a mature cannot sell his cotton, what about the small boy, a small girl you convince to go to the farm and do something. So, we need to have areas of opportunities not only in Government but also in private firms, including agriculture. Mr. Chairman, I remember the British people did use this scheme that is why most of the people like Sibo and others found themselves smart in discipline. (Interruption)

MR. OPIO:  Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that if he has cotton to sell which he has not we have capacity in Tororo District to buy his cotton. Second piece of information is not only for the UCC leavers who have no jobs, but even for those civil servants who have been at the University, say, educated Ugandans with no jobs.  Thirdly, even the chiefs who have been working very diligently for the nation in Tororo District, they have spent over two years without being paid, so you should be assured that there are many people in that category. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ELYAU: Thank you very much for the piece of information, but for cotton I do not think Tororo can qualify to buy cotton from my area because they are next door to Kenya. (Laughter and Interruption)

MR. SSENDAWULA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that we have liberalized the cotton industry.  Now we have private buyers all over the country who have prepared to buy cotton just like coffee in the infancy. When we liberalized the industry, people thought we would not be successful but I can tell you to day it is the processors of coffee who look for the farmer so that they can buy his coffee and it is not the farmer now chasing the coffee processor.  In the same way when the ginneries are leased out to private ginners the purchase of cotton will be a very easy exercise and I am glad that a back-bencher has been able to invite the hon. Member who happens to be a member of Teso Co-operative Union that he can sell his cotton next door in Tororo. After all, I remember last year I did challenge the same hon. Member that there are records that he promised to provide certain kilos of cotton to Teso Co-operative Union and to this day, he has never provided that cotton.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ELYAU: Mr. Chairman, you can see how people can tell lies in this House. (Laughter) Nobody has ever told me to take my cotton to Teso Co-operative Union. (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. ELYAU: Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO: Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to tell us lies?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is not in order. Withdraw it.

MR. ELYAU:  I have not been told to take any cotton anywhere by the Minister, to be honest. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  You just withdraw the word lies.

MR. ELYAU: Okay, if you say I withdraw because you are putting it - but I did not really -(Interruption and Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. ELYAU:  Okay, I withdraw, but you see let us not take it for a joke this is a very serious matter.  Ugandans have a right to be protected if I buy something or if I grow something expecting that my country will help me to find a market.  It is not wrong for me to complain, I have a right to talk in this House about my problems.  I am representing a lot of farmers who are having problems, and some of them had their cotton burnt in the houses so this is not a joke.  

You see, Civil Service is where Government can be seen, and if any political Government has to perform properly the civil service must be up today they must be wanting to work and they should be ready to work because they see the future.  now, tell us what are the challenges which make people work effectively apart from have fears that they can be retrenched any time because we are told now that another lot will soon be retrenched that is a problem.  Why do we threaten our sons and daughters who are already in service, why do we not make one thing at ago and those who remain, remain to work and establish a good service?  I am complaining that we should make Uganda a good place for everybody to stay.

Lastly, although I talk now, our people in Teso like other areas are not happy, we feel unprotected.  When I say this, having fought hard to relieve ourselves from the insecurity and now our people are back to agriculture and unity, there is still a problem threatening us.  Our brothers from Karamoja are allowed to come to Teso. They are provided with permits, and they are even given bullets to come and take their cows and there is nothing for us.  

Politicians, have never given to know both in Karamoja and Teso; otherwise, we would have sat down and discussed, so that, we can explain the solution to the people.  There are some government organs who take for themselves to let these people come in big numbers; now in Teso everybody is worried. I do not know whether we shall succeed having this election proper because people are worried, they are saying we people in this Parliament have agreed to sell areas that are around Karamoja so that these people come to our areas with a number of animals without even protection from the Government.  We want to know what is the Government’s position over the matter.  

As I tell you now, people are not happy, and even the school children are not happy because we are sure the experience has been very nasty. Can the Government come out with a special statement, so that, people are assured why these people are coming to graze and if they are coming to graze why do they come with guns? If  -(Interruption) Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhima County Mbarara): Mr. Chairman, I want to take the first opportunity and thank the Minister for Public Service for bringing this Bill before this House, even if it is two years late.  We are handling a very important matter, we are handling a matter to do with employment of Public Servants. I would like to suggest strongly that the Minister for Public Service and his team undertakes serious planning of employment avenues in the Public Service in order to give job security to those who enter.  

I would like to make a suggestion that rather than take on everybody with promises which are not going to be realised, the Government comes out clearly with schemes of employment where short term jobs, medium-term jobs are availed and fewer pension jobs available.  Now, what I mean in this, instead of civil servants entering as permanent employees which permanence is not guarantee.  They should be tested first in short-term jobs. In other words, the Government can have a long-term job but initially it is made into a short-term job; for example, five years. Now, when you have a five-year job and you have a package of that kind of job at the end of five years you are able, as a Government, to commit yourself seriously to an employee or to let that employee, if he does not measure up raps into another set of employment. This is happening in many countries. In fact, I think today we are tackling an issue that many other countries tackled in 1943.  

Secondly, I think we should have the civil servants trained continuously until they are probably at the level of the permanent secretary.  At least they must be trained continuously until they have passed the level of the principal secretary.  So that when they go, they become under secretaries when they are already and very, very firm.  But you find in our Civil Service people who have worked for 15 years and they still do not know what to do because they have been neglected by the system.  You will find that people take on jobs and they remain on probation for 10 years even more.  This Civil Service is not well coordinated. I know there are some civil servants, I would name them, even if I think it is not necessary, who eventually leave service when they are still on probation, this is a very dangerous way of employing people. (Interruption)

MR. ARUNA ADAM: Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification form the hon. Member holding the Floor that when a civil servant is appointed every term is stated there probation period is also stated, how comes that when the probation period is stated in a new appointment letter you do not question the appointment authority for about 10 years how does that come? Mr. Chairman, thank you.

MR. SSEBAGEREKA: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I think, I should help here, what hon. Rwakakooko is talking about is quite true and is a situation which we are trying to improve upon. For example, when I became a Minister about two years ago, we could not even know how people were employed. Was this 300,000, was what?  And many of them were not a confirmed for a number of 10 to 15 years, but it is our work that we are now engaged in correcting this and we should be helped and given some support to correct this situation.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Thank you very much hon. Minister. I would like with permission of my Colleague here who is in front of me, Dr. Yeko who was confirmed after serving 14 years.  So, I think, before we demand service, before we demand value for whatever money we pay, people must have confidence in the system under which they are serving. It is only when they have the system, they have confidence in the system.  It is only when they think the system cares for them that they will turn their best.

So, I am happy the Minister is already addressing this issue.  We are talking about the pension; I have seen the formula being used.  I have not seen the money but what is 2 million paid to the Permanent Secretary after 30 years?  What is 2 million?  What is 32 thousand shillings; that is really nothing.  So, I think that, we should try and increase the base that is used for calculation so that when this is made, it is made on the basis of a reasonable figure.  Let me give you another example.  You will find as it has been given, a Permanent Secretary having a salary of Shs.47, 000/= per month. But you will find that he has allowances, maybe, going beyond Shs.300, 000 per month.  Now why do you not call that Shs.347, 000 -(Interjection) Thank you Mr. Chairman.  

What I was trying to develop is that, instead of having these segments of allowances many of which are not pensionable, the Government should commit itself to raising the pensionable amounts so that finally when the calculations are made, they are based on reasonable figures. (Applause and Interruption)

MR. MANZI: Mr. Chairman, I think it is wrong mathematics to try and calculate pension for the allowances; what would be the best, would be what the government is trying to do; to monetorise all the allowances and consolidate them as a salary.  So, that at the end of the day, you are calculated on what you earn.  Because allowances are not actually salaries and that is why some of them are not even taxable.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Some are taxable.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  I would like to thank my Colleague.  Here I was saying that in fact instead of calling them allowances, they should be make into a salary, what is known as basic salary.  So, if you do not want to escape Income Tax that is a different matter.  But i think that to say that, we are going to do well, when the basic salaries are still very law, we will really not have done much.

I would like the Government to consider the introduction of a contributory pension -(Interruption) 

MR. SIBO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I think we should know.  I have been told about retrenchment.  And retrenchment is supposed to end at the end of June.  And by that time, we are supposed to have saved Shs.73 billion.  Now Shs.73 billion added to the Shs.89 billion which is the wage - should give us more than Shs.150 billion. That would properly add our  - at least double the pay - the salary of the civil servant but the Minister is not working to that plan.  Thank you.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Thank you hon. Sibo for that information. Now, what I was trying to develop is that we have had the civil service, the classical civil servants who do not contribute to their pension earnings.  And yet in the same economy, we have got people who contribute to their pension through NSSF.  Now, I do not see why Government should not introduce some contributory pension. What is the reason for having this scheme running without revision to take account of the current demands?  In other countries, in classical civil services, the civil servants contribute to their pension.  In other words, there is some kind of indirect saving which is forced on to people to save so that they can leave better.  I would like the Minister to comment on this because the issue of pension is very, very important. (Interruption)

MR. ASIKU:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that, I cannot imagine how the civil servant and peasant who do not have enough money to live on, is also going to cut the cut of what is not enough to be saved for future in the moment. 

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. I think, what I was trying to say is that, when the salaries are increased in this new arrangement hopefully after the total number of civil servants has come to 145,000. After that the civil servants should contribute towards their pension so that the pension amount can increase.  I am of course also aware, Mr. Chairman, that the minimum wage is low for others as well. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you finished?

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  I am winding up, Mr. Chairman. I would like to endorse the suggestion made that the retirement age be shifted from 55 years to 60 years.  There is no reason way it should not be shifted.  I know there is a country - I can name it, Canada, where a University Professor won a Supreme Court judgement when he was already 76, and he remained in service.  So, Mr. Chairman, I would like the support the proposal by Prof. Kanyeihamba for retirement to be at 60. (Interruption)

MR. NTIMBA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor and to the House as a whole that, in 10 years time, we are trying to start what is known as Universal and Compulsory Primary Education.   According to my calculations, if we insist on retiring teachers of the present age of 55 years, it is going to be very difficult for us to fulfill that learned target of fulfilling the Universal and Compulsory Primary Education.

The other piece of information I want to give to the House is that currently, many teachers, especially the primary school level, when they retire, they are still both mentally and physically capable of continuing teaching services.  Many of them go and start their private schools, those who are capable, and others find a way of getting contracts into other private schools and so on.  So, the information I am giving is that if we insist on retiring teachers as at the present moment, we may find it difficult to implement this Universal Primary Education and I think, the hon. Minister of Education who is with us today can bare me out in this.  Thank you.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  Let me wind up now.  I would like to make a final suggestion. The final suggestion is that the Minister of Public Service should, I think, consolidate all these pieces of legislation and bring them under one piece of legislation.  I would have been happy if we are handling a consolidated piece of legislation rather than pieces of Amendments of this law or the other.

Lastly, I would like to suggest that amendments be made for those who take on gratuity jobs to be able to draw their many as quickly as they leave service.  So, that we do not have a problem which we are currently experiencing with former East African Community Workers.  I thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. RUTAROH (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill.  The business at our hands is very, very important because we are talking about remuneration of people who have served the nation in various capacities at their retirement age.  Unfortunately, the pension we are talking about has not been half as good as what we would like to have, mainly because it is meagre.  I do think there should be a change like hon. Rwakakooko suggested; either in the administration of the pension scheme because of inflation.  The amounts paid out retired public servants are so low that they become meaningless in the end. In my view, if gratuities were combined with the pensions, and paid at ago, maybe, this would help our retired civil servants in one way or another.  Because the handouts that are given, at times you find a cheque of Shs.3, 000/= which is paid after a long time, when the money has already lost value and in the end, people do not get the benefit they would like to have, Pensions are a constitutional matter.  It is a constitutional right of people who serve the nation with diligence.   And I think if we have kept a servant at his desk for several years of 20 to 30 years, we should give him something that will make him happy in his retirement. I wish to refer to a piece of information that was given yesterday by hon. Adonia Tiberondwa who said, Mr. Rutega had been retired and that was taken on by government.  And I wish to make clarification that Mr. Ruetega did retire and took on a contract job with World Bank after competing in an interview with many others.  So, in support of a Minister to say that it is not true that you pick a retired civil servant and you just take him on as though you do not have others to replace him.

I wish to talk about retirement age.  I am sorry, I am of the views that while others think that the retirement age should be put higher, I think the retirement age for civil servants should be lowered because it is a fact that during the turbulent years of Uganda, the private sector and the public sector suffered.  They did shrink.   The rate at which jobs are being created is so low compared to the rate at which training is giving us manpower.  If you increase the retirement age say to 60, then you will certainly have many more people on the street.   If it was for teachers, I would like to agree, that you can increase the retirement age for teachers because of the conditions of service of teachers, many more teachers tend to leave the service before retirement age than in the public service.  

So, as a result, you find that you have many or rather fewer teachers in service and you would want to get many to teach our children but Public Service.  Until we improve and increase on the jobs that are available, I think retirement age should be lowered to 50 years, so that people can retire when they are still fresh, when they are strong to go about business.  When you put it at 60 years you are effectively saying, when you are no longer very useful, then you can be retired.  I think, they should be retired when they are still very, very strong, creative, imaginative and energetic.

Yesterday, many Members made contributions on the East African Community workers and rightly said Government should give a statement to the House about when they should be paid.  I think that is not sufficient; definitely not. The East African Community Pension Scheme was a contributory pension scheme.  Some money was taken off from the salaries of the workers.  And Government keeping quiet is actually tantamount to rob money from the pockets of these employees.  My view is, Government in spite of monitory constituents, should put out a timetable as to how they will be able to pay back to these people.  It is not enough to give a statement here in Parliament.  The money is due to them.  

When NRM took power there were too many debts for constructors suppliers and to different government departments.  A timetable was worked out and various suppliers were paid after a certain period.  I see no reason why these people cannot be told because of constituents of money, we shall be paying you know, according to a certain given schedule.  A statement Parliament is very, very insufficient.  This also is going to a bad indicator to even people who are being retired from Public Service, Urban Authorities and so on. Already we have people who have not been paid their retrenchment benefits. And in our language we have a proverb that says; ‘omutego kugukwata eihuri akeine ebisya kirirayo’, meaning that, ‘if a trap can get hold of an egg, then anything with a neck must be extremely careful’.  If you have the community people who made contributions towards their pension and they fail to get their money, then these others who do not contribute directly, have everything to worry about.  So, I think the Minister should come out and know uncertain terms about the payment of the community workers.

I wish to reiterate what hon. Rwakakooko said, or rather to emphasize that the pensions that are given out are too small. A civil servant works for twenty, thirty years, and receives a pension of Shs.2 million.  This two million you cannot leave on for even a year.  This two million is not enough for renting a house equivalent to the one he has been staying in for even a half a year.  So, the pension should be meaningful.  This is why you have civil servants reducing their ages, trying to cheat, so that they can remain young and remain on their jobs. At the end of the day, if the pensions are not reasonable, even this Debate will not be meaningful. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO (Bugangainzi County, Kibale): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It is very unfortunate actually that we have not given due respect to our old people the pensioners.  And it is important that people should always consider the old flock.  Because if we do not consider the old people, then the young people we do not also be considered.  But what is important in this matter and what is very important you remember, is that most of the pensioners have worked for a period of over 30 or 25 years.  And this is a time when this country has been mismanaged. They are, of course, part and parcel of this management.  

Now, if this country was a business, probably, the business would have been declared bankrupt and closed. Since a country cannot be closed, it has been going on dropping and dropping.  So you can see that they have a problem, the pensioners have a problem because their business at that time, the Government was serving him did not do well.  In fact, even the civil servants, they left behind they are equally suffering the same way.  They earning as little as they also expect.  

Having said that, there is a need in this country for the Ministry to come up with a scheme for the people working in the Civil Service. These schemes could be, housing scheme, so that if a young man joins civil servants, he is introduced to this scheme he is told that the Government has a scheme of housing.  If you want to join it, a certain percentage of your salary has got to go to this scheme, or has got if not housing, you can introduce farming schemes for the civil servants.  That is a certain amount if you are working with Civil Service, for about 5 years, then you are able either to buy a farm or to start a farm or to buy land somewhere or shares in some big companies. But whatever you save, will go - you buy shares in such a company.  So that actually a person does reach to a certain age, and he is told to retire and has nothing in life. I have known of some civil servants, who have stayed in some Government houses, and in one house for over 30 years, and when he is retiring or he is told to leave that house, he has nowhere to go because there was no scheme for him in place.  

So, it is important for the Ministry to set up a Scheme.  A person cannot stay in the same house for 30 years and just tell him to go out.  Surely, after 25 years or 20 years, a person should have made enough money; if little money was deducted from him monthly; should be able to pay it.  My other complaint, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption) 

DR. MAGEZI: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that I think, we are expecting too much to believe that we are going to tell Government to set up schemes; A, B, C, D, E, to look after the interests of people in the Private Sector.  It would be far more meaningful because you know Government is a bad manager of businesses.  To appeal to these institutions like, National Housing, which have the capacity and the know-how, to come up with schemes, which can be tethered to suit the public servants at curious stage within which they fall and this responsibility should be entirely in arrangement, where the Government could come in if it is to guarantee payment.  But it would not be viable, I do not see the government marshalling enough manpower to man all these teams and be able to start building houses for civil servants.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO: Mr. Chairman, my concern is to have, a housing scheme where that housing scheme comes from the National Housing Corporation and has something to do with the civil service, and I would not mind, but I think, I believe that would be a good idea.  My other complaint, is the distribution of civil servants.  I have noted of late that there is too much concentration of civil servants from Public Service in cities and towns.  You go in a district, and you find that, for instance, in a district like Kibale, we have about four mid-wives. When children from that district who have stayed in mid-wifery, I do not know the number of what - thousands.  

Only four mid-wives taking over three constituencies, four mid-wives and only two doctors, we recently got a second doctor but there was only one doctor and who was only an administrator. Now you come to teachers. Most of the teachers are distributed only in towns and this tends to bring a lot of problems; because we are concentrating a lot of people in towns, and we are providing less facilities in the villages, and people come in towns and when they come in town, they have very little facilities in towns and they do nothing in town. (Interruption)

MR. ADAM ARUNA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, there are many jobs in town than in rural areas. So, when these people qualify to go back to the rural areas, they do not get the type of jobs for which they qualify, but these jobs are possible in town.  Thank you very much.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO: Mr. Chairman, there are more sick people in the villages than even in towns.  We have quite a lot of people who are sick and they have got to come in town; they have got to travel over 130 miles away -(Interruption)

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Point of information.  Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Ssekitoleko for giving way. Besides the poor salaries which encourage people to work near town so that they can do other jobs, to make them subsist, there is also the problem of housing.  The hon. Member is aware that rural schools away from towns have no houses for teachers and teachers find it very difficult to go to a house at a school and be told, the best he can do is, either to stay with the Chairman PTA or with a fellow teacher.  So this kind of situation, where schools have had the responsibility of building the houses has forced away the teachers from the rural places to towns, because they can get small rooms and they can hire; and again, they can get other jobs too; even selling in Owino Market! (Interruption)

MR. KABUUBI:  Point of information. I would like to give an information to defend here, hon. Ssekitoleko that the point he is raising, is really fundamental and I believe, you have realised whenever we are debating the Budget, I have raised this complaint of the planning system which is not co-ordinated in this country, because if the planning system -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kabuubi, please give information and stop there. Do not go on contributing.

MR. KABUUBI:  No, if the planning system - Mr. Chairman I am trying to go to his point.  That if the planning system was well coordinated, we would have more resources in the rural areas; which would attract the man power to go to the rural areas.  But because of poor, uncoordinated planning which we have, you find that all the people, all the resources of the nation are concentrated at the centre; while the rural areas are neglected.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO:  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, try to wind up, please.

MR. SSEKITOLEKO: I am winding up, Mr. Chairman.  There is a need for our civil servants to prepare themselves for retirement.  Many of them retire very unexpectedly, without knowing what exactly they are going to do. I would suggest that when these people are nearing retirement, we should start introducing them to certain new skills.  Let us prepare them for seminars to study agriculture, let us prepare them about some seminars about say; adult education and so on, a few courses before they retire.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Sam Ssebagereka): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to thank the Members for their contributions and also the comments that have been made have been quite useful.  I would like to start by saying that, many of the views that have been given, are already being taken care of in my ministry.  It is only that Members did not know, that we are working to improve on the Civil Service and we have taken note already of what should be done.  

I would like to wind up by reminding Members of the principles on which this Bill has been brought forward.  I would like most importantly to draw the attention of Members, that Bill has brought some innovations in our views, for example, we have introduced the survivors pension to be paid to the deceased pensioners spouses or children after the death of the pensioners; and that is very important.  

The other matter which is of importance, is that this Bill consolidates all the Acts where we have been administering various pensions, for example, the northerners, the easterners, have been dealt with separately; Buganda pensioners have been dealt with separately.  So, Members should take note of this, that in consolidating these Acts, we are going to administer pensions better than we have done before.  

I have carefully considered the comments and criticisms regarding the running of the Civil Service in the country, but I am glad to not that the serious criticism did not concern the Bill before the House.  They related to other matters like East African Pensioners and housing and matters of that kind, which do not concern this Bill before us.  Now, I would like to deal with serious matters one, by one.

The first one is the age of compulsory retirement. I cannot support the suggestion that the age of compulsory retirement should be raised from 55 to 60 in all cases. (Interruption) 

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the Minister to say that this Bill and of course with the Government, should not be concerned with East African former Civil Servants; whereas the Government of Uganda was a partner to East African Community?  And, our brothers in Tanzania have paid their people, in Kenya; they have done the same thing.  So is it really in order, instead of taking care of our people; because some of them were civil servants from our own government than this same scheme, Mr. Chairman? Is it therefore, in order for the Minister to say -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: If you had taken time to listen to him carefully, you would have got the answer.  Proceed, please.

MR. SSEBAGEREKA: Thank you, The question of East African pensioners will be dealt with as I informed the House yesterday, that today, the Cabinet was supposed to be considering this matter.  Unfortunately, I have not been able to go to Gulu where the Cabinet is sitting, so I think, I would like to ask the patience of Members to let the Cabinet consider this matter and soon, in a few days’ time, the Cabinet will come out with a statement.  So, we are not completely ignoring the issue.  

As I was saying, I am not prepared to agree to raise the retirement age from 55 to 60, but I am prepared to accept that in case of teachers, the age of retirement should go up to 60.  I am prepared to consider that and if possible, accept it and incorporate it in these Amendments.  The reason why I am not accepting it is that, there is a tendency to block the promotional opportunities for young men and women who are looking forward to promotion and then, they usually find the old men and old women sitting at the top there and are not moving; and also the other reason is that, life expectancy in Uganda is still so low.  So, a person should be left with some years to enjoy his retirement and do things he would like to do before he dies.  

The other point was powers for the Minister to amend the Schedule.  Hon. Sibo, dwelt on this matter for a very long time.  I think hon. Sibo is pushing the powers of the House far too much.  This is not the first time the Ministers are given powers to regulate and together with the approval of the Cabinet, to come out with some workable regulations.  If we say that each time the Ministry of Public Service wants to change, they should come to this House to be given permission.  Why do we not say also that each time the Minister of Civil Service wants to increase salary, they should come to this House for approval?  Now, this is going to make matters very, very difficult and also delays will be so long and you will not be amused by these delays.   

Take the example of this very Bill that we are considering.  It was first published almost one and half years ago, but because of various delays and priorities on the Government activities, we have not been able to come to this point, where we are now because of various matters.  So, all that I am asking for, is that you give the Minister freedom - after all, the Ministers are responsible persons in the country. If you require that every time the pension should be increased, the Minister should come to Parliament, as I have said, why do you not also say that every time civil servants salaries are to be increased, the minister should come here to seek permission?

Another point of importance was the smallness of the pension itself.  This Bill seeks to remedy this problem.  Members should not introduce obstacles that block quick remedy to the improvement of pensions.  Now, if you look at the chits which were distributed earlier and define the formula which we use in payment of pensions, hon. Kabuubi talked about value for money and he was quite dogmatic about how money is. Decisions should be made and all sorts of things that I wish him well, that the value for money means that you achieve certain results either by a lesser in puts or you increase the out put by the same units of in puts.  So, I would like to say that so far, we have achieved so much.  

Members of the public may not see this, but you should take our word that there has been a lot of improvement in Civil Service.  People are coming early, people are realising that it is important to keep their jobs and if we go on like this, we will soon seem to be having a better and efficient Civil Service.  I would also like to remind Members or re-inform the Members that, when we removed ghost workers, that was an improvement.  So far, we have saved Shs.1.2 billion in ghost workers.  We removed about 42,000 ghost workers and God knows where the money was going, but I can tell you now, we have 1.2 billion shillings which we have save because of our efficient working.  Logistics in payment of pensions - I think I deserve some appreciation on this matter.  Logistics in payment of pensions - failure for pensioners to receive their money is cause by several reasons.  One, the people are not available at their addresses which were given. 

The second reason is that, people are not prepared to travel long distances to collect small amounts that are not worth the effort.  So, in giving me, the Minister, powers to vary, to consider, increasing pensions, certainly this matter will be improved upon.  At the moment, we have a total of about 9,971 pensioners; the District Treasurer is paying 3,000 of them, and 3,675 by direct mail, where we use speed delivery and 3,200 are paid through the Bank.  

But there are some logistical difficulties for pensioners to collect their pensions. As to the actual amount of pensions, the smallness is really appalling. The lowest pension we pay is 49 shillings and this Act - this Amendment is seeking to remedy this.  Of course, I can tell you also that there are the highest pensioners we have on the books at the moment receives Shs.57, 000 and that is people on the special categories.  

I would like now to deal with point of employment of retired civil servants that has attracted so many comments.  It is not true that people get contract automatically.  The very few people whom we have given contracts are people with special knowledge, specialised professions whom we retain because we want to teach the young ones or because at that point, we do not consider it right for the service - that the service will suffer if we do not retain these people.  There are not many; they can only be counted on ten fingers.   So, it is not true as Members were putting it that we really do employ automatically.  No, that is not true.  We consider people for contracts based on special cases.  

As I have already mentioned, a few comments have been made - many of them are not quite true and whenever it comes to comments on civil service, it is a field that is fertile for people to make comments.  Some of which are not practical, some are not reasonable but I can tell you that in the past two years we have been overhauling the whole matter and some people elsewhere are appreciating that Uganda is on the forefront in improving the civil service; but when I heard people here making comments as if we are doing nothing I got a bit depressed.  But I am sure some of the Members appreciate our work -my work and the work of my staff and are prepared to support us.  We are still in the process of restructuring and reforming the Civil Service.  If you gave us a bit of time, within a short time we shall be able to come out with a Civil Service that everybody will be proud of.  

With these few comments, I would like to ask Members to support me to carry out the Amendments and adopt them and the pensioners will be happy to  -(Interruption)

MR. G. KASAIJA: Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  As you are aware, I have not got the chance to contribute on this but there are a number of issues which I wanted the minister to clarify to me maybe for the benefit -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is too late now.  Can you proceed, please.  Let him wind up.  Please, take your Seat.

MR. SSEBAGEREKA: Yes, I was winding up.  I was asking the support of every Member here - for us to improve on the conditions of pensioners and if you give us a chance the pensioners will be happy from now onwards.  I think I would like to end here and thank the Members who have contributed with some ideas.  Those who have brought some difficult ideas will also be considered and they keep on improving continuously.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Pensions’ Amendment Bill, 1992 be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PENSIONS’ (AMENDMENT BILL) 1992

(Clause 1, agreed to).

(Clause 2, agreed to).

(Clause 3, agreed to).

Clause 4

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kasaija are you moving an Amendment?

MR. KASAIJA:  No, I just want to bring out something  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, bring your Amendment if you have it.

MR. KASAIJA: Mr. Chairman, I do not have a written Amendment.

(Clause 4 agreed to).

(Clause 5 agreed to).

(Clause 6 agreed to).

Clause 7

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I move that we add a new Clause 7 to read as follows, Sir - that Section 6, sub-Section (iii) of the Principle Act, be amended to read as follows: every officer shall retire from the public service on the attainment of 60 years of age.  I beg to move, Sir.  This Amendment, Sir, has been pre-empted by the fact that the information given by hon. Members, who spoke, feel that it is high time that the age was elevated from 65 from the colonial times to the modernity of 60 years.  

Many have given reasons and when I spoke yesterday, Sir, I also gave others.  But there are others that have not been advanced.  I am really very surprised that the minister should in fact oppose this proposal.  The fact of the matter is that, a civil servant chooses a career.  They choose a career that they want to work for the state until such time as they retire and are actually pensioned off.  This Bill is entitled The Pensions’ (Amendment) Bill because we are pensioning off people whom we do not want to work any more and I am very glad that he has explained that not many people when they have retired get contract work.  Therefore, we are looking at a career of a civil servant who should be comforted that he is going to work until such time that when he actually reaches retirement age then he retires, maybe, for the next ten years - the Bible speaks of we humans being able to live 6 scores of years and ten more so it is 70 years.  So, he has got a comfortable 10 years in which to look after his grand children and look after his wife.  That is why Members have urged very ably that we need to improve the pension benefits.  So that really, at the end of the day, this man is not required to work again but he can enjoy the remainder, the evening of his life.  

The other point which has been proved, is that many of the people at the age of 55 have really reached their prime of thinking and abilities.  In fact, it is a contradiction that there is no age limit for politicians who give orders to the civil servants.  Politicians can go up to the age of 67, 70 even 90.  There is no age limit.  These are the people, the honourables who are supposed to formulate the policies that the civil servants are to implement.  We let them formulate these policies; bring out new ideas at the age of 80, at the age of 90 - but we say you civil servant whose job is simply to implement what the politicians have done when you have reached the age of 55 you senile and therefore, you should retire.  I do not accept that argument.  It is illogical.  

Therefore, the case for increasing the age from 55 to 60 is really fundamental. We are to remember that the Committee on Public Service had recommended that the age should be raised to 65 but the minister insisted on 55.  I think that to say that 60 should be the means period is a very good compromised and therefore, takes in the fears of the Minister.  I, therefore, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move the Amendment.

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you much Mr. Chairman. I stand to support the Amendment.  (Applause) The age of 55 - a man or woman by the time he reaches of 55 is just beginning life.  (Laughter) Therefore, it is not right that we should lose really skilled, seasoned manpower at the age of 55.  What is the magic about 55? Why 55? Some people have argued that people should retire at the age of 55 in order to create room for other people to take over their jobs.  

This is not correct because you see if somebody is effective and efficient as he would be at the age of 55; he can actually create employment for more people rather than - (interruption)- rather than get somebody who is less experienced and ineffective and then hope that he is going to be efficient and therefore, create other employment opportunities.  

I, therefore, strongly support the Amendment that the age of retirement be raised to 60.  Many countries are doing this.  I think people today are living longer; as a matter of fact people who retire at the age of 65 live another 20 years and the state continues to pay them pensions - when in fact they should be working and actually delivering goods in return for the pension which they are getting (if they were getting salaries.)  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I would like to support very strongly the Amendment.

MR. SSEBAGEREKA: I strongly oppose the raising of the age from 55. The life expectation in this country of still 48; and those of you who have cheated and have lived longer that, are exceptions.  There is definitely, some complaints of blockage at the top. It is not true that we simply promote people - simply because we have to promote them. As I said, I am prepared to accept for teachers to be allowed to go up to the age of 60 even 65; but for ordinary civil servants, I still strongly feel that they should retire at the age of 55.  Teachers at the age of 60 and the Judges at the age of 65.  That is my stand Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 7 as amended and agreed to).

(Clause 8 agreed to).

(Clause 9 agreed to).

(Clause 10 agreed to).

(Clause 11 agreed to).

(Clause 12 agreed to).

(Clause 13 agreed to).

(Clause 14 agreed to).

(Clause 15 agreed to).

(Clause 16 agreed to).

(Clause 17 agreed to).

(Clause 18 agreed to).

(Clause 19 agreed to).

THE TITLE

MR. SSEBAGEREKA: Mr. Chairman, The Title should be, ‘The Pensions’ (Amendment) Bill 1994’, and not ‘1992’, because there was a delay in presenting this Bill to the House. 

(Question put and agreed to).

(The Title as amended and agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Ssebagereka): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Ssebagereka): Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled: ‘The Pensions’ (Amendment) Bill, 1994’ and passed it with two Amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Ssebagereka): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1994

THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr. Ssebagereka): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: ‘The Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 1994’ be read a Third Time and do pass. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The Title settled and the Bill passed).

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council adjourned at 4.20 p.m. until Thursday, 3rd February 1994, at 2.30 p.m.)

