
Thursday, 8 February 2007

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. However, I note that the number is smaller than yesterday’s. I know there is a committee, which is busy in the Eastern part of Uganda, but others should be here. I do not know what is happening, even to the Front Bench. I do not know whether they have a meeting, but I have not been informed. Anyway, I welcome you.

I will be adjusting the Order Paper to allow a statement from hon. Baba Diri and an informal question from hon. Banyenzaki. I would also like to take this opportunity to point out that there is something which we as Parliament should take note of and find a solution to. The problem is the road carnage. There are very many deaths on our roads. I think something should be done to curb this because there was an accident in Mabira and another one on Masaka road. I think something has to be done. There must be something wrong. I am not supposed to participate in the debate, but I also own a constituency and I am a citizen who takes advantage of my seat here to point out what is going on. Something should be done. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the issues why the attendance is poor is that in most cases we begin plenary very late, yet you always adjourn this House to 2.00 p.m. Members are always here at 2.00 p.m. but we begin towards 3.00 p.m., so there is need to keep time.

THE SPEAKER: That has no merit, I must say. You mean they went away because we did not start at 2.00 p.m.? When I am in my chambers I watch the attendance here.  

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Ssezi Mbaguta): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to present the Public Service Commission Annual Report, 2005. In accordance with Article 166, sub-section 3 of the Constitution, the Public Service Commission is required to submit a report to Parliament in respect of each year on the performance of its function. I now, therefore, present the Public Service Commission Annual Report, 2005, to Parliament in line with the constitutional provision. The report represents the highlights of the performance of the Public Service Commission for the year under review, including key outputs, key events, challenges faced and way forward. I beg to present and lay it on the Table.  

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee of Parliament handle it and then subsequently report to us.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.44
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to raise issues of great concern about the people of Koboko. The issues are the outbreak of Meningitis, and the water crisis in Koboko District. In mid January 2007 there was an outbreak of Meningitis in Lobule sub-county in Koboko District. Within a matter of days the Meningitis spread like bushfire throughout the district of Koboko and even the whole West Nile. I understand it even spread to Karamoja and Kotido. The records are now in the Health Centre IV show that there 349 persons infected with Meningitis cumulatively, and 19 have already died, leaving alone those who have died at their homes. I am sure the number is greater.

I thank the Minister of Health for responding quickly by sending drugs for treating Meningitis. However, the vaccination delayed to some extent. It is on 02 February 2007 that immunisation started and indeed people are being immunised. Unfortunately they are immunising people from the age of two to 30, leaving out the age bracket above 31. That means the elderly people can die at ease without being immunised. Mr Speaker, why is it on earth that elderly people should die when actually death could be prevented? 

I would like to remind the Minister of Health that Koboko is now a district and it deserves a district hospital. If we had a hospital, more lives would have been saved because there would be more staff and money to be used. Therefore, people of Koboko urge the Ministry of Health and government at large to upgrade the health centre IV of Koboko into a government hospital.

Koboko actually serves many people including those from Sudan and Congo. If you went to the hospital’s OPD now, you would find that the number is very high. We really need that hospital as quickly as possible.

Mr Speaker, about the water crisis;  Koboko lies on the northwest side of Uganda where during this time of the year there is a prolonged dry season from November to the end of February and sometimes even March. At this time, all the wells and streams are dry. There is no water, especially in the town and the suburbs of the town council. At the moment in Koboko, poor as they are, people buy a jerry can of 20 litres at Shs 1,000, which is too much for them!

On 18 January 2007, we met the Minister of Water and Environment and discussed the issue of this water crisis. She told us she is going to do something about the emergency, that is, by providing maybe some big tanks at some points within the town council so that water could be drawn from Koch River to Koboko town, where people could buy it cheaply at Shs 100 or Shs 200, which is reasonable. Up to now, nothing has been done. People of Koboko are really desperate and they would like to know what the Minister has in place. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The statement has been made but I do not know – maybe the Leader of Government Business – the Minister of Defence will have to alert -(Laughter)

2.49
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I believe my colleagues will be coming in due course, but given the importance of the statement our colleague has made, I think it will require a well prepared response from the Minister of Health. However, let me confirm that there has been an epidemic of meningitis, which has spread to the Karamoja region and now in the West Nile area. 

This attack comes regularly after a number of years and I agree with hon. Baba Diri that perhaps an earlier preparation could have averted at least part of the mortalities that we suffered there. We regret this and convey our sympathies to the families that have been affected. 

On the other issue, I think my colleagues for Water and Health will be giving a more comprehensive reply.

2.50
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point that – in today’s paper of Observer there was a headline which reads, “Politics, Corruption combined to keep NTV out.” This is a media house, which has a broadcasting TV house that had been opened and was giving good services. The closure of this TV station, which had invested millions of money in this country, gives an impression that there is intention to frustrate some of the investors, in the sense that if you read it, the circumstances surrounding the closure of this TV station, there is an allegation that government is actually interfering with the media houses.

Mr Speaker, with your guidance, now that the Minister of Investment is here, wouldn’t it be prudent that the minister clears air that there is no interference with these investors and the Minister of Information, Kirunda Kivejinja, who has been mentioned in interfering with this business should also clear his name?

This leads me to another issue of how the minister issued a statement banning Tiger Head batteries. I believe we are in a liberalised economy whereby a minister does not call a press conference to ban an item, which is being imported into the country. It gives an impression that some businessmen are using government ministers to frustrate other people’s businesses. This is a case of the Ministry of Trade who banned the importation of Tiger Head batteries from the media centre at Nakasero.

Mr Speaker, through you, I require the responsible minister to clarify to this country and assure the investors and businessmen that there is no interference at all in their business of investors and other businesses in this country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the relevant ministers. They are not here.

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for drawing my attention to a newspaper article regarding the treatment of investors. I would like to assure this House that I shall investigate the matter and find out what the truth is. 

Having said that, I would like to assure this House and the public that the Government is committed to maintaining a conducive environment for investors. For this reason I thank the Member and I shall investigate the matter.

MR BANYENZAKI: Now that the minister is going to tell us, if at all, could I be clarified on which modalities he is going to use to clarify this matter?

THE SPEAKER: Essentially the matters which you raised must have been addressed to the Minister of Information. This could only come in to supplement because it is the Minister of Information who should answer for TVs and radio stations. The other one is the Ministry of Trade. Apparently the Minister of Trade is not here. The Minister for Investment can only come in to supplement that part but essentially these were questions to the parent Ministry of Information and the parent Ministry of Trade.

What we can do is that since the Minister of Defence is here, I think we have to talk to the ministers so that they can come here and give detailed responses to your questions and then you can raise other matters. Otherwise, if we start now then part of the answers will not be given, then tomorrow another one comes to – you know, we will be duplicating the work. So you just keep whatever you have, when the Minister of Information and Minister of Trade are here, then they will be able to answer. But they have been recorded in the Hansard.

MR WOPUWA: I was wondering what has happened to our ministers, they are very few in front, Mr Speaker!

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, this morning there were many committees, as colleagues know, which were sitting and many of them finished late. I believe in the course of time some more ministers will come to the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Maj. (Rtd) James Kinobe): Mr Speaker, first of all, I convey apologies from the Ministry of Gender. This morning we had several meetings. Gender is one of the members on the organising committee of CHOGM. My senior minister is still in those meetings and hon. Rukutana is presiding over another function, which is passing on facilities to the youth leaders from the local governments in the ministry. Because of this, I had to come in to stand in for the ministry.

Copies of the statement are on the way –(Laughter)- I beg your indulgence and that of the Members that before I go even half way, the copies will be here.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, read the statement.

MAJ. KINOBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development concerning the state of street children in Uganda.

The problem of street children has become a critical area of concern to many Ugandans. This is because the street children issue is a new phenomenon is our society and it is a combination of many factors, which are greatly compounded by poverty. 

The first research on street children, which was conducted in 1993, established that they were approximately 4,000 street children in all the streets of the towns and cities of Uganda. Since then, the situation has worsened despite the fact that there are various interventions in the management of the street children programme.

The causes of the problem of street children in Uganda are varied, as suggested by various studies conducted by both government and non-government agencies. They have been listed as including, among others: impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, peer pressure, orphanage hostile domestic environment, loss of parental control, war and civil strife. Ultimately the situation has been further worsened by the burden of poverty and or the limited opportunities for the children and the youth of this country. 

The presence of street children in locations of the city and other urban areas and the way the children conduct themselves is socially unacceptable. It is an indicator of a breakdown of traditional systems and presents a major social problem that needs to be addressed without any further delay. The situation is compounded by the influx of Karimojong families in urban areas of Mbale, Tororo, Busia, Iganga, Jinja and Kampala. And it is a major problem of concern, which calls for strategic and timely interventions.

The magnitude of the problem

The street children phenomenon is a complex global problem that continues to be dynamic and volatile. It is a problem that cannot be tackled meaningfully without addressing the obstacles faced by families and communities where these children come from. It might be hard to solve the problem using a single prescription. Uganda has made fundamental reduction in the prevalence rates of the traditional street children. However, social disruptions in Karamoja in form of prolonged famine, cattle rustling and of recent the disarmament programme; have created a new and a merging phenomenon of street families and not children any longer.

Studies also indicate that the street children have differential status. Children on the streets have parents who encourage them to go on the streets to secure additional financial support for the family. On the other hand, some children on the streets do not have parents who can afford to keep them in school. So, these children out of their own decision wander through the streets looking for ways to support themselves. There is also a growing number of orphans and abandoned children whose only home is the street. 

The street children and families problem is one of the biggest challenges facing the Government of Uganda. The phenomenon of street children and families is alarming for Kampala, Jinja, Busia and Mbale districts due to the large numbers of the Karimojong. 

It is against this background, Sir, and honourable members that a strategy for the withdrawal and prevention of street children and families was designed to contribute to the process of restoring and improving the quality of life of the street children and the families. The strategy will ensure that the people who are withdrawn from the streets are resettled in their regional communities and that some follow-up activities in the communities are going to be conducted by the community workers from both government and the NGOs. 

The main focus of the short-term intervention will be to remove the children from the streets in Kampala while the long term one will focus on the children in the entire country.

The consultative process

Before the development of the strategy, a number of consultative meetings were held with stakeholders as below:

A meeting was held between the ministry and some Members of Parliament from Karamoja region to find out a solution to the street children problem who originate from that particular area.

The Minister of State for Youth and Child Affairs with other technical staff in the ministry met with Members of the Parliamentary Sessional Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs when they were holding consultations on the Karamoja general situation on the 13th to 14th December 2006. 

A ministry team led by the Minister of State for Youth and Child Affairs visited a youth centre at Kobulini in Moroto District. There we had discussions with the Chief Administrative Officer of Moroto, the LC III members and elders from Iriri sub-county. The ministry team also visited Masindi and had discussions with the vice-chairperson of that district concerning the possibility of settling the children in Kiryandongo.

The ministry has also had meetings with UNICEF, other stakeholders mainly NGOs, the local governments and Karamoja leaders to find a solution to this problem. There was also a consultative meeting, which was held in the Prime Minister’s Office. It was chaired by hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere and another meeting was chaired by hon. Otafiire, the Minister of Local Government. 

In all the discussions, it was recommended that the issue of street children be handled in phases, that is, the short term, medium term and finally the long term. The issue should be handled as a matter of urgency with all the stakeholders. 

Justification

The definition of a street child according to our laws is that a street child is any person below the age of 18 years but whom the street or unoccupied dwelling has become his/her habitual place of abode during the day, during the night or both, with no care or protection. Under this broad definition, it is acknowledged that street children are not homogeneous, but for convenience of rehabilitation, we broadly categorised them as full time and part time street children. 

Full time street children are those children who stay there throughout the day and the night. Part time street children are the ones who go on the streets during the day but quietly retire to some places where they stay in the night. 

From the above situation, it is glaringly clear that there is need to address the concerns of the street children and families in order to protect and promote their welfare. There is also need to critically and holistically address the factors that force the children and their families to live on the streets. This calls for a multi-sectoral approach to address the plight of these children and families.

The legal framework

Uganda ratified the UN Convention on the rights of the child and is, therefore, obliged to protect the rights of all children including street children. Uganda has further ratified the OAU Charter on the rights and welfare of children. The charter emphasised the need to take appropriate measures to promote and protect the rights and welfare of African children.

The Constitution of Uganda also has an overriding legal framework that recognises the need to protect the rights of children without discrimination. Furthermore, the Children’s Act, 2000 provides a legal framework to protect and promote the rights of children. The Local Governments Act, 1997, Schedule II, mandates the local government administrations to provide services to the children within their areas of jurisdiction without discrimination.
    
The above legal framework and many others provide for the standards that must be observed to ensure the dignity of every child, non-discrimination and equal access to the children’s rights, principle of child participation and family unity and the best interest of the child. It is envisaged that with the full implementation of these legal frameworks, there will be fewer children on the streets. The exercise being carried out now is to make sure that we start with phase 1 of removing the children from the streets. 
   
Goal and objectives

The main objective of this exercise is to protect the rights of the vulnerable children on the streets and promote the welfare of their families by removing them from the streets.

Removal of the Karimojong families

Rt hon. Speaker and honourable members, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as the lead agency on these matters has conducted a series of meetings and consultations with all the people concerned. In preparing to execute the plan of removing the children from the streets, it was unanimously agreed that the children should be resettled back to Karamoja and not anywhere else. Our original proposal was that we resettle them either in other regions or in Kiryandongo but it was resolved that they should be resettled back in Karamoja. 

It was also resolved to urge all key players and stakeholders to work with us towards eliminating all the push and pull factors that force the children on to the street. The push factors are those that normally force the children out of homes, like quarrels, famine, et cetera; and the pull factors are those that make the streets a bit attractive, like the handouts and the many agencies that sometimes make their lives very comfortable on the streets.

The exercise to remove the children from the streets started on Sunday, 04 February 2007. It will continue until Wednesday, 14 February 2007 when the first phase of transferring the children from the transit center at Kampiringisa begins. The Moroto Local Government in conjunction with UNICEF and other agencies are making the necessary arrangements to put in place facilities to receive the children in Moroto. At this point, I want to thank the leaders from Karamoja especially the Members of Parliament, the Presidential Assistant on Disarmament and Karamoja Affairs and other stakeholders for mobilising the Karimojong community, which has enabled us to remove the children without the use of force.

The children and families voluntarily accepted to be returned to Karamoja and they were, therefore, transported to Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre as a transit centre after which a comprehensive strategy to address the problem will take its course.

The strategy focuses on the removal of the children and finally settling them in their families and at a later stage in their communities. Whereas the programme has started in Kampala, we intend to cover the entire country if the biggest problem in Kampala becomes successful. 

Monitoring of the exercise

On Monday 05 February 2007, at 2.30 p.m., the Minister of State for Youth and Children and hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere, Minister of Disaster Preparedness visited Kampiringisa to assess the situation and the facilities available on the ground.

On Wednesday, 07 February 2007, that was yesterday, the senior minister in the Ministry of Gender, with the Minister of State for Youth and Children and technical officers from the Department of Youth and Children went back to Kampiringisa and we had a meeting with other stakeholders who included three Members of Parliament from Karamoja: the Member for Bokora County, the woman MP for Moroto and the woman MP for Kabong. We had UNICEF, WFP, UNHCR and other participating NGOs. The situation as I speak right now is that 832 children with their parents have been relocated to Kampiringisa. 

Honourable members before the exercise began we thought that we only had women and children but as I speak now, we find ourselves even with husbands. We have 40 men who have their families and they were telling us that the husbands had come with their children and wives on to the streets. The men have been keeping in the background while the women “look for money” through the means they have been using on the streets.

This voluntary exercise will continue for a week after which those who will have failed to co-operate under this voluntary arrangement will have to be removed and taken to Kampiringisa transit centre with the help of KCC law enforcement department. The children are going to be documented, screened and then availed with basic requirements before we relocate them to Karamoja. 

Management of the programme

A task force to oversee the implementation of the programme has been put in place. It consists of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as the lead agency, the ministries of: Education and Sports, Karamoja Affairs, Local Government and that of Disaster Preparedness; Kampala City Council, and the Karamoja local leaders. The NGOs include: Africa for Christ Ministries, St Francis of Assisi, Tigers Club, UNICEF, ADRA, Save the Children, Dwelling Places, and the Police.

Challenges

Honourable Speaker and honourable members, there are major challenges of financial capacity because this being a local government function, it had not been provided for in the ministry’s budget. We are trying to see how we can work around with the Ministry of Finance and the donors to have the problem concluded.  

The other challenges at the Kampiringisa centre are shortage of water due to the breakdown of the water pump; utensils for cooking and serving the food. There is need for mosquito nets and other sanitary facilities among the people removed from the streets the majority of whom are young girls and pregnant mothers. So there is need for sanitary facilities that are ordinarily used by ladies. The level of hygiene is generally still low. 

Communication

We have communication problems because the majority neither speak English nor Swahili. So we have engaged some of the students from Makerere University and other people who speak Karimojong from the community to help us in translating and communicating between them and our officers. 

Resettlement in Karamoja

The other challenge is expeditious resettlement to Karamoja because many of them are insisting that they do not want to stay in Kampala any longer. They want to be moved back to Karamoja immediately.

Strategies

Achieving the above aims and objectives is a challenging task and it calls for both short and long term strategies. This is because experiences of government with whom we have consulted in mobilising the necessary resources for the returnees indicate that it is an emergency, which may not have immediate resources.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members as I conclude, I want to clarify on some of the issues that have been captured in the media concerning this exercise:

(i) 	Removal Of children due to the forthcoming CHOGM: there is talk among the general public that the children are being removed due to the forthcoming CHOGM. I want to inform the honourable members of this House and the public at large that the removal of children from the streets is a normal exercise and that the ministry and KCC have been going through the same exercise since 2002. It has nothing to do with CHOGM. With or without CHOGM, the exercise of removing street children will always be on until the streets are cleaned of children because it is in the best interest of the children to grow up in homes and not on the streets.

(ii) 	Taking children to Kampiringisa: Kampiringisa is a remand home for juveniles who are in conflict with the law. It is true that the center is for that purpose but because we did not have any other center that would conveniently handle the exercise, we requested the Solicitor-General to de-gazette part of it for purpose of accommodating these children and for using it specifically as a transit center. The children are going to be registered, screened, provided with necessary services like immunisation, de-worming and provided with vitamin A supplement before finally being re-located to Karamoja.

(iii) 	Assurances: the other issue is the assurances whether the children will not come back as it has been the case before. It is our belief that if the families of these children are supported comprehensively to improve on their livelihood through income generation activities, and some child protection programmes, the children will not come back to the streets. If the push and pull factors are also addressed, then it is our conviction that the children will not get back on the streets.

Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister of Gender approached some good Samaritans to assist us. At this point, I want to recognise Mukwano Industries and its entire management because they responded to our call immediately by assisting us with 100 cartons of washing soap, plates and cups, which will alleviate our problem of serving the people. I want to call upon other people of good heart to continue responding to our call because this is a big problem that is beyond our scope.

The World Food Programme has assisted us with food at Kampiringisa and they are promising to give us more when we get to Karamoja. UNICEF has assisted with the facilitation of the social workers that we are working with. They are going to provide us with transport to take the children and they are comprehensively drawing programmes to assist us when we get to Karamoja. In the short term, they will be doing documentation and handling at Koblin center in Moroto and will still continue in the long term, that is, in the process of resettling them within the communities.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the issue of removing the Karimojong families from the streets is very complex. It will definitely require the support of this House. We also require the support of a multi-sectoral approach in collaboration with the key sectors and NGOs in mobilising the necessary resources to resettle the children at Koblin and finally to their communities.  

The ministry has drawn a comprehensive strategy to handle this exercise in the short term, medium term and the long term, which outlines all the interventions and the corroborations with the key stakeholders. At this point in time, Mr Speaker, I request to lay on the Table a copy of the strategy paper, which has been drawn to address this problem comprehensively. We are looking upon the support of this House and all the members out there. We request the media not to politicise this exercise because of the plight of the desperate families that are being handled at present. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister for the statement.

3.20
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement to the House. While attending the Forum for Children’s Committee workshop in Entebbe last week, we were told by the Member of Parliament from Jie County that not all the Karimojong on the streets come from all the parts of Karamoja. But they come from one county and, that is, Bokora County. I would like this House to be informed by the Member of Parliament from Bokora what causes this influx of people from his county? This is because even today as I was coming, there was a bus full of people from Karamoja and there is one school of thought that there are some big shots who are transporting these people to Kampala and other towns. Thank you. 

3.22
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker, although I am not from Bokora. The issues the statement has highlighted are more complex than we see here. The major cause is really poverty. Bokora County in particular has about six sub-counties, and out of those six sub- counties, the problem majorly lies in three sub-counties. We have done an assessment on the streets and found that out of about 1,400 children and their parents on the streets, about 1,300 are from about one or two sub-counties.

I am happy from the statement of the hon. Minister of Gender that following our discussion with them, we are now looking at a strategy that handles the underlying causes of this problem. One of them has been the challenge to do with disarmament and we have a lot of assurances now with the way the disarmament is progressing; and with the support and the message we have got from the President that a stronger community-based system is going to be put in place to work hand in hand with the UPDF to allay the fears of certain families who have been often left vulnerable and their cows stolen from those communities that have not been disarmed. 

In Karamoja cattle is our matooke. If your matooke is slashed down, what do you do? You wake up the next day and you do not have any plant standing. This is the case with Karamoja. Because of incapacity to protect your livestock, the next morning you wake up and its not there and you fall from riches to rugs. This is the desperation of families leaving. This is what you have on the streets; not just children but they are families moving. They are just driven by the instinct to survive. 

We are happy that one of the things we have agreed with the Ministry of Gender is that, these families and their children are relocated back to Karamoja. With the successful disarmament, which we envisage, the number one problem of insecurity will be handled. Within the strategy that we have presented with the Ministry of Gender, there is an effort to make sure that these families are provided with the necessary tools, the seeds, the security and the capacity to grow their own food. I hope that this strategy will be supported by the honourable members of this House. 

Mr Speaker, a more concerted effort should be directed to addressing the underlying causes instead of the approach used by KCC since 2002 (the “catch and throw back” approach). You catch them, put them on the bus, take photographs and publish in the newspapers and within two weeks they are back to the streets. I think this one is a more humane approach. This gives more careful attention to the problems. I hope that with the support of this House, this will be a more successful way to address the underlying causes and to address the concerns of these families from Bokora County. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to take this opportunity again to remind the Rules Committee to review this particular provision because I had asked them to do so. With the provision we have currently in our rules, there is no debate. You only ask questions where you did not understand. I see many people interested in a debate on this issue. So, I do not know what we can do. I do not know whether this matter can be taken up so that you debate at the committee. Otherwise, the Rules Committee should review this matter and see what to do. As far as I am concern now, you can only ask questions where it was not clear. 

I have also had the experience of seeing these people, children of one-and-a-half years or two years seated alone. The common thing is that, all of them continuously shake the right hand. Who gave them those instructions? You go along Kyaggwe Road and see a one-and-a-half year old seated at a distance and another of two but when you pass by, all of them shake their right hand. (Laughter)

3.27
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for coming up with this statement. I also thank Parliament for availing him the opportunity, given that the Parliament of Uganda has an association that recognises the rights of children.

Mr Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the minister. If poverty is the cause of these children being on the streets and we are going to facilitate these ones who are going back, won’t it become an incentive for more to come so that they can be provided with the same facility? 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, one of the biggest functions of Parliament is to approve budgets and apportion resources. I would have ordinarily expected the minister to come here with a statement either asking us to apportion resources or to ask for re-allocations, but he has come here to also lament with us. What does he expect us to do? 

Is he prepared to come with a supplementary budget requesting this House to provide resources, so that we prevent the embarrassment of government going to fundraise from social organisations and companies? We had such a situation when the Inspector General of Police sometime back tried to fundraise and Parliament contributed but later he was lambasted by government for creating an embarrassment. So, honourable minister, are you coming up with a budget so that we can make provision for resources to help the street children? I thank you.

3.29
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to join members in thanking the ministry for coming up with this plan to remove children from the streets. However, I would have liked to have heard, amongst other things, what the Minister for Karamoja has in place in Karamoja to ensure that these children, all the other Karimojong children plus their mothers and fathers do not find their way back on the streets of Kampala and other towns.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the question of poverty is a question that applies to Karamoja and other parts of Uganda. Coming from Northern Uganda where the situation is really terrible and has been so for many years, I have always wondered why it is the Karimojong on the streets and not the children, mothers and fathers from Northern Uganda. I would have expected those ones in the camps to be the first to run away from the camps and come to the streets of the city and the towns. Therefore, I would want to appeal to my colleagues from Karamoja that I think it is a little more than poverty. I think it has something to do with the outlook, and the outlook cannot be addressed by just taking children from Kampala back to Kobulin. I know it is just a youth centre and can only hold few. 

I think a lot more has to be done by the leaders of Karamoja in ensuring that the Karimojong do not look at cows as the beginning and the end of life. There is life after cows. In Lango, when all our cows were raided by people from Karamoja, we continued to live. We did not run away to the streets. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.31
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for this statement but I have few issues for clarification. On Page 5, the minister outlined the legal framework. There is a legal framework on how these children should be treated. These children did not come all of a sudden to become a menace on the streets of Kampala. Why was the law not complied with to remove these children from the streets before the problem escalated so much to the extent that the Minister of Disaster Preparedness had to come in? It seems like a disaster actually. It would actually be better if the Minister of Disaster Preparedness is the one to give this statement.

Secondly, on page 8 point 7.5(a) under challenges, in his own words the minister says: 

“At the Kampiringisa Transit Centre – 
-	Shortage of water due to breakdown of the water pump. 
-	Shortage of utensils for cooking and serving the food. 
-	Need for mosquito nets and other sanitary facilities
-	Level of hygiene is still very low.”

Mr Speaker, Kampiringisa is a government institution, which has been there for years. When a minister gives a statement of this magnitude, it shows that actually the situation where the children are staying is very bad. What has the ministry concerned with Kampiringisa done so that the children of Uganda, our future generation, do not live as destitutes?

In his statement, the minister thanked Mukwano. This gives an impression that our government operates like an NGO, starting to fundraise from private institutions. What is the problem, Mr Minister? Why would you reduce yourself so low to start asking for soap and jerrycans in order to provide for the children of Uganda?

Finally, if children are removed from the streets, what about these elderly people who are impaired and the disabled? We have a whole ministry and a minister for the disabled yet nothing is being done for these people who are physically impaired and have been reduced to beggars. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.35
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask two questions: One, it looks like there is more than what meets the eye. All of a sudden we have seen the children of Karamoja on the streets more than usual. It has happened suddenly like rain falling; children looking alike and acting in a similar manner. To me government needs to do more investigations to find out what exactly has moved children at that age, in this time and the manner in which they are co-ordinated, to be on the street.

Secondly, we have heard a statement from the Ministry in charge of Gender and Social Development. This statement addresses the symptoms but does not address the causes. It talks about what is happening and what is going to be done to address the current symptoms of the problems. Mr Speaker, is it not more appropriate for government to give a comprehensive strategy or at least a statement in terms of what it plans to do to ensure that the issues that are bringing the children of Karamoja on the streets are addressed? 

It cannot only be the Ministry of Gender and Social Development in this. It must be something to do with security, in which case the security sector should come in. There is something to do with production, which is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. There are issues to do with provision of water for Karamoja, which is very dry and so people are becoming more and more incapable of producing and are sending their children to the streets.

I, therefore, would like to ask whether it is not appropriate that government comes up with a comprehensive statement, maybe by the Leader of Government Business, to tell us what government is preparing to do to address this problem. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a serious problem. The minister has presented a statement, we did not give our input in the matter, but it seems a serious matter to which all of us should find a lasting solution. 

I suggest that maybe the committee dealing with children affairs together with the committee on Karamoja affairs sit with the minister and other people who have ideas on how to solve this problem, so that this matter is eventually examined. A report can then be given to us by that committee so that we can debate it as a report of a committee. I think that is the best way. I will also go to the committee and give my experience on what I have been seeing in town. 

Let the minister answer these few questions, but let this matter be undertaken. We will get a report within two weeks.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE (YOUTH AFFAIRS) (Maj. James Kinobe): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for that wise guidance. I also want to thank the members for raising the issues in a spirit that seeks real and permanent solutions.

The honourable member from Tororo raised information that has been circulating in the corridors that possibly there are some people who assist these people to get here. In the course of our investigations, we also established - we got this also from the Karamoja leaders - that there has been a racket of people who use some of them for commercial activities. They even get commission from them to transport them to the centres where they get money.

Unfortunately, when most of these people reach the place they think is heaven, they get trapped into a difficult situation, which they cannot withdraw from. This explains why many of them were voluntarily willing to go back to Karamoja. What they found out this way was not exactly what they were told when some people persuaded them to come.

As to why they are mostly form Bokora, the MP from Bokora would have been more useful in this. It is a fact that there is an economic element in the whole thing. When we talked to some of them yesterday, they told us that they were coached on this aspect of doing it with a particular arm, in a sort of professional way. Actually even babies, as young as seven months, the first think they show you is how to present your hand. They even strategically put the children in the forefront so that you become sympathetic. When they get here, it becomes an organised source of income. 

It is true some of them have been doing very well, which has been attracting more people. Those of you who are observant have seen this. They actually send some things to their families, but of course there are many who are trapped in the situation by those who are using them.

The hon. Remigio talked about the issue of poverty. I think that is a matter, which can be handled comprehensively by government. However, I want to say that from the time we started to interact with them, we found out that there was a bigger problem of attitude towards work. The problem in Karamoja is that, the people look at the cow as the source of everything. As we speak now, many of them do not even have the cows. Even if they had the cows, they would not exploit them exhaustively. 

We were working out a strategy with UNICEF, a package for re-settlement. UNICEF has even introduced what they call “food for work”. They want to make sure that the people being re-settled are tried into other means of production other than relying only on cattle.

There are very big stretches of fertile land in Karamoja. At Kobulin alone, we have two kilometres surrounding the centre. We are going to work with the families that are willing to get integrated in agriculture, to make sure that we get a group that will qualitatively transform the Karimojong into other means of production.  But there is a problem of attitude towards work.

Hon. Dombo was right, that instead of coming with a proposal to request for money I have come to lament. But, Sir, the statement we chose to make as a ministry was to create awareness among the Members of this House so that they do not pick it from the media. I entirely agree with your proposal that we need to go to the committee, sit with other branches of government to come up with a solution.  But I also said that we have a strategy paper, which I have laid on Table.  

Honourable members, when you get an opportunity to look at the strategy paper later on, you will realise that there is a comprehensive package, which involves all the departments of the state and other non-governmental departments. So, at an appropriate time, when the outcome from that process is complete, we shall definitely go to Finance, discuss with them and finally end up here for the final approval. But I appreciate the concerns and the support.

Hon. Lagada is asking, “Why is it that it is only the children from Karamoja and not other areas?”  I do not know. But I think other regions were only disrupted by the war; they used to be engaged in full productive work like the North. The men there, Sir, do not work. They instead sit and do the drinking and eating. It is the women who are supposed to do all the production; and in situations where the women can no longer do it, they have decided to move as husband, wife and children here in order to change the mode of production through that arrangement.  

So, it is not poverty alone, there are other issues, which we need to handle if we are to enable our friends in Karamoja to pick up. But also the government has to slightly do much more to go down to the people. Because they have schools but they are empty. Children do not go to school; even where you have the schools you find the classes empty.  Of course, there is a genuine problem of famine, which sometimes takes a bit long, but these are issues that can be handled comprehensively with other stakeholders.

Hon. Banyenzaki asked, despite the legal framework, why did we have to wait? Honourable members, I called this an influx because an influx normally comes all of a sudden.  You will agree with me that much as we have had these programmes over sometime, the Karimojong phenomenon is recent and they came massively. That is why when you have unique situations you need to come up with unique proposals. We are addressing this problem now as it is because it also came very fast.  

Apparently, we have other programmes that have been handling orphans: we have the Orphans and Vulnerable Children Programme. We have the programme on promotion of youth and children, which of course may not have a lot of funding, but there are some programmes if the influx was not of this magnitude. But we were overwhelmed when we got children with their fathers and mothers.

The challenges in Kampiringisa; what are we doing about them? By the time we made this statement, the problem of the water pump was still on. But the commissioner has just alerted me that the pump in Kampiringisa has been repaired and the remaining problem is that of power, which is on and off. So, the problem of the pumping water has been sorted out.

As for the other items that are needed, I only informed Parliament because we had those shortages.  But definitely we were working with the ministry and the other stakeholders to assist us. But hon. Banyenzaki’s concern is, why do we go so low to start begging instead of going to government? You need to appreciate that over 70 percent of our population in this country are youths and children below the age of 30 years. The children in particular are between 55 and 60 percent.  Government alone will not be in position to handle children’s affairs without involving other stakeholders and that is why we have been working comprehensively with the NGOs, national and international, to have some subversions.

On the question of why we went to Mukwano, there is a concept called, “Corporate Social Responsibility” in companies. Companies are supposed to return to the community and when you have such situations, it is prudent that you talk to them and those who are really responsive always respond under that concept of corporate social responsibility.

Now, the question of when we are going to handle other categories of people will be for another phase. What we are concerned about now are the children. As I said earlier on, all those conventions outline that it is in the best interest of the children to be in homes.  I do not know what they say about the disabled.  The Minister of State for Disability is not around. I do not know whether it says that disabled people should not be on the streets, but if it says that, then we shall see how to handle it. But it is expressed in all child statutes that children must not be exposed to situations that affect their best interests.

Hon. Mugyenyi is saying that the matter should be investigated much further than what we see. I entirely agree with her. We may be looking at symptoms and I think we use the opportunity outlined by the Rt hon. Speaker, that is, of going to the committee responsible for our sector and interacting with the Parliamentary Forum on Children which has almost 100 Members of Parliament and other stakeholders so that we finally come up with a comprehensive solution to the problem of children in this country. But I want to thank the Members for the support and the apparent support which is going to be given when we come back to have this problem sorted out. Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to clarify on a point made specifically by hon. Banyenzaki about Mukwano; that government was being reduced to a level of an NGO. Mr Speaker, 44 percent of the budget we are now running on is dependent on money from outside, where we go and beg and get support. We need to run the country but 44 percent of the budget is foreign-supported.  

Secondly, individuals or organisations donate the relief we distribute through the World Food Programme, UNICEF and all these other agencies in some cases except that most of those are not local. So, we do not realise that we are actually getting this support from individuals. But it is true that we are inadequately equipped to provide all the relief that we need from our own budget.  That is why when a crisis comes, we call on the international community to give us support. So, the honourable member should not be surprised that generous citizens –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for a senior Cabinet minister to take the floor and start defending a policy, which the chief executive of this country, the President, called total indiscipline? The ministries and government organisations fundraising from corporate organisations, the way it was done when Police were fundraising for cars. In this case, the minister is defending a policy, which is not actually a government policy. Is he in order to mislead this House that it is the method of work of government?

THE SPEAKER: Well, first of all, for me to rule on that whether it is in order or not, I should know the government position and whether it prohibits making appeals to people when you have an emergency. As you see, the situation is an emergency. So, if the government is confronted with that problem, of course, it has resources but they may not be enough because there are other activities to cater for. Is there anything wrong with appealing to people with the ability to assist? 

So, for me to rule on it, I have to know clearly the government’s policy. But I would only say that you can return them and be unable to give them everything that is required that is why you appeal to those who can assist to supplement the efforts of government. I think that is the spirit under which the appeal was made and we should not be ashamed if an appeal is again made to assist these people. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, there are people already in this country who get interested in what is going on. If you see this large number of people on the streets, and you are the type of person like Mukwano, obviously you may be concerned and try to find out what is happening. And if there is a situation like Kampiringisa and you are taking people there, and he produces soap, what is wrong with a donation to that institution? 

Anyway, Mr Speaker, I thought that point should be made, that let us not exaggerate the capacity that we have and let us not seem to want to be told lies. Hon. Kinobe said that we are inadequately equipped in this place and we are making a point to improve. Now, if he came here and said that we are alright, that would be a mistake. So, honesty should not be taken for weakness. I don’t think that running a country can succeed on telling lies. I think it is fair, justified, normal, upright and respectable to tell the truth so that you can look for a solution. 

Lastly, this comprehensive study of the problem - yes it includes cattle rustling. Rustling has actually been a dignified way of saying cattle thieving. It is actually cattle robbing, cattle thieving, armed with guns, displacing and killing people. So, part of the problem is that, people are moving away from a practise, which is of centuries ago, which is obviously out of date in the 21 Century. So people have to run away. But also, government has put in place a mechanism of putting roadblocks to check on children. 

If you look at the children who have been on the street, they could not raise the transport to come here. So there is something, which all leaders of public responsibility must consider. It is not just government; government is Kabwegyere, people in Bushenyi, in Igara West. I also have to have a role to play in this as we run a country. So, it’s a bigger problem than can be answered by a statement. Certainly, it is a bigger problem than we have been seeing on the roads of Kampala.

CONSIDERATION OF THE BILL RETURNED BY THE PRESIDENT 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 127

BILLS 
SECOND READING

 THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the object of this Bill is to provide charging provisions for imposition of excise duty on landline and public pay phones and to replace the schedule to the Excise Tariff Act Cap. 338 with one schedule prescribing all excise tariff rates. 

I did lay the Excise (Amendment) Bill, 2006 to the House on 14 December 2006, in accordance with Rule 127 (2).

Today, I wish to direct the House to the recommendations of the President to the Bill in accordance with Rule 127 (3) and I would like to read verbatim as returned by His Excellency, the President: Item 2(b): “The excise tariff on beer, whose local raw material content, excluding water, is at least 75 percent by weight of its constituents be increased from 20 percent to 30 percent. The reduction of the tariff from 30 to 20 percent as passed by this Parliament on the 14 September 2006, is projected to lead to a shortfall of Shs 4.3 billion in revenue under this financial year.”

Secondly, item 8: “The five percent excise tariff on landlines and public pay phones: This is expected to generate Shs 2.9 billion revenue to government. Parliament’s reduction of the excise duty rates on landlines and public pay phones from five percent to three percent will lead to a contraction of the projected revenue by Shs 1.2 billion.”

Thirdly, item 9: “The excise duty of Shs 500 per 50 kg duty on cement. Parliament’s removal of the excise duty will lead to a revenue loss of Shs 7.6 billion.”  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

03.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nsubuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Before I read the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I want to lay on Table the minutes of the proceedings.

The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was first laid on Table on 22 August 2006 and was considered by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and passed by the august House on 14 September 2006. 

On 29 November 2006, the Speaker of Parliament read to the House the letter from the President of the Republic of Uganda, requesting Parliament to consider item 2(b), 8 and 9 of the schedule of the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The President’s request was in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The Bill was then referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration. 

Whereas the committee had previously recognised that the excise tariff would discourage the consumption of certain goods and services, that led to the recommendation of the reduction in rates of item 2(b), 8 and 9 of the schedule to the Bill, the committee now appreciates the President’s request for Parliament to reconsider the Bill to enable government generate revenue for execution of key programmes, which have tight deadlines. The committee has accordingly scrutinised the Bill and now wish to report its findings.

Method of work:

The committee held meetings and also made reference to the principal Excise Tariff Act Cap. 338. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee also reviewed the content of the letter from the President of the Republic of Uganda to the Speaker dated 25 September 2006, reference PO/31 in respect of the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill.

The object of the Bill is to provide for a charging provision for imposition of excise duty on landline and public pay phones and replacing the schedule to the Excise Tariff Cap. 338.

Observations

Clause 3: Replacement of the schedule to the principal Act. Mr speaker and honourable members, the committee observed that the increase of excise tariff on beer whose raw material content, excluding water, is at 75 percent by weights of its content from 20 to 30, for the financial year 2006/07 will discourage the production of the local materials especially sorghum. However, it was noted that a reduction of the excise duty on beer whose local material content, excluding water, is at least 75 percent by weight of its content from 30 to 20, would lead to a contract of the projected revenue by Shs 4.3 billion. 

The committee had earlier recommended that the excise duty on landline and public payphone be reduced from five to three percent. This, however, would lead to a contraction of predicted revenue by Shs 1.2 billion.

The committee had earlier recommended scrapping of the excise duty on cement of Shs 500 per 50 kg of cement. However, this would lead to a contract of projected revenue by Shs 7.6 billion. 

In view of the fact that the Appropriation Bill, 2006 was passed and enacted without considering of the adjustment in the Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006 as previously passed by Parliament, this would cause a budget deficit.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee made the following recommendations:

•	The committee recommend that all Bills that relate to collection of taxes should be considered earlier than the Appropriation Bill for a given financial year. 

•	The committee recommends that the present request be guaranteed and item 2(b), 8 and 9 of the schedule as earlier proposed in the Bill be passed.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, before I conclude, I want to inform this august House that attached to our report is a minority report signed by three Members of the committee. The committee requests the House to adopt the report and pass the Bill. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman and the committee. Since I see no debate on this, I put the question that the Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

4.03
The Schedule

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that the Schedule be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, General Duties (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman and honourable members, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, General Duties (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006” and passed it without any amendment. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, General Duties (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, General Duties (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE EXCISE TARIFF (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2006”

THE SPEAKER:  The Bill is passed, congratulations. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach):  Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, it is seconded.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the object of this Bill is to amend the Uganda Revenue Authority Act, to modify the membership of the Board of Directors of Uganda Revenue Authority, to bar the suing of the Commissioner General in his or her official or personal capacity and to provide for the appointment by the Board of Directors of Uganda Revenue Authority of officers from the level of Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Head of Department or higher.  I beg to move.

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nsubuga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Before I read the report of the Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, let me lay on table the minutes of the proceedings.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was laid on table on 22 August 2006 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny. The committee has accordingly scrutinised the Bill and now wishes to report its findings to the House.

The committee held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and officials from Uganda Revenue Authority. The committee also made reference to the principal Uganda Revenue Authority Act, Cap 196.  

The object of the Bill is to provide for the modification of the membership of the Board of Directors of Uganda Revenue Authority, barring the suing of the Commissioner- General in his or her official or personal capacity and the appointment, by the Board of Directors of Uganda Revenue Authority of officers from the level of assistant commissioner or deputy head of department or higher.

The committee made some observations on clause 1, Amendment of Sections 4.  Instead of completely repealing the membership of UMA in the Uganda Revenue Authority Board, it is important that the views and interests of the broader private sector be represented in the board of this organisation, which Uganda Manufacturers Association is part. Thus, the private sector in Uganda is represented by four apex bodies that include: Private Sector Foundation (PSFU), Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry (UNCCI), Uganda National Farmers’ Federation (UNFFE) and the Uganda Manufacturers Association (UMA).  

Clause 2, insertion of a new Subsection (5) in Section 9:  The Commissioner General of Uganda Revenue Authority is among the public officers who hold public office in public trust, and who shall be personally responsible for their actions or inactions. The passing of this clause would therefore contravene Section 8(2) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 and Section 4.10 of the Code of Conduct and Ethics for the Uganda Public Service. 

It was also observed that according to Article 98(5) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda, it is only the President who is not liable to civil or criminal prosecution in respect of anything done, or omitted to be done in his or her personal capacity before or during the term of office of that person.

Clause 3, replacement of Subsection (1) of Section 11:  In the Commonwealth Corporate Management Practice, the board appoints the senior management staff of an organisation.  In the case of Uganda Revenue Authority, the committee established that senior management constitutes officers from the level of supervisor and above. It is not fair to empower management to hire and discipline officers at the levels of supervisor and manager.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends substituting clause 1 with the clause that provides for the representation of the entire private sector. 

The committee also proposes to delete clause 2 and substitute clause 3(1) with a subclause that provides for the appointment of senior management staff from the level of supervisor and above by the board subject to Section 9 of the principle Act.  

Mr Speaker, I want to read the principal Act. From the principal Act, you will find that the Board of Directors is made of seven people and subclause (2) proposes that the minister may appoint two other persons. So actually as a committee we found that sub clause (2) Section 4 does not compel the minister to appoint. That is why when it comes to deleting Uganda Manufacturers Association we are proposing to widen the scope such that the membership remains seven rather than reducing the membership to six when we are not sure of the two who are at the mercy of the minister to appoint.

 On the issue of the Commissioner-General and other officers and staff, subject to Section 9, the board shall appoint officers at the level of the principle revenue officers or higher on such terms and conditions as the board may determine. Uganda Revenue Authority was restructured and positions of the PROs, which members were used to, were phased out. New ranks were instituted like that of the supervisor and manager and that is why the equivalent of PRO is the supervisor. That is how we came to these recommendations.

In conclusion, the committee requests the House to adopt the report and pass the proposed amendments.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a motion and the committee has given its report on the Bill. Are there any contributions?

4.16
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the committee’s recommendation especially in respect of the second amendment that is deleting the section that intends to bar the Commissioner General from being prosecuted. In this era when we are trying to fight corruption, such a clause would be contrary to the spirit of fighting corruption.  This is because I believe it would insulate the person in charge of the Authority and it would be detriment to the efforts that we are making.  

I believe just like is the case with other corporations, the Commissioner General of Uganda Revenue Authority, who is the head of that Authority should be made to operate within the laws that apply to other corporations.  In that way we shall be seen to be fighting corruption.

Mr Speaker, I find it difficult to believe that this amendment came from the Executive yet they keep on telling us that they are there to fight corruption. That is why I support this amendment and I ask honourable members to support it also so that the provision that has been provided for in the Bill is deleted. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.18
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the report from the committee, particularly on the first two issues. I appeal to the committee that regarding the appointment of two extra members. If Uganda Manufacturers Association is removed then it would leave us on the discretion of the minister. It is very important that an organisation like Uganda Revenue Authority whose name has gained some respect now has guidance from a good and excisable board. 

In this case if this House adopts the suggestion of the committee, it means that they will maintain a membership of seven persons. But if it is not, the membership of the board may reduce to essentially four people; and if you have a chairman and vice chairperson this means the quorum will be two persons. For an organisation like Uganda Revenue Authority to have such a board will not be in the best interests of the institution.

Secondly, it is proposed here that the actions against Uganda Revenue Authority shall not be brought against the Commissioner General in his or her official or personal capacity. I agree totally with the committee and other members who have contributed. You are a public officer performing a public role; therefore, there is a point at which you must be officially liable for the acts of the organisation for which you represent. If you go contrary to the rules of that institution, the veil must be lifted and the one who is hiding behind that veil must be found and you should be personally responsible for some of the acts.

 This is in light with the spirit of transparency, accountability and fighting corruption as other members have mentioned. I agree with the recommendations of the committee that the amendments as proposed by them are adopted by this House and that is the way to go. Thank you very much.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. In regard to the amendment on clause 1, the import of it is to remove Uganda Manufacturers Association from being in the law. However, as a ministry we will accept the position that is now being given by the committee that we have one person appointed from the private sector. This is because if we appoint only UMA, there will be conflict of interest and there will also be inequity in choosing only one taxpayer to be represented on the board.  

On the issue of the powers of the Commissioner General of Uganda Revenue Authority, this is really meant to deter the suing of the Commissioner General for the actions of URA. Under the Civil Procedure and Limitation Miscellaneous Provisions Act, URA cannot be sued until the expiry of 45 days after written notice of intention to sue has been delivered to URA by any intending plaintiff. However, many intending plaintiffs have found it easier to sue the Commissioner General as an office or as an individual. That is why we would like the intending plaintiffs to sue the URA as a body corporate rather than suing the Commissioner General as an individual.  

At the committee stage we shall be proposing an amendment to this particular clause so that the suing of the Commissioner General does not come when an intending plaintiff wants to sue URA.

Under clause 3, Mr Speaker, we would like that the board appoints from the rank of assistant commissioner and above. We shall again agree with the committee on retaining what is pertaining in the principal Act, which is talking about the position of principal revenue officer and the equivalent of the principal revenue officer, which is now at the rank of the manager and above. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.24
MR FRED RUHINDI (NRM, Nakawa Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the Bill and to also commend the chairperson and his team for a very good report. I have a problem with the way the committee report has analysed the submission of the minister on the issue of suing the Commissioner General in his or her personal capacity.  

What the Bill intends to do is not to insulate the Commissioner General from personal liability, not at all.  It is simply saying that people have abused our Civil Procedure Rules because of the requirement of 45 days before suing any statutory body including URA. It takes too long for them and so they circumvent it by suing the Commission General herself in this case- it may be a he later on.   

Therefore, the liability of the Commissioner-General, if there is evidence incriminating her or him, this Bill does not absolve her from that liability. It is only addressing a problem enshrined now in our Rules of Procedure. And, therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg that the committee revisits their position and supports the position of the Minister.

THE SPEAKER: In other words, you are saying that the authority should own the default by the Commissioner-General. That is what it means. That is the Commissioner-General defaults, and because the she or he is an agent of the Authority; you sue the Authority rather than the agent when there is a principal?

MR RUHINDI: You have really put it the other way round; you put it much better. If she has been acting- if she makes an error and commits that act or omits to do it in the course of his or her duty, then the aggrieved party should sue the URA. But if it is something completely attributable to her, then of course you bring an action against her or him. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Chairman, do you have anything to say?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Members and the Minister and Attorney-General. But, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, he is saying, if a permanent secretary, the accounting officer of a ministry, does something wrong, it is the government which has done something wrong. You do not go to the accounting officer; you sue government, because government acts a human being. Therefore, they own what the servants of Government have done. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I agree with you and I agree entirely with the Minister. But when you actually read clause 2, it is not very clear, unless people will be going to the Constitutional Court for interpretation. That is why as a committee we had lengthy deliberations with the Minister and we agreed that this clause will be abused; and even the minister consented and he has proposed an amendment. 

Mr Speaker, URA is a body corporate, so, it is just common sense that you cannot sue an individual; you sue URA. Since it is known URA is not a special organ; there are so many body corporate like that. If we make such law, we shall be receiving so many amendments from any body corporate such that somebody is protected. That is why the committee really proposed to delete this, because there is an amendment and the Minister will be given time to read it. 

I am just appealing to Members that in order to save this country from taxpayers going to Constitutional Court, we should really delete this one and make something very clear because a law must be very clear. If a law is ambiguous, then people will use that loophole. Actions against Uganda Revenue Authority shall not be brought against the commissioner general in his or her official or personal capacity. 

Mr Speaker if you just read these relevant laws, he is actually the person liable. So, why do we bother the taxpayers read many laws in order to make a point? 

THE SPEAKER: It is something maybe which Members need to think about. 

4.30
MR STEPHEN MUGENI (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My understanding of this amendment is that if an officer of Uganda Revenue Authority has acted in Busia in a way, which has dissatisfied a taxpayer, the taxpayer should not sue the Commissioner-General for an action of an officer who was in Busia. Instead the tax officer should sue URA as a body corporate because the officer was acting in his capacity as an officer of URA. 

I would agree with the Minister of Finance that it is not proper to bring an action by various people who are acting on behalf of the Commissioner-General to allow him or her to be sued. It should be Uganda Revenue Authority to be sued and in some cases, the board can take action against that person, or the board can take action against the Commissioner-General or sack the Commissioner-General or take him or her to court. In which case it will be URA versus that individual who maybe the Commissioner-General; but if an action is by way of official execution of duty, it is not proper to sue the individual.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry to come in, but if you sue the Commissioner-General and you get damages, from whom do you recover the damages? [Hon.Members: “URA”] Then if it is URA that is going to pay the damages, why don’t you sue URA in the first place? 

4.33
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to make a clarification so that it can guide the House. The law of agency states that the action of the agents binds the principle. In this case, we are referring to the officer as an agent and the principle is URA. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, Members may need to think about this and make consultations.

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, we intend to move the following amendment at the committee stage. With your permission, I could read it now. “A person aggrieved or dissatisfied by a decision” –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But that will be an amendment at the committee stage. You want to make an amendment now?

MR OMACH: No, Sir. That is why I was asking –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think Members need to –I understand it legally, but Members may have doubts about what is happening and that is why I will give you more time so that we do not say –(Interjections)- so, honourable members, those who have contributions, make them and then we shall see what to do.

4.34
MR TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for the report. However, I still have a problem on this clause 2. I am a member of the PAC committee and most times we have come across incidences where agents of ministries in the names of the permanent secretaries have actually committed offences, which could actually be personal to them. We have pinned them down and sometimes even caused the Permanent Secretary to pay up especially where funds are concerned or be held responsible. 

There are also issues where generally the ministry has sort of misappropriated or committed offences – that is where you would take it as general. But I find it very difficult and I do not quite agree that for any offence that is committed by people in the Revenue Authority, the Commissioner-General should be individually or personally put into responsibility.

Honourable members, of late, following the media reports, there have been incidents that look as if there are people in the business community who are trying to frustrate the work of the Commissioner-General. Actually, it comes to something like intimidation, because there have been cases which have been directly put on her to intimidate her. So, when we are considering this law, we should be very careful and protect the people we have put in positions to help the country raise revenue. 

In this case, I would like to agree with the Minister’s position that unless it has been found that the act or offence that has been committed has been done by the Commissioner-General in her individual capacity. Otherwise, offences committed within the organisation definitely should not be the Commissioner-General’s responsibility. That is my position, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see a problem because these authorities were not there many years ago. There are many cases in law reports where you would see Commissioner of Customs, but then there was a development when authorities were created. This may also be causing uneasiness in the minds of a number of Members. That is why you need to make further consultations before we can conclude this debate. Don’t you think so, Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, hon. Toskin’s observations are pertinent but we all know that the application of penal laws is generally different from the proceedings under civil matters. Certainly, if a person for instance embezzles government funds, you do not sue the Attorney-General, you proceed against that person directly; have him or her arrested, produce evidence and take him to court. The provision we are analysing is more of a civil related matter, talking about debt recovery of taxes, as the Minister has noted, and that is when this provision is being circumvented. In criminal matters, do you first serve the URA within 45 days notice in order to proceed to prosecute? Of course not; so, these are different matters. 

4.40
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker, it appears there is consensus if I have understood very well. We are all agreeing that in the course of her/his work, if the Commissioner-General in this case makes a mistake, it will be brought against the organisation. But if there is something that she/he does individually, then that person must answer. 

My colleague, the honourable Minister of Finance and the chair, they appear to agree that the formulation as it is now in the law is ambiguous and they are ready to agree on an amendment that will convey the matter more clearly. 

THE SPEAKER: In that case, we deal with the motion for second reading but we suspend the committee stage. It is on the committee stage that actual amendments are going to be moved, not in the general debate. Are there any further contributions on the motion?

MR NGABIRANO: Thank you. I am just seeking a clarification that during all the submissions from the Minister and the Attorney-General, I was concerned about the omission of observation No. 2 on page 2, which states some contraventions if we pass the Bill as it is. I need to get clear guidance about this observation from the two offices.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the colleague that the committee and the honourable Minister are in agreement that clause 2 was poorly drafted and if we are to take it the way it is, it will be bad. In order to make a law that is consonant with other laws – if you are to leave it stated like this, it will contravene the Public Finance and Accountability Act, which clearly stipulates that accounting officers are personally liable. I am happy hon. Toskin emphasised it though at the end he retracted. We have been actually grilling permanent secretaries. When you go even to the code of conduct –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: These details about the drafting will come at the committee stage. That is where you will be justifying what you want to do. This was a general debate on the motion by the Minister. Therefore, if there are no further contributions to the motion, I put the question that this Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

THE SPEAKER: The Bill has come to the committee stage but in view of the lingering doubts in minds of Members, we give you time to go and make consultations, study the situation, so that when next time we come – because there are few clauses to deal with in the committee stage – we will deal with the committee stage on Tuesday.

Therefore, with this, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.44 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)


