Wednesday, 8 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I am delighted to announce that yesterday 7 February 2012, I received communication from the head of Public Service that he has in compliance with Article 87(1) of the Constitution, consulted with both the President and the Public Service Commission, and appointed Mrs Jane Lubowa Kibirige as the Clerk of the National Assembly. She will be formally introduced to the plenary during tomorrow’s sitting.
I want to appeal to you to work with her and cooperate with her; ensure that she has a safe landing. I also want to announce that the Presidential address on the issue of the oil agreements will take place on Friday at 2.00 p.m. So, I invite you all to come.

I then wish to adjust the Order Paper to bring forward item No.7; you may have noted that a number of Members have come here with gold medals which we received in Bujumbura in November, but they were not able to lay them on Table. So, after my communication, I will permit that adjustment so that the trophy of the East African Community Sports Tournament can be laid on the Table.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING THE UGANDA PARLIAMENT FOOTBALL CLUB FOR WINNING THE EAST AFRICAN INTER-PARLIAMENTARY FOOTBALL TOURNAMENT

2.49
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament congratulating the Uganda Parliamentary Football Club for winning the East African Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament, moved under Rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure.

WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 under the provisions of the national objectives -(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, let it be understood that I will support this motion, but the guidance I am seeking is whether it is proper for people who played in the team to move a motion to congratulate themselves.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you were informed in November that we had won, and none of you took the trouble to congratulate the team so they decided to do it themselves.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I want to thank Ms Nambooze for supporting the motion in advance. 

AND WHEREAS the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament brought together football teams from East Africa member states, namely, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi and EALA in the spirit of widening, deepening and strengthening integration and togetherness; 

FURTHER AWARE that  on 29 November 2011, in marking the 10th anniversary of EALA and through the outstanding performance of Parliament of Uganda team, Uganda won and was crowned champions of 2011 East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament after trouncing the host Parliament of Burundi, 4-1, played at Prince Louis Rwagasore Stadium in Bujumbura;

NOTING that this is the first time the Parliament of Uganda is winning this tournament since its inception;
COGNISANT of the fact that Parliament and Government of Uganda need to take an upper hand in nurturing sporting talent and enhancing their realisations of reaching greater heights and supporting the development of sports generally;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

1)	Parliament of Uganda extends its illustrious appreciation and congratulation to the Members of Uganda Parliamentary Football Club for winning the prestigious East Africa Inter Parliamentary Football Tournament 2011.

2)	Parliament of Uganda extends its appreciation to the Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda for facilitating and making it possible for Uganda to send a delegation.

3)	Government of Uganda to increase the annual budget to support the sports sub-sector and to facilitate the development of sports countrywide. I beg to move.

At this point I would like to do two things. I want to individually recognise the Members who participated and to lay on Table the trophies. We have:
1.	Hon. Kyoma Xavier
2.	Hon. Kiwanda Geoffrey 
3.	Hon. Bintu Jalia
4.	Hon. Ssemuju Nganda Ibrahim
5.	Hon. Ssejoba Isaac
6.	Hon. Mugabi Martin Muzaale
7.	Hon. Kasule Robert
8.	Hon. Kafeero Sekitoleko
9.	Hon. Kiyingi Bbosa 
10.	Hon. Muwuma Milton 
11.	Hon. Bagole Johnson 
12.	Hon. Kyeyune Haruna Kasolo
13.	Hon. Obua Denis Hamson 
14.	Hon. Nsereko Muhammed
15.	Hon. Sanja Patrick 
16.	Hon. Badda Fred
17.	Hon. Okupa Elijah (Team manager)
18.	Hon. Maganda Julius
19.	Hon. Okeyoh Peter
20.	Hon. Baryayanga Andrew
21.	Hon. Tom Aza
22.	Hon. Balikuddembe Joseph 
23.	Hon. Rose Akol Akullu.... 
24.	Hon. Nalubega Mariam
25.	Hon. Lameru Susan

Madam Speaker, we also have distinguished members of Staff  who participated. We have:
 
1.	Mr Busiku Peter
2.	Mr Nsimbe Kassimu
3.	Mr Kaggwa Patrick
4.	Mr Kayigwa Robert
5.	Mr Sekidde Daniel (Goal Keeper)
6.	Mr Olok Geoffrey 
7.	Mr Waddimba David
8.	Mr Ngabirano Herbert.

All this success came because of our coach who was a Uganda Cranes player in 1997, and German trained, Mr Tom Lwanga, and before forgetting myself, Odongo Otto, who is the team captain. Secondly, I beg to lay on table three items:

The trophy that was awarded to the Parliamentary Football Club of Uganda, there were also an individual trophy that was awarded to the best player in the whole tournament, which was given to hon. Balikuddembe Joseph, in spite of his size and mass, he was still voted the best player in the whole league.

I beg also to lay on Table for the history of this Parliament, a formal portrait of all the Parliamentary football players armed for the struggle in Bujumbura. You will be interested to see that we are all in yellow. (Laughter) Madam Speaker I beg to move.

2.49
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebetong): In seconding this motion, I would like to note and observe that right from the time you took over leadership of this Parliament, this Parliament is associated with nothing but victory. This Parliament is walking the talk; this Parliament is leading by example. That explains why, since 2001, Parliament of Uganda has won under your leadership a prestigious Inter Parliamentary Football Tournament for the East African Community.

The win by this Parliament in my view sets the pace; it sets the momentum of propelling sport in this country, and in particular football, to greater heights.

I want to say that despite the fact that our national team the Uganda Cranes has not qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations since 1978, there is still hope that our win as a Parliament must propel them to move to greater heights because the next qualification for Africa Cup of Nations is around the corner. Uganda will be playing the Congo Brazzaville on the 28th of this Month for the next qualification of the Africa cup of nations.

I am using this to set the pace as a milestone for our national team to move to greater heights. In June this year, Uganda will be hosting the national team of Senegal for the 2014 World Cup qualifiers and, therefore, this Parliament must support sport and we are already leading by example.

The fact that we were playing in Bujumbura and our national team was also playing in Tanzania, and they also won the regional CECAFA tournament, they deserve credit as Uganda Cranes.

I want to say, our win notwithstanding; there is a lot that we need to do as a Parliament in terms of policies and laws, and ensuring that the talent in the countryside is nurtured by this Government.

There is nothing that sells now like sports. I think honourable members you are watching the ongoing Africa Cup of Nations; how people are very happy seeing their teams that qualified.

On that note, Madam Speaker, I want to thank you, the Parliamentary Commission, and the Office of the Clerk, for facilitating the team that travelled by road from Kampala to Bujumbura although a Member of Parliament is entitled to business class in a plane. We humbled ourselves and travelled by road. I must salute you for even attending this tournament; your personal presence gave us momentum to die a little for this Parliament.

I want to thank the team members, Members of Parliament. People think that we are here for legislation, representation, budgeting and oversight, but I think it is also important for us to take Parliament nearer to the people. Our participation has broadened our spectrum in terms of the public relations of this Parliament with other sister Parliaments within the region.

I want to thank the staff who participated, and even those who did not play, because it is not a simple tournament. It is a very difficult tournament honourable members and you could see how your fellow colleagues were sweating at the national stadium in Bujumbura.

I want to thank all the staffs who were part of the technical team, and who ensured that everything is done for this Parliament to win the game. 

I want to thank our ministers; the Minister of East African Cooperation, hon. Eriya Kategaya, who graced the occasion by his personal presence. I want to thank our Minister of Sports and also our three ambassadors; Ambassador Brigadier Kyaligonza, Ambassador Mrs Wapkhabulo and Ambassador Kabonero. These three ambassadors would visit us each time and encourage us. We won partly because of their advice.

I want to thank our coach, for the record of this Parliament. Uganda Parliamentary Football Team is coached by one of our national players, who played in the 1978 Africa Cup of Nations. He was part of our national team and they were second in the whole continent. The record has never been broken since then. Maybe you can stand up for recognition because your record is unbeaten. 

I want to thank Members of Parliament; while we were there we received calls from Uganda, with Members asking, “How is it going?” I want to thank you honourable Members of Parliament for the support you rendered to us. I want to thank our Members of Parliament in the East African Legislative Assembly for the support they rendered to us. 

At a personal level this win is a milestone in my life. For the record of this Parliament, I have joined the long list of Ugandan gold medallists who hail from Lango – and in particular my clan, Ateko Kwerowe; to mention but a few: The late John Akii-Bua, the late Denis Obua, David Obua and now the living Denis Hamson Obua. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that for 2012 we are set, as a parliamentary team, to defend this title. And with the support of this Parliament and with your support, I am optimistic that come November, we shall move to wherever this tournament will be held and defend this title on behalf of this Parliament. I beg to move.

2.56
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second this historical motion that has led to the tabling of trophies for the first time in the history of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda – a motion in recognition of the victory of the Ninth Parliament football team. 

I would like to note that if it were not for your encouragement to our team, these trophies would not be here now. (Applause) I would like, for purposes of emphasis, to commend the efforts of all my honourable colleagues and the parliamentary staff who participated in bringing this victory. The victory we achieved depicts the teamwork of the Ninth Parliament – the same teamwork that we would like to see depicted as we debate all matters of national importance. (Applause) This should be a symbol that we shall always stand together in matters that cut across, regardless of whether we are NRM, the Opposition or Independents. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I would like to end by thanking you for all your efforts and the Parliament of Uganda for the support it gave to this team. I beg to move.

2.59
MRS BETTY OCAN (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all know that if we want to be healthy, we must not run away from games and sports. The people who played in the tournament have made us proud. We are very grateful and congratulate you upon bringing the trophy. This is now our New Year gift.

But I also I want to raise a concern, especially to the minister concerned. It looks like this will mark the beginning of us supporting sports, especially football. About two weeks ago, I visited some big team in Gulu District and there were about 100 girls who are very interested in football. Moreover last year, I flagged off a small number that went to France to represent Uganda. It, however, looks like we do not offer them much support. I do not know if this only affects my district or it applies to other districts too. While we have started very well this time, let us support our youth –(Interruption)

MR ROBERT SEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Aol for giving way. I wish to tell all the Members that whoever wants to host the parliamentary football team in their constituency is free to apply to our captain, hon. Odonga Otto and we shall bring this trophy to the people at the grassroots. So, we are starting with hon. Nsanja and whoever else is interested is free to call us. Thank you.

MRS OCAN: Thank you for that information. Maybe this arrangement will go a long way in enabling us support the youth better and act as an incentive to them to put in a lot more effort into games and sports. It should not be about football alone, but other games like basketball, netball, badminton and others.

MR ISSA KIKUNGWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to provide some information on this important motion. I am a stakeholder in sports in this country and believe this Parliament can do a lot, including contributing money towards improvement of sports. However, there are problems in the sports sector; it looks like our colleague, the Minister of Sports, is no longer in charge. Look at the federations in this country – almost each of them is in problems. Football, boxing and kickboxing are all in problems. What is this that is causing all these? (Laughter) If we are really interested in seeing sports improve, we should not think about only our team here, but rather have a broader picture of this nation. Thank you.

3.04
MR AZA ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, I am the FUFA delegate for Arua, Chairperson of Athletics in Arua and FUFA National Protocol Officer in Mulindwa’s government. (Laughter) I have been the oldest in that Parliament football team. Before 1st October this year I will be 49 years old and am very proud because the second oldest person is hon. Sebunya who is 48 years old. My advice to Members here is that let us embrace sports because it is good for our health. It helps us avoid hypertension, diabetes, cardiac arrest -(Interjections)- Malaria and Liver Cirrhosis.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, as my colleague said, we are very unhappy that there is a lot of bickering and wrangling in the sports fraternity: USL versus FUFA, Dr Ntege versus Nyakaana in boxing and Goloola versus others. 

So, my appeal to the Minister of Sports is to harmonise all these various groups so that we can enjoy sporting activities instead of hearing that Mulindwa has been taken to court. How shall we develop sports if we are always going to court? So, please -(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: I heard someone saying they cannot fail to give No.9. Madam Speaker and honourable members, first of all, I would like to thank this country for tying itself around the principle of patriotism. Sports offers a huge opportunity for all of us to be patriotic, be it football, netball, badminton, basketball or boxing. But what do we as a country or Government contribute to the sports fraternity? You hear national team players are leaving without tickets. They have to borrow or they have to mortgage FUFA House in order to get tickets, for example. 

I think this offers us the opportunity to come out and join other great countries that have come out to market the names of their countries. 

For this matter I would like to clearly cite the role our former President, Idi Amin Dada, played in promotion of sports in this country. I would also like to personally thank the Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, for having gone to the camp of the Uganda Cranes and all other government officials including His Excellency, the President, and contributed. Even if we did not qualify, there was a show of solidarity. Now, can we translate this in form of contribution from our national budget to the development of sports in this country? There are very many youths in this country who possess big talent, whether in Basketball – I have seen Kipsiro and others in athletics - but why is it that we only praise them when they bring medals; and when time comes when they are suffering we do not come to their rescue - (Interruption)

MR ALERO: Finally, I would like to pay special tribute to our former FUFA presidents. We have one of them with us here right now. Hon. Moses Ali was a former FUFA president. Can we please -(Interjections)- Yes. (Laughter) Hon. Moses Ali was our FUFA president. Kakaire was a FUFA president, Obua was a FUFA president. I do not want to continue. Dear members, can we rally behind Mulindwa so that we can promote Football in this country. I thank you very much for listening to me. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the Minister for East Africa to conclude.

MR ALERO: Excuse me; this is the ball that scored the goal that made Uganda proud. I will lay it on Table. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I hereby lay on Table the golden ball that brought the golden trophy for the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Thank you very much.

3.10
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER IN CHARGE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (MR Eriya Kategeya): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me an opportunity to make some remarks on this motion. First, I would like to say that this was not the first time for the Parliament of Uganda to participate in this tournament. The Eighth Parliament participated but they did not win like the Ninth Parliament. So, the first thing is to congratulate the Ninth Parliament for having won the tournament in the region. Definitely, you did us proud in two respects. 

One, when our Members are outside Uganda they are one Parliament. I have not seen the Opposition and the Government. It has been Uganda Parliament participating which I think is good. (Applause) Sometimes you have delegations and then they carry their domestic differences outside the country. But for the Eighth Parliament and even this Parliament I have always seen us acting as Ugandans in East Africa, which is very good, because as one Member was saying, there are matters which become national, and our differences should not make us carry all this outside this Parliament.

Secondly, I would like to thank hon. Otto whom I have seen very active on the field -(Applause)- leading our team. Also, the goal keeper of this team has been very outstanding in helping the team. Then we have our hon. Member who beats me in big size but is very good in defence. Hon. Balikuddembe - (Laughter)- is always really - we do not understand how he moves - he is very agile - and defends the team very well.

Let me take this opportunity to appeal to this Parliament to get interested in matters of integration. It is good to play football, but I think we should get interested in why we want to integrate in East Africa. Madam Speaker, much as you give us a slot in the business of this Parliament so that we can present the progress on the integration of East Africa, have discussions and internalise why we are integrating because it is very crucial that you Members of Parliament should understand why this emphasis on integration. Football is okay, but we have a bigger goal or why we want to integrate in the region, and Football helps us to know each other in the first line because the first line is for the people to understand each other. I am sure you have friends in Arusha and Bujumbura, and our slogan is deepening and widening. So, I am sure you did both. 

The current chairman of the secretariat also said we should hasten the integration, but I think it is important that the honourable members should be interested in this exercise of integration for the strategic importance of this policy for the region in terms of infrastructure, defence - capacity to defend ourselves - and making sure we have weight in international affairs when we talk as East Africa. And I can assure the honourable members that I think there is a lot of progress done, much as people are complaining, but definitely a lot is going on, on this question of integration. 

Once again, I congratulate the team and I congratulate the Speaker on the interest you are showing in the integration, because you went and camped in Bujumbura until the team won. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, First Deputy Prime Minister. I put the question that this House do compliment the Parliamentary Football Club for winning the East African Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, Members, there are other problems in sports, but I think we should have a separate motion on those issues. This one was to say, “We are happy with the Parliament”. The other problems should be addressed separately.

Now, honourable members, let us go back to our agenda. There was a small matter from Ntoroko, from Katakwi and Gilbert Olanya. Three minutes each.

3.16
MS JENNIPHER MUJUNGU (Indepedent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in Ntoroko District in the sub-counties of Bweramule, Rwebesengo and Butungama. These sub-counties have faced a problem of a stray lion from the Semiliki-Toro Game Reserve, which has escaped and invaded peoples’ farms killing cows. This stray lion is killing peoples’ cows almost on a daily basis. Someone loses like seven to 12 cows each day. I received a report from the locals and at the moment, about 177 cows have died and they continue to die. I bring this to the attention of the House and I request the government through the Ministry of Tourism to direct the Wildlife Authority to take serious action on this stray lion by either relocating it to another place or restraining it from killing peoples’ cows.

In the sub-county of Kanara, we also have baboons which escaped from this game park and attacked people in their homes. You find baboons entering peoples’ homes, and scaring away the children, and they are a real threat to human life.

I pray also that Uganda Wildlife Authority compensates the people who have lost their cows because this is really a big number. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to compliment what hon. Mujungu has said. In December, I went with the Parliamentary Commission to Fort Portal and we went to the radio. The issues coming from Ntoroko were mainly about the pressures of the national park vis-a-viz the population, and I told them that there is a pending question here from Amuru along the same lines, and that when we come to discuss it, we shall bring the issue of Ntoroko. I think they have a problem and I hope the government really helps them.  Where is the Minister of Tourism?

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Akiror): Madam Speaker and honourable members, first, I would like to identify with the families that have been affected by the animals. It came to our notice and I informed Dr Andrew Seguya, and our people are on the ground trying to handle the situation.

3.20
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This is concerning land in Amuru District and the border. Now as I talk, in my district, we have the Madi community who are crossing the boundary coming to Amuru and they are being facilitated by some leaders that are in this august House. 
It was on the 27th January when they crossed to a place called Apar. They were being given brand new spears, arrows, pangas -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Gilbert Olanya for yielding. Hon. Gilbert Olanya has made a very serious statement, and according to our Rules of Procedure, we cannot afford not to seek for clarification, especially when it attacks the integrity of this House. 

The honourable member says, there is a Member of this august House who is facilitating the movement of people from Madi into Amuru District and later on, he qualified it that they are issued with spears and pangas. I think as a law- making institution, it is only proper that we get to know these types of people the honourable member is talking about so that we can direct our debate appropriately when the Floor is opened. Could you please clarify to this august House who that person is so that we know? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: And honourable member if you are not able to, you will have to withdraw because there are so many Madi here. I do not know what to do to them now. (Laughter)

MS AURU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The allegation that has just been made by the honourable member is very serious. I am a Madi and I know the Madi for being peaceful people. In this House, the honourable member mentioned that the Madi have been facilitated to attack his constituency with pangas. There are three groups of Madi: There are Madi in Adjumani, Madi of Moyo and there are Madis of Okolo. Let him clarify which Madi these are. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am talking of Madi from Adjumani District. It was on the 27th of January when they crossed; they were facilitated with spears and arrows as I mentioned. They came to a place called Apar in Amuru. On reaching that particular area, they said all the Acholi who are there must leave their land. Because of fear - you know, Acholi naturally do not like fighting until they are provoked -(Laughter)- All the Acholi took off without exchanging any fight. It was on the 30th January when the Acholi who were living in Apar decided to go back to their homes. From there, they went and the Madi community took off because they went in a different form. It was yesterday the 7th February when the Madi community was re-organised again. They were ferried on a truck to Amuru District in a place called Bibia, Atiak sub-county; the place bordering Sudan and Amuru District and Uganda for that matter. When they arrived there, they told the people who were occupying that land that they were going back to their ancestral land. They told all the Acholi who were there to leave. They said they were facilitated with spears, pangas, to mention but a few. 

Madam Speaker -(Interjections)- I am sensing a lot of problems, I am sensing danger. (Interjections) Right now, there are other people who are facilitating a tribal war, especially in Northern Uganda, with the aim of grabbing the land of the people of Acholi. This is a very sensitive issue, especially in my district of Amuru. You remember last Friday, court made a very serious ruling that some of the land found in Acholi is vacant and when he was making -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, ask the government to establish what is happening. Ask the government to take an interest in the problem.

MR OLANYA: Hon. Todwong.

MR TODWONG: Thank you my brother. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I understand the pain my brother is going through and all our brothers from Northern Uganda. Some of us had an opportunity to work in a wider spectrum in Northern Uganda. What hon. Gilbert Olanya is raising is very true to the extent that people are coming to occupy that land. 

I would like to start from my area. The issue was brought up to the level of the Office of the Prime Minister when the Alur were claiming almost 30 kilometres inside Nwoya District. (Interjections) The issue was settled, because historically, the Acholi and Alur are brothers. So, the boundary remained along the river.

In particular, what my brother is raising, the Madi people, other than the place of Apar in Atiak sub-county and in particular, Bibya. Bibya Town Council is a place along the border between Uganda and Sudan. It is a very busy urban centre. The authorities in Adjumani District are claiming that area to be within Adjumani District because of the lucrative business taking place there. It has already brought pressure on the local authorities. The area of Atiak; the traditional leadership in Adjumani - the Madi from Adjumani at one time claimed almost up to Atiak Town Council. 

I remember attending a meeting which was called by the traditional leader of Atiak and what the elders said – they were very particular; they mentioned that if the elders from Madi are claiming this land, what we are going to do is, “Let us mix this soil with water, drink it and we see the owners of this land.” That scared away the Madi elders and we thought the issue was settled. Now I am hearing that they are coming back.

It is not that we are too sensitive or sentimental about some of these issues, and it is not that we are aggressive; we love living with neighbours. Gulu is a cosmopolitan town that is housing Madi and almost everybody in Uganda. Amuru is the same. We request Government to take this matter seriously and help with this tension that is brewing in our community before more bloodshed is witnessed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Minister of Security to – because he has heard what the problem is; Minister of Security.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker and honourable members, a few days ago, you must have probably seen something in the press regarding the problem in Amuru. Principally, there is some dispute between the people of Amuru, the Acholi and the Madi over Adjumani. It had to do with the border between the two districts. I have also had reports about the situation there from our respective resident district commissioners of Adjumani and Amuru. The reports I have point to one thing. 

One, the area in dispute is a gazetted game reserve; the game reserve of East Madi, which was gazetted some time back. How does a dispute come about? During the insurgency in Northern Uganda, perpetuated by Kony and his group, a number of people were displaced. People from Amuru were displaced, people from Adjumani were also displaced and they took refuge in that area. When peace returned, obviously, people were expected to go back to their areas of origin. Indeed, people started going back. Now, because people who had come from various parts of Amuru had long distances to travel back to their places of origin; there was a transit IDP camp made nearby, near the border. So, they would move from the game reserve, go to that transit camp and eventually go back. 

However, there was some strange occurrence such that even after they had gone back; I think due to some political interests, some of these people were invited to go back to the game reserve. This matter was brought to the attention of the minister in charge of wildlife. He took it upon himself with a number of people, to get down there. Unfortunately, because of political influence, political agitation; the reception he received from some of the people he met there on the ground was a little bit hostile. He came back, went to Amuru, went to Adjumani and got a report. 

What resulted was that clash between these two groups and indeed, this matter came to Cabinet last week. Cabinet decided that there should be a Cabinet sub-committee to look into the matter, headed by Hon. Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali. (Interjections) The sub-committee met and of course it was a sub-committee of the Prime Minister, Local Government, Security, Internal Affairs and Wildlife. (Interjections) 

We looked at the matter and decided that, “Yes, the sanctity of the game reserve must be preserved.” In other words, all groups of people going to occupy the game reserve should be sensitised and they leave. Further encroachment on the game reserve should also be stopped and then Ministry of Lands, at an appropriate time, of course under the leadership of Wildlife, gets to the area and determines exactly, the border between Amuru and Adjumani. [HON. MEMBER: “Information.”] And then, Internal Affairs and Security, make sure that [HON. MEMBER: “Clarification.”] What are you clarifying, honourable member? (Interjections) Are you seeking clarification from me? (Interjections) Okay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are now engaging in a debate. You conclude and maybe, come back with an official statement. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Yes indeed, Wildlife, together -[HON. MEMBER: “There is no game park there.”]- It is a game reserve, East Madi Game Reserve. (Interjections) Now, you should get to the area and determine exactly the border between Amuru and Adjumani. Then Internal Affairs and Security will –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, you are now engaging in a debate; maybe you can conclude and come back later with an official statement. 

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Yes, indeed, Wildlife together - East Madi Game Reserve. Indeed, Wildlife and Internal Affairs moved to the area to sensitise the people –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is a very sensitive matter. The Minister responsible for Security should go back and prepare for us a statement and bring it tomorrow so that we are able to debate on what he is trying to say. As you can see, a number of colleagues are getting up to seek for clarification and information. So, I would think that it is procedurally right for him to go back and prepare a statement – he seems to have some information. So, he should be able to come back tomorrow with a ministerial statement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would want him to come back tomorrow, but I am still concerned about the issue of Ntoroko – the issue of the Sabiny; I do not know whether we cannot have a statement touching on all these things together.

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I think it is in order for this august House to know about some of these critical points in various parts of the country. The question of Ntoroko, the question of animals destroying people’s crops and threatening life; the question of the Sabiny and Budaka – and a few other areas where there are disputes.

On the question of Amuru, Government has taken steps and a team of wildlife and security went there to talk to the people so that they vacate the game reserve and live it intact and then Ministry of Lands will come in later to determine the borders. 

Fortunately, these borders are very well documented. The East Madi Game Reserve was curved from the former colonial district of Madi. So, it will not be a very difficult thing to determine the borders and to know which part is Amuru and which one is Adjumani. 

So, Madam Speaker, I know it is okay to bring a statement, but probably, since it includes these other areas in the various parts of the country, I think tomorrow will be too early. We vie for extra time to come with a statement on all these areas. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go back to the Order Paper – Honourable minister, will you be ready by Thursday next week?

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Yes, Thursday next week.

BILLS
FIRST READING

PLANT PROTECTION AND HEALTH BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: I would like to welcome the Vice President –(Applause)– let us hear from the Minister of Agriculture. 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill is committed to the relevant committee and report back; it is reprinted so we hope that the period between the first and second reading will be reduced so that we can have it back for scrutiny and completion. 

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PROHIBITION AND PREVENTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010

3.40
MR NIWAGABA WILFRED (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010” be read for the first time. And it being a saved Bill, the Certificate of Financial Implications is already on the record of Parliament and it is assumed it is accompanying this Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is a reprint, having been saved. It is committed to the relevant committee for scrutiny and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES BILL, 2008

3.41
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, you may also want to know that I am the Acting Leader of the Opposition today in the House. (Laughter) So, I am holding two posts.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Acting Leader of the Opposition.

MR ODONGA-OTT: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Implementation of Government Assurances Bill, 2008” be read for the first time. And since it is a saved Bill, my position is the same as what hon. Niwagaba stated.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is a re-print, therefore, it is committed to the committee for perusal and report back expeditiously. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PETROLEUM EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: The Bill, having come from the Committee of Government Assurances, we will send it to the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

3.43
THE MINISTER OF PRIMARY EDUCATION (MR Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that that Bill entitled, “The Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012” be read for the first time. Madam Speaker, I have the certificate of financial implications and a copy of the Uganda Gazette. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that this is one of the Bills that this House has been waiting for -(Applause)– it is committed to the relevant committee for expeditious scrutiny and report back. But I want to add that in line with this Bill, I am organizing a one-week seminar on Oil and Gas Law to help you process the Bill. But I will let you know. (Applause)

BILL 
FIRST READING

THE HIV/AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

3.44
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Madam Speaker, I also happen to be the Vice Chairperson of the HIV/AIDS Committee of Parliament. With apologies, my chairperson is away on official duties - 


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is a reprint, but since it has come from the Committee on HIV/AIDS, we remit it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny and report back. I thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

    (I) STATEMENT ON UNFULFILLED PLEDGES TO PARLIAMENT BY THE GOVERNMENT, AND STATEMENT ON ATTENDANCE OF PLENARY SITTING BY MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT

3.46
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I thank you Madam Speaker. This time, we were able to print the copies and they are being given out. I want to inform the Speaker that I have combined the two items and they are all on one paper, and so, we should not be expecting two papers, but two in one -(Laughter).

1.0	Introduction

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome you from the long recess in which we were able to interact at length with our constituents.

I also take this opportunity to congratulate Members on successfully completing the year 2011, and the Government is looking forward to a fruitful calendar year 2012.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, at the close of the last meeting of Parliament, the Government made some commitments to this House, which I would like to report on as follows:

Re-printing of Saved Bills from the Eighth Parliament 

You will recall that 23 Bills were saved from the Eighth Parliament and the Government undertook to re-print them. To this effect, nine Bills have so far been re-printed (six Government Bills and three Private Members’ Bills) and forwarded to the Clerk to Parliament for first reading, and actually, most of them were read yesterday. For your information, these Bills are:

1.	The Implementation of Government Assurances Bill
2.	The Plant Variety Protection Bill
3.	The Plant Protection and Health Bill
4.	The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill
5.	The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill
6.	The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill
7.	The Anti-Homosexuality Bill
8.	The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill
9.	The HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill

Madam Speaker, I am glad once again to inform you that Government signed production sharing agreements with Tullow Oil, which takes us one step closer to the realisation of production of oil in this country. This was in line with the Government’s understanding of the parliamentary resolutions on oil - that they were never meant to affect the on-going agreements.

Parliamentary Resolutions on the Cotton Sector
Madam Speaker, you will recall that Parliament passed resolutions relating to this sector and Government undertook to convene a meeting with stakeholders. I am happy to report that a stakeholders’ meeting took place on 31 January 2012 chaired by me. It was attended by most of the stakeholders in the sector who came up with some way forward. I have directed the Minister of Agriculture to brief the House, at an appropriate time, on how far the resolutions are being implemented.

Recent Developments in the Country

Petition by Teachers

Madam Speaker, you will recall that during the recess teachers petitioned Government on an increase of their salaries by 100 per cent and threatened another strike at the beginning of the first term for schools. 

We are committed to gradually improving the welfare of teachers as far as salary enhancement is concerned. Government has made a commitment to increasing the salary of public servants, including teachers, by 50 per cent. However, this increment shall be staggered over a period of three years beginning with FY 2012/13 as follows: Financial Year 2012/2013, 15 per cent; Financial Year 2013/2014, 20 per cent; and Financial Year 2014/2015, 15 per cent. 

At the moment, we encourage teachers to remain calm as their needs will be addressed.

Strike by KACITA

Recently, the traders in Kampala, under their umbrella association called Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA), went on strike protesting alleged Bank of Uganda indifference towards the increasing interest rates on loans. The traders had a meeting with H.E President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the Governor of Bank of Uganda in which certain concessions were made and understandings reached. The responsible minister will make a statement to this House at an appropriate time.

I am, however, pleased to inform the House that the inflationary pressures the country has been facing over the last one year have started easing. It is Government’s hope that with a good monetary policy in place, inflation will gradually be brought back to a single digit.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, last year this House faced some challenges, among them was the issue of lack of quorum. As I conclude, I want to advise Members of Parliament from both sides to take attendance of Parliament seriously because it is the only way we can effectively represent the people who sent us to Parliament and serve the country diligently. 

For God and My Country! Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the statement contains a number of issues, but I would like to propose that the issue of the oil agreements be deferred until after Friday when we will receive the President’s address. We will speak to both of them together. It is not proper for us to do it now and later after his address, we do it again. So, let us address all the issues exclusive of the issue of oil.

4.01
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity –

THE SPEAKER: You shall take only five minutes, please.

MS AMODING: I would like to welcome Members of Parliament back from recess. 

In my contribution, I would like to address myself to the issue of quorum, which the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister talked about in his statement. I want to say that what he raised here in regard to quorum is just an insult. I am saying this because as much I recall, as Members we have tried to consistently attend Parliament. We have also been very willing to contribute and participate in the debates even up to late hours of the night.

Let me also point it out that the Leader of Government Business in the House has not also been very consistent in bringing substantial issues to be put on the Order Paper. Much as we are here for business and want to perform excellently, you have to play your part. We have tried our best to attend Parliament despite the fact that you have been bringing here issues that are not sustentative. Such issues usually consume a lot of our time while debating – not very irrelevant that they should not be debated, but they should take little time. We need to debate issues that will take us forward. That is my complaint, Madam Speaker. 

Yes, we are here to do work and serve this country to the best of our ability, but I would like to challenge the team that draws this Order Paper to do their part. I hope that during this meeting, I am going to see substantive issues being lined up on the Order Paper for debate. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me clarify on the issue of business that is lined up on the Order Paper for discussion. The team that draws the Order Paper comprises the Speaker and the Clerk to Parliament. However, I want to make it clear that this paper is drawn according to what is available. When there is no business available, that is how private members’ motions come on the Floor.

4.02
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak to what the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister has presented. I also would like to thank him for presenting this statement. One of the issues I wanted to speak about was that of oil, but since you have asked us to wait, I will do so.

On page 6, the Leader of Government Business has said, in part that, “I have directed the Minister of Agriculture to brief the House…at an appropriate time.” I thought that the modus operandi of the Ninth Parliament is such that the Executive comes up with programmes that carry timelines. 

These open-ended statements with no timelines within which execution is going to be done leave a lot to be desired, especially when they come from the Office of the Prime Minister who is supposed to supervise Cabinet. If such a senior Government official allows the ministers the freedom, laxity and elasticity, it is amazing. My sister stood here and said that lions were mauling animals and the Leader of Government Business said that he would come back to Parliament with a statement. As to when, where and how, there was no mention of such. 

Madam Speaker, it is the weakness of the Office of the Prime Minister that lets these ministers to relax. In the circumstances, I would like to urge the Prime Minister to always attach timelines to all instructions given to ministers. The Leader of Government Business repeats the same on page 7 where he talks about the concessions between the Governor of Bank of Uganda and KACITA, before he states that the responsible minister will make a statement to this House at an appropriate time. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to ask: can the hon. Prime Minister tell us when this appropriate time is, in his own understanding? I thank you.

4.04
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Deputy Prime Minister, if you were a teacher living in Adjumani District and you were told that over a period of three years you would have an enhancement of 50 per cent spread out and you were earning Shs 200,000, and by the end of June this year, you would have a 15 per cent enhancement, what would that mean to you if you had a university-going child? If you were a medical doctor and you were told that from this date forward, over a period of three years, you would be given a 15 per cent increment, 20 per cent increment and 15 per cent increment in the terminal year when elections are beginning, and you had two children in secondary schools, let us assume in Budo Senior Secondary School, what would that mean to you?

Why am I bringing this to your attention, Mr Prime Minister? If you look at the failure rate that we experienced from the results that your government has just released, you would be heartbroken. You would be heartbroken enough to appreciate the issues that the teachers are raising. You would not be talking about percentages. You would be looking at the time value of money. This is what we are talking about. 

The First Lady was crying in Kaabong because of finding one student in a school that was well built, partly financed by Government and partly financed by the Irish Government. We are here saying alright, we shall do this, but why do you politicise matters of education? Why do you politicise matters that affect our children? By the year 2014, you are going into an election year, you can easily make a political statement, and we are saying with 70 per cent increment –

THE SPEAKER: There is some information.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, when it comes to matters of education, I am a specialist. I would love to advise you and Government that just look at the dooms day you are pronouncing today on our children when you downplay matters of teachers’ salary. I can confess to you that a teacher today in a rural district committed suicide because she could not handle matters of educating her children. She was being coerced by the area district to go to the classroom yet she was just selling second hand clothes to make extra income. She could not bear it. Tell me, Mr Prime Minister, if the teachers who taught you were treated like we are treating our teachers today, would you be comfortable where you are?

Secondly, I want to address the issue of cotton. During the days when governments were governments, we used to talk about cotton, copper, name it. The Minister of Agriculture, whom I respect immensely, was on the Floor of Parliament saying he can do nothing because this is a liberalised economy. 

There used to be something called a stabilisation fund. How much effort has Government taken over the span of 27 years to create a stabilisation fund at least for cotton producers? What have you done? But he will come again and say, “We are waiting for the market forces to interact”. Why are you treating Ugandans as if they are refugees? You know that our soils are failing us. You know that our rainfall patterns are failing us. You know that we have not invested in taming nature for our farmers. Why are we joking? Who is interested in taking care of our children’s children? 

I am now developing grey hair. Is this the kind of nation that I want to leave behind where farmers are treated like this, where even if things were to happen the way they happen, it would be the market forces? Who does not know that the US heavily invests in its farmers and subsidizes them? Why are we backward? 

Lastly, when we talk about traders striking and they are striking because of interest rates, I know many of us have gotten loans but the person who is heavily and mostly affected is the middle income earner. We are talking about that teacher who is perpetually indebted to the bank. Even if I were a trader today, if I imported let us say from China, I would reach here, fulfil my tax obligation and by the time my goods get to the shops, the value of those goods is depreciating so much and yet the interest rates keep on accelerating.

The banks are telling us, it is a central bank rate and we have nothing to do. Granted, but how does Government inflate its citizens when the times are as hard as this? How many people in this country do not know why we are where we are today? How much money did we wire into this economy during the electioneering process? How much commitment do we have to generate policies that can salvage the situation? 

Until we count ourselves as persons and until we count ourselves as people who are interested in seeing that Uganda belongs to all of us, unless as a country we forget that we ran short of forex because we invested in jets that are non-functional today, we will continue to serve the interests of none other than our dead conscience. 

My honourable member, whom I respect immensely, Moses Ali, has talked about attending Parliament. I think Government, in particular the Executive, are interested in frustrating this institution. Why do I say this? You have given us a list of all these Bills; so what? Doesn’t Government have technocrats? Do we have to come here and say this minister is absent? 

By the way, yesterday there should have been formal statements on the nodding disease and on the failure of Continental Tobacco (U) Ltd to pay tobacco farmers. How, as a country, can we not afford to do this? What do your technocrats do? What do you ministers do? You are now pleading with us to attend Parliament. Well, we are here, what is the serious business we are doing here? To listen to you on these very few pages! This disturbs my conscience. Thank you.

4.12
MR GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, when I was listening to Gen. Moses Ali, I was thinking about whether he has the hat from the other side about Government and one for himself from his constituency about teachers. Last week, I asked teachers not to begin teaching but converge at Bat Valley and discuss these matters. Police stopped me. 

What is the main issue? In Uganda, we had 500,000 children sitting for PLE. Uganda had 40,000 first grades. Kampala District had 8,000 out of the 40,000 first grades. Wakiso District had over 6,000 first grades. Mukono had 5,000 first grades, minus the municipalities. I was asking the Minister of Education to show us results of PLE for private schools alone and those of government schools and we see their performance. Children who were in fourth grade, which is almost a failure, were 362,000. 

When you talk about increment of 15 per cent, you must ask yourself what you are adding. Are you adding to the Shs 500,000 which is already there or you are adding to the Shs 260,000 which is already taxed for Pay As You Earn? 

As we talk now, most of the districts in Uganda do not have banks. Teachers get their salaries from banks; they move with ATM cards. You move from Kamuli and go up to Busoga or Jinja, you go to the bank, you do not find your salary and you go back. Within a week, you find that you have spent almost Shs 30,000 looking for your salary at the banks. 

Where are we going? A teacher who gets a loan of Shs 3 million has to pay it for a period of five years. General Moses Ali, do not deceive yourself that teachers are teaching. No way! You will pay them but you are paying air. The advice we are giving you is better. A country like Rwanda now gives every UPE child a cup of milk at break time. What is Uganda doing? We are only posing that we have UPE but actually UPE is an abstract because there is no performance. 

I was asking the Minister to tell this nation whether schools began when they got capitation grant. For a child in UPE, when you calculate the money government gives a school and divide it by three months and the number of children in the school, you will get a figure where each child gets Shs 900 as fees. When schools begin, there are no scholastic materials, there is no chalk, there are no books, there are no papers for scheming and you still say teachers should get to school and be there. If they refuse, you say Ssewungu is politicking! The issue is that children are not learning. 

When you educate a child, you have educated a nation. A child from Kamuli or Kalungu can perform the same as a child from Kampala Parents School as long as the teachers are there. I want us to have a practical experience. Let us pick a teacher from Greenhill and take him to Kalungu Boys School in my constituency and let us pick a teacher from the UPE Kalungu Boys School and take him to Greenhill and see the performance after one year. The one from Kalungu – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your point. You know, he speaks a lot for the teachers. Okay, you can have one minute.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, you will find that the teacher you picked from Greenhill will make children fail and the one you took from Kalungu to Greenhill will make the children pass because of good remuneration. I want to emphasise this point; we cannot talk about 15 per cent increment and you are still taxing these teachers. 

Secondly, I am going to bring a motion to this Floor of Parliament. We have celebrated our team in Parliament because they managed to bring a trophy. Which UPE school can even receive a ball or can afford buying a set of drums out of the capitation grants we get? When you go to the National Theatre here, you find that all the schools coming to participate in music competitions are private schools but the Chameleons started from school. 

Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to say, go back and sit with the Cabinet. We have hon. Muyingo; he has schools. The Commissioner for Education, Mr Nkaada, has a school in Nkumba. We want to ask these people to tell us how their schools perform and make children pass without remunerating teachers very well. 

As I sit, I want to urge this Government that it is useless to continue paying salaries to teachers when the performance is not there. You are paying them salaries but a district like Ssembabule has 400 ghost teachers and the ministry is there posing. We need inspection, we need good payments for teachers for our children to become ministers, speakers or to be an MP like Ssewungu or even the Pope if need be. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us agree to three minutes please. Hon. Aol.

4.18
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, getting straight on with education and teachers, I am a teacher by profession and when I was in active service, I enjoyed teaching very much because we also enjoy prestige. On 20th last month, I happened to attend a graduation ceremony at Makerere University and I marked one statement by the Chancellor, Makerere University. He said that if education of those days were like that of today, he would not be the Chancellor of Makerere University. That means that we have a lot left to desire. We need to put a lot of efforts in education and we cannot do that without working on the issue of teachers. 

I was in Pok-Ogali in Paraloo Sub County, which is in Aswa County in Gulu District, last week on Thursday. There was no chalk. I even donated some Shs 20,000 to buy chalk, and teachers were not there. The motivation is not there. The incentive is not there. We actually take issues of teachers as issues that are not serious, but all of us, whether you are a doctor or a president, we pass through the hands of teachers. We cannot hold public offices without passing through the hands of teachers. 

Let us take education more seriously. If a review of the education policy in the country needs to be done, the ministry should do it. The Minister of Education should take it more seriously. 

Let me touch on the cotton sector. I have been with the people in my district. About two weeks ago, there was an announcement on the radio that the farmers should be very happy because the price of cotton had moved up from Shs 1,000 to Shs 1,100. Is that not a mockery, that the farmers should now be happy when even the official position of the price of cotton was supposed to be Shs 1,600 but from Shs 1,000 it is now Shs 1,100 and that the farmers should be happy! I think we are not serious. 

Last year, when we closed this Parliament, we wanted the price of cotton to be Shs 2,200 at least but the Leader of Government Business, you have not even told us that position yet we insisted that we needed it very much. We are not happy – (Member timed out.)

4.21
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Leader of Government Business for his effort of bringing a statement. However, in future, he should address us on fulfilled pledges rather than on the unfulfilled pledges. In future, you could make your statement to read “fulfilled pledges” so that we are sure that you are working on the pledges which you make in this House. 

I also do not know the mechanism you use to track and record these pledges. I think in the last six months or so, there are many more pledges than what you have presented, which were made on the Floor of this House. 

Secondly, I would like to thank you for initiating arrangements trying to make Parliament more functional, particularly by initiating a parliamentary calendar where the business of the House is programmed on an annual basis. I also thank you for putting in place a mechanism for fast tracking the Bills, which are tabled in this House, so that we avoid a situation where Bills expire within this House.

Madam Speaker, you also recall that you have been publically accused of having frustrated the government programmes in the first month of this Parliament. We want to put it on record that the challenge has been from the government side. The government, since the Ninth Parliament started, has not been forthcoming with respect to bringing Bills into this House and that is why the first part of the House business was dominated by private members’ business. That is why it is the private members, the back bench members, who moved a motion to save the Bills which lapsed with the Eighth Parliament. I just wanted to put this on record so that the Leader of Government Business stops accusing the Speaker of not having allowed government business on the Floor - (Interruption)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I just want to inform the whole House that the Government side has never accused the Speaker of not putting our business on the Order Paper. That is the information I want to give. Otherwise, the honourable member should substantiate – (Interruption) 

MR OMWONYA: Madam Speaker, I want to rise on a point of order. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is not telling us what we should be doing here.

Sometimes I feel annoyed, given the background that some of us have actually come from. We have been brought up in a background of the private sector and the pay that a private sector employee gets entirely depends on how much they work for the company. The unfortunate bit is that here in this House, especially the likes of the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister, Lt Gen. Moses Ali, sometimes take this House for granted. They think we are not following trends in this House.  

Is it in order for the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister to allege that it is a rumour that you, Madam Speaker, is frustrating Government Business and yet we have read in the newspapers, we have heard it on TV that it is what is happening. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the President of this country one day called me at 10.00 p.m. when they were having a caucus meeting in Entebbe. I was in a supermarket trying to buy a few things after leaving office. He asked, “Is it true that you have blocked Government Business in the House?” So, it is something you have been saying in your caucus, it is in the public domain; do not deny it because I know. (Applause)
 
DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that ruling. I also want to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for formally withdrawing that accusation on the Floor. Definitely, he was aware because he was informed about that.
 
The Prime Minister raises pertinent issues on a petition by teachers and interest rates, but he does not offer solutions. He promises that substantive presentations will be made by the ministers, hopefully, very soon. However, on the issue of salaries for teachers and other civil servants, we would like to request that Government should have a comprehensive and serious approach in respect to the review of the salaries of teachers and other key civil servants as some of the Members have already brought up. 

When you look at the 15 per cent increment proposed for the coming financial year, for most of the primary school teachers it amounts to about Shs 40,000 before taxation. So, really, to increase these people’s salary by Shs 30,000 or Shs 40,000 is really a mockery. 

We also know that most of the districts have failed to attract medical officers and other health workers. The government, therefore, needs to take the issue of salaries for civil servants much more seriously than you are presenting it, so that you comprehensively look at the issue and make substantial adjustments in the salaries and emoluments of civil servants. This would motivate and make the civil service functional and be able to deliver services including primary education, healthcare and others. Thank you very much. 

4.30
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister for the statement made, and I also equally want to welcome Members from the long recess that we have just completed.

On Monday, which was the 6th of this month, we held a very serious stakeholders’ meeting of the district leaders in Hoima in response to the PLE results that we had just received. Among the many issues discussed, we majorly discussed the reasons as to why our district performed so poorly. My own county got 66 first grades, which is so poor compared to other schools especially in the urban areas. Sixty-six pupils in grade one is half of what some of the schools here in Kampala and other municipalities in Uganda got or even a quarter of that. 

We were trying to find out what we can do to change the trend plus, of course, other issues which I would not want to go into - the comparison between UPE and private schools. That is a topic for another day. Among the issues we observed that were strongly raised by the teachers was the issue to do with their remuneration. 

I was very happy when the Leader of Government Business raised this matter. Unfortunately, we had heard the same information even before, especially to do with the increment of their salary. When I tried to explain the 15 per cent, just like my colleague has raised, it amounted to Shs 30,000 in the next one year and subsequently Shs 30,000 and the other year Shs 30,000, which in total makes it Shs 90,000. This would give a total of Shs 290,000 for a primary teacher. This is very unserious, given the inflationary pressure that we are already having. My call to Government, therefore, is that we need to comprehensively look into this matter of the salaries especially of the teachers otherwise we shall continue performing very poorly in our county. 

As if that is not enough, Madam Speaker, in that very meeting I was petitioned by around 50 teachers who received half pay for the  months of December, 2011 and January this year. Some received salaries as low as Shs 50,000, Shs 60,000 and Shs 100,000 on their accounts. So, the issue they had at hand was how this had come about. There were others who did not get any money at all. I do not know whether it happened elsewhere other than Hoima. It is a very serious matter for a teacher to go to their ATM machine expecting to draw their Shs 200,000 and find nothing to buy a gomesi or something else for his wife for Christmas. 

I had to ask the personnel department at the district to explain what happened, but I could not believe that even the personnel could not explain why. He was just trying to say that it was due to the IPPS system, which I could not also understand because I am not technical in that area. I would like to call upon the Ministry of Public Service to explain this because it is continuing and there is no one to explain. 

As we were discussing the issues to do with salary increment within a period of three years to make it Shs 50,000, I failed to tell whether it was by design to derail us or create an impression that this Parliament is no longer doing its work, somebody brought out this news headline that MPs had received Shs 103 million. The teachers started saying, “Hon. Bigirwa, why don’t we share that one?” I do not know who did that but I interpret it as something that was not done in good faith because someone was wavering. A week before you leave Kyankwanzi - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know we have the other statement on the nodding disease, so we will have to just take a few more contributions because that one is also pressing. Three minutes.

4.36
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank the Prime Minister for trying to deliver this report to Parliament today. However, as he was reading it, I got disappointed. I have come to realise that we have no future. If we have a future, we have to have a plan and a way forward.

During last year in our session, these issues were being raised and my people of Butaleja had hope and I was also giving them hope. I told them, “please do not give up, the government is going to work on these issues”. Now I realise that I have nothing to tell them. I am only supposed to tell them that we have no future because they are cotton farmers. They are telling us that the Ministry of Agriculture will bring a report at an appropriate time, so we do not know when it will come.

In fact, I have come to realise the way this government works. I used to just hear about it but now I am seeing it with my own eyes. After ripping off my people of Butaleja by buying their cotton at Shs 200 per kilo and buying all of it, after some time they will put the price high at Shs 2,000 when they know that they no longer have the cotton. The people will then rush to buy the seeds and grow more cotton. After growing the cotton, the prices will go back to Shs 200 so that they can benefit while our people do not benefit. I am requesting the Prime Minister to be serious and take our voters to be serious also.

On the issue of teachers, I sit on the social services committee and last year, the Minister of Education came to our committee. She promised us that she had a letter from the President giving us assurance that we should pass the budget and they are going to increase the salaries of teachers by 30 per cent starting with 2012, this term. That is what she told us in our committee.

I want the Prime Minister to tell me what has happened to the 30 per cent this term, to start breaking it into parts yet things are becoming more expensive and not reducing. What happened to the 30 per cent? I need an explanation on that.
Let me go to KACITA. The Prime Minister said that at an appropriate time, the Minister will come and give us –

THE SPEAKER: Some information-

MS NEBANDA: I do not need information; they will give information afterwards.

THE SPEAKER: It is from the Minister of Finance.

MS NEBANDA: No, he will bring it after the report. Let me go to the issue of KACITA. When you turn to page 7, the Prime Minister has told us that they will bring the report at an appropriate time. We do not know when the appropriate time will come. This is how the system works. The interest rate will increase and since they have commercial banks and after accumulating lot of money, they will put it back to 14 and 15 per cent.

In order for us to know how our country moves, we need a period of time. If it is a supplementary budget that is being brought in front here with classified information, you want us to pass it within minutes. When it comes to issues of teachers and our people who are suffering in our villages like farmers, you tell us that, “at an appropriate time when we feel like, we shall come and give you the information.” How are we leading this government? How are we moving forward?
I do not want my people to continue losing hope - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the proposal is that we reduce the time to two minutes. Okay.

4.40
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also rising to make a comment on the presentation by the Prime Minister. I want to begin with the concern over teachers’ pay, and I will not dwell so much on it. I will simply ask whether the Prime Minister knows the inflation rate as of now and whether the 15 per cent is trying to cushion a bit of inflation that has affected the value of money of teachers’ salaries or it is really an increment as we are talking about.

I want to join hon. Monicah Amoding to also express some disappointment. It is true that the Leader of Government Business could be concerned about attendance in Parliament, but I also want to add a voice to the fact that he also needs to be concerned about adding meaning and value to our presence in this House. We are not coming here to present our biological structures; we are coming here to deliberate. Therefore, when you come here, value the people before whom you are presenting issues. 

Yesterday it was put on the Order Paper and then it was pushed to today. However, when you read this and someone is telling you, “I have directed the Minister to present to you at an appropriate time”, then what was the use of this? I thought as a Leader of Government Business you are coming to present. So what was the use? Are you worse than the person who is not coming here now? Actually, aren’t you worse because you are not even doing what you promised; you are coming to waste our time?

Finally, when we come here and say we are responding to a situation and it is one of national concern, I feel so hurt when I sit here from 2.00 p.m. to whatever time and someone comes and tells me, “I will be ready when I am ready. We shall tell you the situation as soon as possible.” Are you valuing my time here? Are you valuing the people we represent here? Do you qualify to be the one advising us on attendance? So, can we behave and respond on the same note? Present yourself here on issues in the same note as someone who emphasises attendance so that we can be on the same page. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.44
MR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You guided us that we should leave issues of oil until Friday. However, on page 3 of the statement, there is a statement which is disturbing me. It says, “A lot of progress has been made to implement the resolutions and relevant government ministries are in constant dialogue with the ad hoc committee which Parliament set to study....”

By saying that government ministries are in constant dialogue with the ad hoc committee, which I am meant to understand was put in abeyance because of the court process, someone outside there may think that while they are supposed to be in abeyance, there are underhand methods, which are taking place. There are people from various areas who were ready to appear before this ad hoc committee; isn’t this statement misleading? I hope the presenter will make corrections.

Secondly, on the issue of teachers, hon. Ssewungu brought up a very good issue and it has always been coming up. We are all products of rural schools, especially primary and even secondary schools. However, where we are going, the rural schools are becoming lame ducks every day that passes; children are not passing exams. What strategy should we really come up with to ensure that we revive rural schools? 

I would request you, Madam Speaker, that during the time of debating policy statements – because of the time and schedule of the Budget, we sometimes have less time to debate reports - maybe you could allot time so that we can have full debates on the agricultural, education, health and infrastructure sectors. This will enable us to exhaust many of the things. Otherwise, these issues will keep coming up without us doing justice to these crucial sectors that especially affect our rural people who we represent here. My request is that we get time – two or three days – so that we can debate each of the sectors. This will enable us conclude them rather than have someone bring up an issue of national importance then we react, leaving it half done. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the point raised by hon. Atwooki is important. That is why I had requested the rules committee to separate the health sector from the education sector in the social services committee so that we can create more time and focus. I have not yet read their report but I know they were talking about expenditure, but I thought it was more important to get the issues rather than worry about expenditure. I hope they have agreed to my request that we have a committee for education and that for health so that we give them sufficient time.

4.48
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to support the statement by the Prime Minister. He mentioned that sometimes we do not reach the quorum in Parliament. Still, when we reflect back, it is always the frontbench that is occupied by only one or two people. Moreover, there was a day a debate was closed because of that. Now, if he is talking about the quorum not being realised sometimes, I do not think he means the backbench. Had that been the case, then the complaint would have come from either the whip or the commissioners.

Coming back to the issue of teachers; when we do calculations – real arithmetic – you find that a 15 per cent increment that teachers will get on Shs 194,450 leaves a teacher, who does donkey’s work, with virtually nothing. I propose that the Leader of Government Business – if he accepts to buy my idea – could grade the teachers according to the scale they are in. Scale U6 to U8, for example, this financial year could get 50 per cent and then next financial year they could get 25 per cent and the following year another 25 per cent. These are the people who are handling the pupils themselves. We can then grade another group of teachers. 

Why am I breaking them into scales? A teacher who is in a rural area does not get the opportunity to go for seminars in order to get allowances. Moreover they cannot get the opportunity to do private work. When you go to private schools, teachers are not restricted such that when they complete their lessons, they are free to go and do – (Member timed out_)

4.51
MR FAISAL KIKULUKUNYU (NRM, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Leader of Government Business for his statement. Without wasting time, I want to make a few observations. 

Among the many demands that teachers made was the issue of hard-to-reach areas. That issue has not been commented on by the Leader of Government Business as one of the unfulfilled pledges. There is also the issue of science teachers. We know the significance of science today in the development of the country. 

I wish to concur with hon. Okot regarding the increment of teachers’ salaries. The 15 per cent is too small a figure. Given the economic demands today, there is no way we can talk about increasing teachers’ salaries by a mere 15 per cent. Why don’t we adopt the 50 per cent figure proposed by hon. Okot? In future, we can then decrease depending on what we have generated – probably the economy would have bettered. 

In my district, we registered 46 first grades and the best performing schools were privately owned, not government UPE schools. One disappointing factor is that whereas a government paid teacher earns more, their performance is worse than that of a private school teacher who earns between Shs 100,000 to Shs 150,000. I do not know what is happening with UPE schools; the performance is very poor. Something must be done by the Ministry of Education to find out what is happening – (Member timed out_) 

4.54
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to sympathise with the Leader of Government Business because when ministers fear an issue, they keep away and tell him to make a statement like, “We will do it at an appropriate time.” (Laughter) 

There are many sectors which people should not joke around with. When the health workers go on strike, a solution will be found within a week. But teachers have been told to keep calm every day and yet whenever we go to our constituencies, the teachers are looking at us as part of the problem, looking at us with a bad eye, “You promised us, what happened?”

I am a teacher by profession and when they were talking here, I really felt the plight of the teachers. Let me put it in a simple way so that maybe those who do not understand the plight of teachers can understand it. If you had your wife and you told her, “Keep at home, I will come next year”, you may not get that wife. But because teachers have nowhere to go, we always tell them that they will have the increment. When the Makerere University lecturers went on strike for one week, part of their problem was solved. 

We would like the Leader of Government Business to sit with the ministers concerned, the ministers in education. It is very good that some of them are teachers so they know that part of success is through motivation and not pledges or promises. If you talk of 15 per cent or 10 per cent, later on if the economy is not too good I think there will be no increment. We seek that the Ministry of Education really addresses the plight of teachers so that we can have a way forward. Thank you very much.

4.57
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to raise a concern on the issue of the banking system, which is in one of the paragraphs of this report. I also want to thank the Leader of Government Business for the report. 

In this report, the Government has picked a concern and said it is serious because KACITA had gone on strike and they have reported only on one thing, the interest rate. As a Government, I thought that would have been an eye opener for us to see that in the banking system, the bankers are robbing this country in all ways. The interest rate is only one. What about a parent who is paying school fees; even if you have a balance of Shs 100 you are supposed to pay Shs 2,500 as a bank charge for paying. Is that not robbing? I thought that is one of the things we must consider as a Government within the banking sector. 

In some banks in this country, even if you are depositing you have to pay for depositing. We have these banks in this country. In this country when you are saving, the interest rates are so low even if it is a fixed savings account. When you are borrowing, the interest rates are so high. What are we doing? Why can’t we as a Government bring some regulations so that we have a very good environment both for the business people - the bankers - and clients who are using the banks? Why should we only talk about interest rates, which is an eye opener being brought by KACITA? 

Madam Speaker, through you, I want to thank the staff of this Parliament. These days we are receiving speeches of the leaders of this world. Yesterday, I opened my email and received a speech by President Barrack Obama given to his leaders. When I read through it, I wished all the leaders of this country could also read that speech and we borrow some of the things in there. 

Those who are seriously proclaiming private business in terms of complete liberalisation are making a U-turn. If the President of America is now saying that we must consider our nationals first and we must even subsidise them so that they create employment opportunities for our people, why can’t we Ugandans borrow from that and we start – (Interjections) - so that we make a U-turn as people are also turning around. It will be unfortunate when we wait for them to go around the cycle and then we also begin to turn. We shall be late - (Member timed out_)

5.01
MRS VICTORIA BUSINGE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I concur with my colleagues to assert that no country can be better than the quality of its teachers. We are what we are because of our teachers. It is therefore extremely alarming to see that the new term has started and some teachers’ children are sitting at home because they cannot afford the escalating fees the schools have been allowed to charge for senior one. 

I have a valid example in my district. It is unfortunate that I could not help all those who came crying to me, but it all hinges on the poor payment. So, it is my cry that we increase the salary of these teachers genuinely and realistically to pull them out of the ditch.

You realise that the number of cancelled results is increasing due to cheating, and the cheating is being done in the rural schools. These teachers are harassed to get grades and so they try to get those grades by hook or crook and they end up indulging in examination malpractices. When the results are cancelled, the teachers get penalties and the penalties are very clear - cancellation of their certificates. So, we have to be genuine and do the needful.

Related to payment is the existing discrepancy that puts the teachers or head teachers in grades according to schools. Long ago these grades were due to high numbers. A certain school would be graded a first grade school if it had an enrolment of 700 and above. But as we talk, even the smallest school, especially the upcountry schools, have over 1,000 children and these head teachers are doing the same job of managing high numbers of teachers and children but the salaries are still different.

So, it is my cry that we get serious on this matter and we erase grading, because now the head teachers are handling the same number of children and teachers. So they do the same work - (Member timed out_)

5.03
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I entirely agree with my colleagues that the pay of teachers and other civil servants is low. However, I disagree that the poor performance is due to a low salary. I have got reasons for that. As we heard from hon. Kikulukunyu, I am a proprietor of a private school. The other year I got 10 first grades. The highly paid person on my staff gets Shs 250,000- (Interjections) - and this year I got 12 first grades. (Laughter) I am just giving an illustration. 

In Uganda, a job done by four Ugandans requires only one Kenyan. That is to do with productivity. To me, salaries are a scapegoat. There is a problem; we have made a mistake in the past and we need to review. That is why I want to propose to my Government that we have a serious review of the public service performance and we see where we have gone wrong. 

After reviewing the performance of public service, then Government can come for a loan. We are approving loans to build good hospitals; the other Friday we were in Mityana. I can see the Director General of Medical Services is there. We are giving out pickups, we are launching the building of good hospitals but what will be the use if the performance of the civil servants is not good? 

Let us see where we went wrong. Let us begin to motivate the unit cost of labour. If a doctor operates five patients, do we appreciate him more than that one who has seen none? All of them get the same pay. We are giving omnibus pay. Even if today we increased salaries by 100 per cent, it will not change into 100 per cent performance of public service - (Member timed out_)

5.07
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will use this opportunity to ask that the Ministry of Education presents to this House their analysis of performance in PLE, USE and the ordinary level examinations in this country. Why? Because for a long time, it has become a ritual that the ministry does and we hear how condemned our village schools are and then we do not go through this debate with the ministry. 

I think that is important that the analysis of performance be presented to the Parliament of Uganda this year so that we are able to compare the dynamics in Serere and the dynamics in Wakiso and Kampala, and we will be able to propose solutions. 

My major concern arises from this attitude portrayed in this statement. When Parliament was told that teachers’ salaries would be raised by a factor of 30 per cent, a matter that was committed on the Floor of this House, a matter which would now be in the custody of the Government Assurances Committee to follow up, government again runs away and comes with a proposal which does not even catch up with inflation. You know, inflation is already at 28 per cent. What mockery are you doing to these teachers?  Because of that, Madam Speaker, I think that we need to - (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I think I owe you an explanation so this point is well debated and well understood, the question of the pay rise to teachers. Who would not want to pay a teacher a good salary? [Hon. Members: “You”] I would be the last one not to pay a good salary to the teacher because I have been one and I am a product of one. The issue is a sizeable envelope. The 15 per cent we are going to put in the budget translated in absolute figures is Shs 250 billion, the expected increase in our revenue in this financial year assuming the economy does not contract. 

All signs are showing the economy may contract because over the last three months, we have not been hitting our revenue collection. We are now behind by Shs 78 billion as I speak today. Therefore, the issue is that we had to sit down and agree with teachers. This year, we expect to generate an extra Ugshs 55 billion from which we would be able to give teachers a salary increase. Unless if this House says, “Cut all the budgets of other departments and ministries including Parliament” - (Interjections)-if I carry that message to my minister, we shall cut all budgets of all departments of Government and Parliament and pay teachers. I salute you.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister wanted to make his own statement but to really divert what I was driving at. I hope that you will take this into consideration, just give me one additional second.

It is this lack of appreciation of the welfare of teachers and their contribution that we must address. I have heard statements, and at this point really, - no pun intended – that you can order a teacher to go to class! I want to tell you that if you can order soldiers, you will not get what they call learning and teaching and the intended outcomes if you order teachers to go to class. They will sit there and you will just end up with half-baked children. You will be satisfied as Generals but there will be no teaching in class. It is this attitude that the Government of Uganda, if it is still in charge, must change. If it does not change, we hold you accountable for the failure to generate the required labour force in this country.

Let me wind up. You have advised and guided on oil and we are not going to talk about this. However, may I make this prayer that the Revenue Management Bill is as important as the production one that you have tabled to this House - (Member timed out_)

5.13
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one comment, which is general. To me, many of the issues brought are highlights but the detailed information is left behind. This, therefore, to me, affects the level of our debate and value of our attendance of meetings here because when the ministers come back with the reports, we shall again re-debate these issues. So, I pray that the frontbench re-adjusts when they are bringing reports to Parliament so that we shall have value for time and we debate issues exhaustively.

Secondly, on the issue of teachers, I am the woman Member of Parliament for Adjumani where the presenter of this brief comes from. Adjumani has performed very badly, I wonder why such a report to Parliament! It is a mockery! How do you supervise and monitor a poorly paid staff? 

As Members of Parliament, we also face the challenges of inflation. So, how much do you expect a teacher to face the challenges of inflation with the Shs 200,000 that they get? Statements come out that the issues have been agreed with the teachers. I totally disagree with this. Issues under implementation have not been harmoniously agreed with the teachers. If so, why are the teachers disagreeing with this implementation?

If we prioritise education, honourable members, I feel this House should look at the increment of the teachers’ salaries because education is the heart of our country and is the heart of development. Why do we neglect? Where have we ranked education in all our sectors?

On the issue of attendance, I believe the presenter of this brief has to check more on the Frontbench. When we sit here, the number on their side is minimal compared to the rest of the attendance by the Backbenchers. I think the Prime Minister should check inside before looking outward.

Lastly, on this side, the quality of issues brought to the House should also be analysed so that our attentiveness is maintained. Often, people move out because some of the issues are not sustainable to keep people around. Thank you, very much. 

5.16
MR PHILIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance to talk - just two issues. The first one is on KACITA. I followed it very closely - the KACITA strike. We had interactions with the KACITA people as a member of the Committee on National Economy, and I had issues which are legitimate. We hope Government is going to address them. 

We also interacted with the Governor of Bank of Uganda and he told us he had decided to raise the central bank rates because he wanted to withdraw or mop up a lot of money which was in the public. He did not tell us where that too much money came from. 

The Leader of Government Business has just said the minister will be coming at an appropriate time. I would like to ask the Leader of Government Business that when the minister comes to talk to us at that appropriate time, let her tell us where the too much money came from into the economy, which the bank or Government is trying to mop out.

They told us inflation was caused largely by scarcity of food. But now the Leader of Government Business is pleased that inflation is going down. This year, we might move toward a single digit, a very good thing for Uganda and it is giving us hope. But where I come from in Busoga, we are already facing food scarcity. This is largely because we depend a lot on cassava, and cassava was destroyed by some disease. So, basically, now we do not have any other grain apart from maize, which, out of poverty, the peasants have sold most of it to Kenya. So, what is Government doing that is going to assist people so that inflation is brought down? I would like the honourable Leader of Government Business to help me answer that question; what is Government doing about the food scarcity which we are already facing? I think by July, Busoga region and most of eastern Uganda will be having a very serious problem of food.  

There is the issue of teachers. My district got only about 150 first grades. I think about 130 of them were from private schools. Any Government or UPE school which got a first grade had a private school in the neighbourhood which registered there. So, the first grades are for private schools registered in Government schools. Any Government school which got a first grade has introduced some sort of boarding and paying of school fees. So, we need to be asking the Minister of Education – we need a review of the education sector because as it is, it is a disaster. It is turning into a disaster, UPE and USE -(Member timed out.) 

5.20
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two points to make. One is on cotton. 

I want to raise this serious issue about the word “stakeholder”. The Prime Minister is telling us that when we asked him to go and meet these people, that indeed, he held this meeting and he met stakeholders. Who are these stakeholders? In this country, we have a problem, especially when it comes to farmers’ issues. Who is a stakeholder? It is a very serious word and it is used especially these days when there is a liberalisation policy in this country. We should know a specific person whom we should meet, especially when there is a problem and especially on this point of cotton. We have moved before that, even during the recess some of us have been moving around. I want to advise the Prime Minister to go back and meet the specific people, otherwise, the people you met maybe were just your supporters but not the stakeholders in cotton.

When you move down and see what is happening, the farmers are still waiting. Why? Before, these people were paid. We need to think twice and see how we can help these farmers. Otherwise, to add Shs 100, sometimes Shs 50 – if you go down to the ground, you will not see even the 100 they are talking about. 

Secondly, there is a problem of marketing. We need to help the farmers. As a Ministry of Trade and Industry, what are you doing? We should get people who should be in charge of marketing these products. We have a problem in this country; the products of our farmers do not have market -(Member timed out.)

5.23
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Whereas the people of Toroma County in Katakwi District salute the government so far for steering this country, a number of things have happened that make us worried. As I speak now, Uganda seems to be at crossroads and each one of us is not safe. We are not safe even where we are seated. 

A few days ago on the 3rd of February, I met head teachers in my constituency. We were trying to discuss issues pertaining to education because, in my constituency, education is at an admission stage. But I was told by the teachers that every UPE pupil - I do not know whether it is true or it is not - every UPE pupil receives Shs 300 for the requirements that are supposed to be used in the school. That means that a year, a child is provided with Shs 900. So, I got worried – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that in Kitgum District, we also have Government schools and many of our children are enrolled in USE. But as the area Member of Parliament, I am helping 40 children in USE because of the requirements which are necessary and could make those students drop out of school. There is additional money which their parents cannot meet. So, every term, I am supposed to supplement 40 USE students. Therefore, it is not only in my colleague’s constituency, but it is all over the country. 

MR AMODOI: Thank you. Now –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amodoi, when you donate your time that is what happens –(Laughter)– and when you donate to people like hon. Anywar, she will really use your time.

MR AMODIO: Just give me one more minute to finish. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one more minute.

MR AMODIO: When I heard of the Shs 900, I realised that we are giving teachers a burden. With only Shs 900 per year, you want the teacher to provide the student with all the necessities. 

As parents are waiting to get some assistance from their brothers and their children who are in Public Service, even in Public Service, people are getting very little money. So, where are we headed as a country? 

Besides, my people are displaced from their land where they are supposed to go and farm – that is why I said we are not safe in this country. My prayer, therefore, is that Government must come up with serious policies to streamline the way their country is stirred. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.28
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the Leader of Government Business for his presentation. I disagree with the Prime Minister on the issue of lack of quorum in the House. I do not know how he made his analysis, but I want him to take this right. On about two occasions, you suspended the House because of lack of quorum, and the Leader of Government Business and his team were not serious. The time we were supposed to be in the House conducting business is when they were sitting in their caucus; could they be serious? 

So, what he is lamenting about here that lack of quorum in Parliament will cause serious problems in this country is not true; it is poor timing for their caucus meetings. Get the appropriate time; some of us had already sat in our caucus and we also set apart our time for business. 

Another issue is on cotton –(Interruption)

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, the honourable member has alleged that the reason there is poor quorum in Parliament is because NRM –(Interjections)- she said Government and we are the ones in charge; we are in Government. (Laughter) She said that we hold caucuses at the wrong time.  Madam Speaker, you are the one who always invites us to come here to Parliament. There is no single day when we wrote telling you that we cannot come to Parliament because we are holding a caucus meeting. In any case, the Opposition also has their time for holding caucus meetings. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to say that NRM holds caucuses at the wrong time?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not gloss over issues. But on one or two occasions, I suspended this House for almost an hour to ensure that everybody is here.

MS ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I am well protected and she is not that consistent in Parliament. 

On the cotton sector, I hail from a cotton growing area. I remember we brought up the issue of cotton on the Floor of this Parliament. So, I wonder why the Leader of Government Business says that at an appropriate time – our people are badly off. I do not know whether this Government wants people to riot, strike and so on, before they can pay attention. Our people are still keeping the cotton in their houses and this season, fire is rampant. Some of the houses have already caught fire.

So, I ask the Leader of Government Business to be serous and bring for us the right prices of the cotton so that our people can market their cotton and pay fees and construct houses – if at all they can afford with this little money –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (DP, Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like first of all to thank the Leader of Government Business for presenting a seven page document which has grossly been evasive. It does not offer any solution other than promising action.

I would like to propose that for ease of your work, you would find it important if you adopted a system where you could periodically produce an action-taken report as Leader of Government Business and tell us what you have done on which project. 

I will only say something about KACITA strike. On this issue of KACITA - if we do not urgently address it, it is going to have multiplier effects. Already, the Minister is saying we have a shortfall of 78 billion, which is just small. We are going to sit here until we have no salary even to pay ourselves because of that issue. The Governor of Bank of Uganda and his team know very well what brought the excessive amount of money in the economy, and the simplest economics would indicate that once you have an excessive supply of money, then automatically, prices will go up; this is simple economics. Bank of Uganda has failed up to today to eliminate the old notes after their currency reform. I would imagine that anybody reasonable would know that having old and new notes would automatically bring excessive supply of money in the economy. 

I am surprised that Bank of Uganda is fighting inflation at the expense of employment. If this situation continues, then banks in this country are going to get rid of some of their employees, because banks get money out of lending money. If we do not lend money, then there is no way banks are going to pay their employees and at the end of the day, they will have to lose their jobs. This is when Bank of Uganda will now come up again to fight unemployment. Let us not act like fire-fighters. It is a long time since you left the bush -(Member timed out.)

5.37
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the retired General and also Third Deputy Prime Minister for his brief statement. 

My main concern is on teachers. First and foremost, I wonder how a teacher here in Kampala or in Wakiso gets the same payment as a teacher deep there in Kabale, Mushanjye, Nyinkunama or Katakwi. I last time made an outcry that sincerely, Kabale should be put back on the list of hard-to-reach areas and given an incentive, but they are not listening to our outcry. I know that when the General was making his presentation – whenever he goes to a shop he has incentives and does not pay taxes because soldiers have Army shops where they get tax-free commodities. For example, if somebody is building a house and he wants iron sheets and he is a soldier, he will just walk to the Army shop and get iron sheets -[HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]- 

In the same way, if they want a blanket or mattress, they will just get them there tax-free. The same also applies to fuel and more so, it even applies to the ATM card; when they are withdrawing their salaries from the bank, they do not get a surcharge for withdrawing. I am not saying that it is bad for the Army, but I am saying that this incentive should also be given to teachers. Teachers should also get these incentives. We should either get them special cards so that when they are buying certain necessities that are needed at home, they should also not pay some of these taxes. Maybe they should also get some mortgage from Housing Finance Bank and they start building. 

Teachers have made us and I would not be a Member of Parliament if teachers had not made me. This should also go to the health sector because these are the two main sectors where people are getting meagre pay and yet they do a lot of work. Look at the midwife, nurse or the doctor, because it is not only concerning teachers.

Lastly and sincerely, how do we come and say that teachers should start with a 100 percent increment – we agreed on 30 percent from the Government and then you come here and tell us that you will make bits of 15 percent. Are you aware of the inflation rate that is running around? (Member timed out.)

5.40
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): I thank you a lot, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I have been following the debate regarding this matter and I should say that we do not need to blame the Deputy Leader of Government Business simply because – I have a feeling that he is just being misled by the technocrats. They do not have an idea of what is happening on the ground and so we should forgive him for that.             

However, I have been able to observe something very important here. If he had the audacity to deny that you had not been accused of sabotaging Government business, then I believe that everything in here is total lies and has a hidden agenda. If you look at the state of affairs within the education department, teachers are very poorly facilitated. These are people who are almost not housed and do not have any sort of incentive. If they cannot afford to pay for their own children, how do you expect them to teach? The lies that the Government has put forward relating to the increment of the teachers’ salaries explains the poor performance in schools. 

If teachers are not paid, it is common sense they are not going to teach. They will simply go there, sit and relax simply because they know that their salaries go straight to their accounts. They do not care and if the situation is not looked into, we are actually moving towards a very bad situation. Since they are meant to set a very strong background for the next generation, it appears that by neglecting the children at this stage, we are failing the economy in the foreseeable future. It is, therefore, very important that these lies stop. Teachers should be paid and if you do not pay them, you are not going to get a good performing environment –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think his time has gone. 

5.43
MS SANTA OGWANG (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to participate in this debate. The Leader of Government Business has given us a statement, but I would like to say that as far as the teachers are concerned, I see the 15 percent as an insult to the teachers. Why do I say so? It is because when you look below the petition of the teachers on 6.2, we have the rise in interest rates and we should remember that teachers are parents. We should remember that teachers are husbands and have to pay for the school fees of their children. But when you look at the high interest rates - the teachers used to go to the banks to get loans to pay the school fees of their children. Where should they turn? You go to the bank and the interest rate is very high. So, the Leader of Government Business – you are old enough – the teachers of those days are not the teachers of today. We should be aware that the teachers are in the kitchen producing or laying the foundation for the honourable Members of Parliament, engineers, generals and everybody we see around, including the President.

On this note, I would like to go back to the area I represent; Oyam District. We in Oyam and many other districts are coming out of war; we are in rural areas and if you are paying teachers very little money and they do not have time and other schools to do part time, where else from do you expect them to survive? I would like to tell the Leader of Government Business that very soon, the farmers – because we are not giving them good money for their cotton; we are paying the teachers little money – people in Uganda will develop survival mechanisms. I am sounding a warning that because you have not told the farmers the good price of the cotton, very soon the agriculture sector will face a serious blow -(Member timed out.)

5.45
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasiro County, Serere): Madam Speaker, when I look at this item as drawn on the Order Paper, I realise that it talks about a statement on unfulfilled pledges by Government. However, when I look at the report, I don’t see any pledges being talked about. I don’t know whether the problem is with the interpretation of the English words or something else.

The Order Paper I have is talking about a statement on attendance of plenary sittings by Members of Parliament, but when you read the statement that has been presented, you realise that there is just a paragraph on that at its conclusion yet this is a very important issue that I thought should have been addressed comprehensively. It is in those circumstances that I now say that there is a problem with either the understanding of the issues that are on the Order Paper visa-a-vis what has been presented to us.

That, however, will not stop me from making comments on this statement, which is not related to pledges at all. On page three, the Leader of Government Business makes a comment that the relevant Government ministries are in constant dialogue with the Ad hoc committee of Parliament. I would like to say that that is not true. There is no dialogue going on.

The Parliamentary Commission has received a letter from the lawyers of the so-called Severino, who sued Parliament, complaining that that Ad hoc committee has continued to do its work, which is not true at all. As I said, the committee is not doing any work as of now. So, it is surprising for the Third Deputy Prime Minister to say that such work is going on. Where is it taking place?

We don’t want this kind of rumour to continue with the Parliamentary Commission being continuously accused of doing nothing. I want to put it on record that the Parliamentary Commission respects the rulings of any court. And once that ruling was made, the Parliament Ad hoc Committee halted its actions. So, for the Third Deputy Prime Minister to come here and say that there is a dialogue going on, is something that should be expunged from this statement.

On the issue of cotton, I want to say that it didn’t require the Third Deputy Prime Minister to make a statement just telling us that the Minister of Agriculture would bring a statement to Parliament. He would have just said it verbally. As a person who comes from a cotton growing area, I know the first cotton season is about to start. People always use cotton proceeds to pay school fees for their children. However, up to now, the Cotton Development Authority and Ministry of Agriculture have not issued the indicative price because they withdrew the earlier one. So, for the Leader of Government Business to come here and just tell us that a statement will be made by the responsible minister is not enough. When will the cotton farmers be able to pay school fees for their children? 

As regards the petition by teachers, I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament to stop wasting time debating the 15 percent increment. We should target the next financial year budgeting process by identifying the areas from which we shall cut and move money to raise the teachers’ salaries. We should not wait for the last moment like we did last financial year. 

On the issue of KACITA, the Leader of Government Business is telling us that the responsible minister will be tabling a statement to Parliament. However, the biggest question is when will this be done? These are very biting issues.

Government needs to know that that wasn’t the only issue they talked about; they also talked about the issue of electricity tariffs and bank charges. I hope that the said ministerial statement will cover all these areas and that that statement should come soon. 

This statement has only enabled us to debate some of these issues; it is not about the unfulfilled pledges. Thank you very much.

5.50
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Leader of Government Business for the statement that he just made to the august House. 

Teachers in Ntoroko District are really in a very bad state. We have very few schools in that district and so you find teachers moving from one sub-county to another on foot to deliver materials to pupils. In Ntoroko, not even a headmaster drives a car; no teacher rides a motorcycle; and no teacher rides a bicycle. So, I am talking about a teacher who walks about five kilometres to get to their place of work. By the time they get there, they are already tired and it is already midday. You can imagine such a teacher being the least paid civil servant.

In his statement, the Leader of Government Business said that Government is committed to gradually improve the welfare of teachers as far as salary enhancement is concerned. But teachers do not only need salary increments as far as their welfare is concerned. Welfare is a broad concept. The teachers, for example, do not have staff quarters and that explains the reason they have to walk the long distances. Teachers in Ntoroko usually talk to me about these issues, but I usually have no words to tell them.

Teachers also need some allowances to help them sort out some other issues such as transport. Remember, teachers are parents like any other parents in this country and so they have to pay school fees for their children.

We have hard-to-reach areas with schools; for example Kyamutema Primary School in Ntoroko, which is located on top of a mountain about 20 kilometres from the slopes. What does that mean? It means the teachers have to walk those 20 kilometres up to the top of the mountain to teach, spending half of the day walking to their place of work. 

But such schools are not only lacking teachers, they also lack buildings. You find a primary seven school with only two classrooms with two classes sharing one classroom. The teachers keep dividing that one classroom with a blackboard. A teacher will write the homework for example, for P.5 and turns the other side of the same blackboard to give homework for the P.6 class pupils. 

What I am trying to say here is that even the schools themselves are in a very bad state let alone having demotivated teachers. That is why most of the time we receive very bad results. How would you compare an urban teacher with a rural teacher from such a place?

5.53
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to disagree with people who said that private schools pay little, but that they perform well compared to Government schools. I would like to inform the House that in Government schools, teachers are usually affected by the environment. Parents are becoming very aggressive. Also, when politicians go to the rallies, they accuse teachers of many things. For example, many politicians usually accuse teachers of asking for money for lunch from children. This makes teachers suffer a lot of psychological torture.

When you look at the environment teachers cannot even be proud of their jobs. I suggest that the government should look at the environment. The population is now increasing. One teacher is looking after hundreds of pupils. In the first place, the teacher is doing donkey work. All the day he teaches, he does parental work and on top of that, the whole night he is marking, making schemes, so he gets no time to rest. But he earns very little. He depends on that little salary. 

Look at other institutions like the Police, the Army, where they are given free shoes, free uniforms, free transport, among others. I think we should not compare private institutions with Government institutions. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Finally, let us have the Acting Leader of the Opposition, the Minister of Tourism and then we hear from the Minister of Education and Minister of Agriculture. 

5.56
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As the Acting Leader of the Opposition, I have the following to say. This morning when I saw on the Order Paper that they were coming to make a statement on unfulfilled pledges, I checked through the files. The Leader of the Opposition had given me a comprehensive list of all resolutions passed in this Parliament from 1996 up to today. There are 508 resolutions passed in this Parliament, and many of them asking Government to do something. We are yet to synchronise to find out how many of the 508 resolutions of Parliament have been actually fulfilled from 1996 to date. We need those statistics, Madam Speaker, because we gather here to talk as Parliament, make concrete suggestions to Government and then Government opts either not to implement it, using Article 93 of the Constitution, which says that Parliament should not make laws that impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund. 

Madam Speaker, under your leadership, if this Parliament is to be very effective - because these issues will be coming every day. Today its teachers, tomorrow doctors, the other day KACITA, then UTODA. We need to consider amending both the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure, if we are to have an effective Parliament which can bite members of the Executive. 

Because, as of now, Members resolve that give teachers this increment; the minister commits himself; and then comes back with another assurance which is different from what we agreed upon at the time Parliament ended. This is a syndrome that is dragging this Parliament behind. 

Without getting into the details of whether teachers should be paid or whether we are discussing the issue of oil, I think as Parliament we should urgently consider amending our rules, probably even amending the Constitution, so that today, if we talk about teachers, it is a fait accompli. We don’t need to come back tomorrow on that same issue.  

Secondly, I would want to say that the Bill that you, Madam Speaker, allowed to be read for the first time today, The Implementation of Government Assurances Bill, should also be expedited by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs because in that Bill, we have sanctions on ministers who come and tell lies before this House and walk away because Ugandans forget and forgive very fast. We would actually make telling lies a very risky business in this Parliament because they have sanctions - asking you not to sit in the Frontbench; suspending you from the House, maybe for two weeks because you make statements that you cannot fulfill. That means we are all gathered here, from all over Uganda, talking about things which cannot be fulfilled by members of the Executive. I would think that our rules and the Constitution should be urgently amended. 

Lastly, I would want to say that we should stop politicking about teachers. My analysis is that it is politics which is killing the morale of teachers. Someone gets up and says no one should ask for money for meals; someone says, we shall cook for pupils at school. Other schools are collecting Shs 3,000 to Shs 4,000 per parent. In my constituency, children go and dig at least four gardens for the teachers; it’s a local arrangement. On Saturdays, they go and dig four gardens, like four acres, for every teacher. And it is working well, but when the orders come from up, then they stop doing that. But they really help teachers. If you have four acres of cassava, the issue of Shs 200,000 would be immaterial because you have something to eat. 

What I would think is parents should be serious. You cannot just produce a child and expect someone to pay for that child’s education; you expect someone, in the name of Government, to feed that child. And you are just drinking from morning to evening. These are the people who ask us for school fees every day. 

I think Government, especially the President, should take a firm stand and say, if you are paying, this is the amount all over the country; if you are sending your child to school, please carry some roasted potatoes. Those are the things we used to carry those days, and now I am here as a Member of Parliament, and now Acting Leader of Opposition for that matter. (Laughter)

This thing of making parents feel like they are kings; that you just produce and you bring to school; they fall sick, you just take to hospital, it is a very bad practice that all politicians should desist from. I am actually one of those MPs that would soon even advocate that Graduated Tax should be brought back, even if it is Shs 1,000 because it puts a sense of responsibility on the parents. (Applause) When we go to the village, they say, “Give us, give us, give us.” At least if they are paying Shs 1,000 we can say the money you are contributing, which goes to Kampala, is not enough, so we may have to increase the amount of Graduated Tax. That would bring a sense of responsibility on the heads of ordinary Ugandans. 

Otherwise, as of now, I am sorry to say this; our people are almost like animals; begging, begging, begging and begging. There is land and there is rain, but no one wants to work; instead they are begging and drinking. So, we may have to consider bringing back Graduated Tax to pull the ears of the parents so that citizens can equally be responsible instead of expecting from Government every day. That is why the President even said that people should not think Government should feed them. He made that statement that people should work hard. They should not think that Government should feed them. What is the background of that statement? It is because people are always begging, begging and begging. 

So, as Members of Parliament, we should stop bringing politics into education. When the appropriate committee –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (MS JESSICA ALUPO): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am very impressed by the way hon. Otto, The Acting Leader of the Opposition, has made his submission, especially with a view to instilling a sense of responsibility in our people.

My point of information that I would like to extend to hon. Otto is just to thank him for speaking so well and encourage him to always speak like that. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The Acting Leader of the Opposition has really got a commendation from the Minister of Education. Just to emphasise the point hon. Otto made. During the recess, when I was doing my rounds with my voters, I asked them what improvements they wanted us to make in Parliament. One of things they said was can you go and make a law that teaches people to be responsible with their lives. This is what they told me, among many things. The other thing they asked me to explain is why the Capitation Grant arrives in the last week of the last term. They also want answers about that. 

6.06
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, thank you very much indeed and I want to thank you for guiding the House, particularly on the debate about oil. I know how passionate the House is about this. So, you saved us a lot of time and we would be repeating it when it comes again. Maybe that rule should also have applied to the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance since the deputy Leader of Government Business has asked the ministers to make statements. 

I want to make two points. The first one is that the deputy Leader of Government Business did an honourable job to honour a promise at the close of the last meeting of Parliament. There was a promise to make a report and he has done exactly that. We need to thank him for honouring that pledge. 

There are a few points which seemed to be coming and they need to be answered. One is the government action on increasing salaries for teachers and the second one is on KACITA and generally the rise in interest rates. Madam Speaker, this is a very complicated situation because in this inflationary situation that the country is going through, to increase salaries, particularly for a group which is very big, and whose increment would be quite a lot of money as the Minister in charge of Planning has done, if government didn’t phase it and sequence it properly, you would be shooting yourselves in the foot. To increase salaries when at the same time you are trying to control inflation would go counter to the very measure you want to achieve because inflation is a very dangerous phenomenon. It eats on the savings of all those who have fixed incomes and those who have saved and it makes planning and development very difficult. Consequently, every effort made to control inflation should be supported and we could not support that effort if at the same time you are increasing dramatically the salaries of certain groups. Therefore, the reason for phasing and sequencing the increment of salaries for teachers is very logical. 

No one in their right mind, particularly those of you who have been educated, would deny teachers a salary increment. In fact, I am sure even Members of Parliament would want their salaries increased because the situation is tricky, but if we are to solve it, we have to have that courage to say yes, we will sequence and increase the salaries of teachers by 15 percent or 20 percent and at the end of the phase, the salaries would have been increased. I am sure even during that time, as the economy expands, it would be logical to increase it even more than 15 percent. But Members, we plead with you professionally; bear with Government to make these measures bear fruit just like the interest rates in banks are now beginning to yield results. This is going to come and we need the support of the Members. 

The second point relates to KACITA; I know the secretary -(Ms Alaso rose_)- Madam Speaker, since my time is very limited, we can sort this one bilaterally when we –(Laughter)- I really want to comment on this KACITA strike –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I got up to seek clarification. I wanted to know whether the proposed adjustments to salary are about cushioning the teachers against inflation or making some additional money available for them to dispose of as income; and I thought that the honourable minister would have appreciated the need for a backbench Member like me to be helped to understand the position of Government. Instead, the honourable minister now proposes that I go and sort out matters bilaterally with him when the people of Serere have asked me to come here to seek this type of clarification not for my sake, but for the sake of this nation and on their behalf. Is he, therefore, in order, first of all, to insinuate that I have bilateral arrangements with him? (Laughter)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, is the minister in order to ignore a backbenchers and refuse to give clarification to a people’s representative of Serere? Is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, on the point of clarification, he needs to accept. It is up to him to accept whether he will take the clarification or information. If he doesn’t yield the Floor, I can’t force him, but I am surprised that you don’t want to have bilateral relations with hon. Kamuntu. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: This is not a secret. I have sometimes had bilateral discussions with the distinguished members and I have found it mutually beneficial and I thank you very much for your guidance, Madam Speaker. But quite seriously, on the strike of KACITA and the rise in the interest rates, the essential point of KACITA is that they are finding the price of a dollar in terms of local shillings very high because they import items from outside. Therefore, they need more shillings to buy a few dollars. Consequently, they would want Government to reduce or control the exchange rates for them to import cheaply and I can share with you, Members of Parliament, that what you need is dollars because the more dollars you can get, the less shillings in terms of buying dollars will be needed in the case for KACITA. So, KACITA will be advised that instead of striking, you would rather want to solve this peacefully so that dollars come into the country and they can be bought cheaply and you import your items. But the moment you begin to strike and you provoke the Riot Police and tear gas and purple water, it works against your interest because it scares away tourists who would have brought foreign exchange and the business investors become hesitant to come and the situation becomes compounded. 

Consequently, Members of Parliament –(Ms Cecilia Ogwal rose_)– that one is very difficult to have bilateral relations with. (Laughter)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I think the minister is deliberately diverting the attention of this House from focusing on the root cause of the strike. The foreign exchange translation has been with us for years, where the dollar rate against the Uganda shilling has always been either going up or down, but there has never been an occasion when the traders went on strike. But this time round, the traders are complaining about the high rate of borrowing, because when you borrow at a very high rate and the dollar translation is also against the same trader, it becomes absolutely impossible for the trader to be able to make profits and also be able to pay the commercial banks at the rate of over 30 percent.  That is why the traders are concerned. Otherwise the dollar translation has always been with the traders and they have always known how to adjust their prices and sales against the translation. So, Madam Speaker, that is the clarification I would like the Minister to give us, as to how he is going to deal with the high rates of borrowing. That is what we are concerned about. Thank you. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Naturally, I gave way for the point she has raised and she knows it well that there are two issues here that are interlinked; you have an exchange rate and you need more shillings in order to get dollars; and you have interest rates as well in an inflationary situation. Now, the equation is simply like this; defined simply, inflation is too much money chasing too few goods. So, the instrument the Central Bank has is to raise the interest rates because the interest rate is the price you pay for borrowing the money. Consequently, when the price is high, it helps the Central Bank because people will not borrow the money and by so doing, you will have mopped local currency out of circulation and you will be able to bring the circulation in line with the supply. 

So, it makes a lot of sense. But the issue is that it cannot be so drastic. You need to do both; you need to control the supply of money and you also need a production stimulus so that the supply side and the demand side come to some equilibrium and then you can control inflation. These measures are being done although in the interim, when they are being done, there is a little bit of discomfort. I plead with Members to bear with this discomfort because the situation will eventually be controlled. That is the explanation that I wanted to give, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to clarify on the issues that were raised about my sector, particularly about the teachers and performance in schools. As you are aware, teachers’ welfare is a great concern to me and my sector in particular. First of all, I am a teacher, I am a parent and my sons have gone to school to become teachers; and so, whenever I hear anything about teachers, I feel that it shouldn’t go without my eye.  

But before that, allow me to sincerely thank the honourable members for their concern about education, which is evidenced from the energy with which people raise issues to do with education. I saw hon. Ssewungu using a lot of energy, which showed that honourable members have a lot of love and interest in education. I would like to appreciate that. I would also like to appreciate hon. Aol for one statement she made, that we should become very serious about education. I took her very seriously when she meant all of us and not only people seated on this side, but all of us, particularly the MPs.  

I take that statement very seriously especially when you look at what we are going through these days. I visited Busoga and Iganga in particular last Thursday, in a bid to find out what is happening in the schools. I will use this example to explain some of the misinformation that has been passed on from honourable members. Rt Hon. Speaker, I found out that Government had already sent over Shs 1 billion to that district for primary education. Some of this money was for capitation, teachers’ houses and other things that we would like, to ensure that every child is in school. 

What did I find? The teachers were in school although the House has been misinformed here that teachers are not at school. But over 90 percent of the teachers in the district were at school. In quite a number of schools in that district, which is almost the same in all the rural areas, there were many schools in which less than 10 percent of the pupils had gone to school during the first week. We need to ask ourselves; Government has sent money, there has been information on the Floor that capitation money and salaries were not sent to the schools. But there is now evidence to show that this money has been sent. The teachers are at school but the children are not at school. So, who is to blame? If one is to perform well, the teacher builds on what was taught yesterday. I was told in Lusoga that the children are going to come after the second week. Whose problem is this? The teachers are there; they are teaching the 10 percent who attend and when the other 90 percent come after two weeks, I would like you to imagine what is going to happen. Either the teacher is going to go back to what he has already taught or continue from where he had stopped. What will be the result? 

The issue as much as we may be blaming Government is for all of us. Who is responsible for mobilising the parents to send the children to school? The other day we were talking about absenteeism of teachers, but as Government we have curbed that. The records I have in the ministry indicate that attendance is over 90 percent. Ten percent of students – I am told that this is going to improve as the term continues. It is my duty and your duty to change the attitude of the parents and to teach the parents to attach great importance to education. Otherwise, Government is not going to use Police to drag the parents to school. 

You have been asking what strategies we use to improve on the standards in the rural areas. Government has this time sent capitation grants in good time, even before the term started; salaries of December and January have also been paid in good time although there were some districts where money wasn’t sent.  We had a meeting yesterday chaired by the minister and we put our technical staff to task to explain. We also cross-checked with Finance and we were assured that even those districts where there were errors, their money has now been sent. So, this means that Government has played its part. How much are we playing our part? The more we talk about the teachers -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. Indeed you have said you were in Busoga last week and met teachers at school, but the children were not there. Honourable minister, can you give us any rightful information of the teachers that you met that they were having prepared working schemes of work and books for lesson plans with them? 

I would like to inform the honourable minister that there are reasons as to why children don’t go to school in the first week. It is because teaching doesn’t start on the first day; they think that when they go to school they are just going to sweep and clean the compound; those are some of the factors.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, do you want to have children who cannot even sweep their homes? Minister, please.

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, hon. Ssewungu. Whenever I go out in the field, the first thing I check on is the classroom before I even go to the headmaster’s office. And what do I check on? Schemes of work, lesson plans, attendance. There is a list and I want to tell you that I was satisfied that all the schemes of work were very well prepared and lesson plans were available. There was one whom I found without a properly made lesson plan and I discovered that he was not our teacher but just somebody assisting.

The government is trying its best, especially when you see - there are weaknesses, which we have tried to address. I know that what teachers are getting is not enough, but when we are being trained, there is a course we do, which is called comparative education where we look at the teachers all over the world. What is happening to Uganda is not very different from what is happening elsewhere, but the government is committed to improve on the welfare of the teachers.

If you allow our sector, within two weeks, we would like to bring a comprehensive statement about the efforts of Government to address the teachers’ welfare and not specifically the salary increment. I want you to allow us to bring a statement. My minister has asked me; it is almost ready and I want us to bring it on the Floor of Parliament. 

People have been misinformed that Government schools are performing very poorly, which is not true. Go to Iganga and I am taking that as an example. I have been to Nakasongola in the last two days. The best school in PLE in Iganga is a Government school. Government teachers are the ones teaching there. Go to Luweero, the story is not different.

THE SPEAKER: Even the best school in Kamuli this year.

MR MUYINGO: Exactly, these are Government schools. Today, we released the UCE examination results. Go and check who the best are. The results speak for themselves. I know there are some private schools that have performed much better than some Government schools, but on average, we did statistics and research. I want us to talk about something you have researched with data. Data is available and my minister is going to come up with that data.

What strategy? The analysis of performance; we have always done it and even today as my minister was releasing the results, there was a detailed analysis showing the performance even by sex. That analysis has been there but the point I want to put across is that this time and particularly this year, Government has sent the money at the right time. Government has increased on the number of teachers. Almost each and every school has now a minimum of seven teachers, which was not the case before -

THE SPEAKER: Information. Will you take it?

MR MUYINGO: The problem -

MR ALLEN: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. The honourable minister said that he did actually release payments in time. However, in my district of Kamuli, I was talking to the DEO and some of the teachers in Kamuli district were not fully paid from December 2011 to January, and some of these teachers are having challenges. So, if you say you paid all the teachers, then I think you forgot Kamuli District, which is very unfair.

MR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, it is true there were some teachers who did not get their December salary in good time. This was because of the changes in the Public Service computer system. If there was a change in your name, the computer rejected you. We put pressure on Public Service and Ministry of Finance and they assured us that when paying the salaries of January, those people would be paid two salaries for December and January, which happened.

But it is also true that as they tried to make the corrections - because corrections are to start from the district; from the schools where these teacher are, there were others who, as they were filling in these forms, again made mistakes and still the computer rejected them. You know how the government works; it cannot let something go when it still has errors. You know you have been hearing about ghost teachers.

But the point is, I am not saying that the system is 100 percent perfect, but at least there are all efforts to show that Government is committed to do the best. 

They have been talking about private schools that private teachers in private schools are paid much higher. Which statistics? Where is the data? You pick on Namugongo, you pick on two or three and you take that to be representative? (Interruption)

MR KYEWALABYE: Honourable minister, what people have said - and I will repeat it - is that in general, private schools, using statistics across the country, private school teachers are paid less than Government teachers. This is if you take the whole country.

We know that there are a few schools like Kampala Parents where the teachers might be paid much higher, but overall, the government teachers are paid higher than private teachers.

However, what they were asking is, why is it that the private schools, even though their salaries are lower than those of Government schools are performing much better? They are getting higher first grades. Even an honourable there talked about it and said that even the few first grades in Government schools came from private students who went and sat from Government schools. That is what you need to clarify.

MR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I think the information has enabled me to clarify that it is not true that private school teachers are paid much higher. It is a few. I have researched this and I have data.

When you talk of Namugongo and others or Kampala Parents, how many are they in the country? The fact is that there are some few who pay higher salaries, but majority of the private schools pay much lower than what Government pays.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, I think this will help the House. When you write your paper, we want statistics about the performance of the government schools, the performance of the private schools and the pay in those private schools and then we can be able to get a picture.

MR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we shall do that and contain it in our paper. One last point I want to make is that it is true that in quite a number of private schools although their pay is low, they have produced better results. What is the problem? The problem is that all of stakeholders who are supposed to provide the management of these institutions have failed somewhere. That is one. The MP, have you done your oversight function where that money goes to see to it that the teachers are there, the management committees are in place and the parents send their children to school before we blame the Ministry of Education entirely? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. Let us hear from Agriculture.

6.35
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am going to comment on two issues, namely cotton and food security, since they were raised. 

Starting with cotton, we had a successful meeting chaired by the Third Deputy Prime Minister exactly eight days ago. At that meeting, three issues came up, that is, marketing and pricing of cotton, usage of Cotton Development Fund and a possibility of setting up a price stabilisation fund for the future.

Regarding point one, we took time to explain to the participants the fundamentals on the market with regard to exportable crops. We were lucky to have stakeholders like Members of Parliament, especially from cotton-growing areas, the agriculture committee, representatives of farmers and ginners and technicians from CDO and the Ministry of Agriculture. We were able to persuade the participants that there is not much we can do to alter the international prices or influence the exchange and interest rates. 

All that could be done would be to translate them into the price payable to the farmer as farm-gate price. At the end of the day, that issue was appreciated by the stakeholders and it was resolved that marketing should continue normally. According to our own information system from market analysts, cotton buying is currently going on at an average price of Shs 1,200 as a farm-gate price. Those who deliver their cotton to ginners are getting a little more, like Shs 1,300 - (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Minister. You were in the meeting together with the Third Deputy Prime Minister. You must have noticed that the stakeholders as prescribed by this House were not there - I mean Members of Parliament from cotton-growing areas, some farmers from different parts of Uganda and the ginners. 

Can you honestly tell this House whether genuine farmers from Lango, Acholi, Teso, Busoga and so on were invited in their own right as farmers? Did you invite Members of Parliament from cotton-growing areas as stakeholders? I am a farmer and Member of Parliament from Dokolo, which is one of the cotton-growing districts, but I was not invited but rather attended the meeting as an interested party. May I know who these stakeholders were? 

Madam Speaker, the reason I want the Minister to tell us the truth is because the farmers who attended were handpicked by CDO and they would be told, “You stand up and confirm that you planted 1000 kilogrammes of cotton per acre.” Someone would stand up nervously and you would just look at him, and we were very few. Some of us were shocked to see some people paraded as farmers. Let these people tell us whether they are really interested in promoting the cotton industry. 

Secondly, and most importantly, in that meeting it was established that the cotton seed levy is illegal. Moreover, it was agreed that the money belongs to the farmers and yet it was being utilised by CDO and ginners. The Third Deputy Prime Minister actually laboured to get CDO to confirm that the money was neither for CDO nor ginners. What business do the ginners and CDO have to utilise the farmers’ Shs 46.8 billion for their own work? 

The Minister stood on the Floor of Parliament to tell us how the Shs 46.8 billion was used. They are trying to say that that was private money. If it was private, how did you come to the Floor of Parliament to give accountability for that money? 

There is something being hidden from Members of Parliament. Let the Minister tell us if he is interested in helping the farmers. Currently, CDO continues to collect Shs 200 per kilogramme from farmers despite the fact that they are crying. This is in addition to the Shs 600 which was collected last year, amounting to Shs 46.8 billion. This is shameful.

MR OMOLO: I wish to give further clarification. My understanding is that CDO came into existence through an Act of Parliament and it should have term limits spelled out for its executive director. I hope we are not being hit by lack-of-term-limits syndrome in this country. Somebody cannot be the executive director from the onset of CDO and it is almost bound to die on her chest. That is not proper. She has been there for close to 20 years and CDO has now become her personal enterprise. 

No wonder you heard the Member of Parliament for Butaleja say that at some point, cotton is bought for Shs 200 and at another point for Shs 2,000. These are agents who go to buy cotton from the farmers at Shs 200 and they are later rewarded with Shs 1,800 per kilogramme for collecting the cotton for them. In the end, the farmers are just being enslaved - we are just doing work for the management of CDO. 

Please, come to our rescue. I come from a cotton-growing area and I am a farmer, as you very well know, and I studied out of cotton. I am sure that many of us here studied out of cotton-growing and are wearing cotton. However, cotton is soon running out. So the Minister and the Third Deputy Prime Minister should come to our rescue. I expected you to recommend that Sabuni should be replaced as the executive director of CDO. Short of that, we are just wasting time. If you fail to do that, do not talk about cotton on this Floor again. (Laughter)

I have always listened to the Third Deputy Prime Minister very attentively and there are statements that are very common coming out of his mouth. These are: “We shall do it as soon as possible”, “We shall do it immediately” and “We shall do it at the appropriate time.” I appreciate his dilemma in that he has worked in many governments, but in the government we had in 1970s, “as soon as possible” would mean that evening or the next morning. In today’s government, however, it can mean 10 years from now. 

So, I ask him to avoid some of those statements and instead be time-specific. If it is two weeks or one month, he should say so. Avoid saying “as soon as possible” when you know you do not mean “as soon as possible”. That statement had a meaning when directives were being used. “As soon as possible” would be in the evening if not the next morning. I recall when they said Asians must leave as soon as possible; they were given only 90 days. (Laughter) Does it work today? So, avoid such words in today’s government. Be specific. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Speaker, what they have said is, I would not say valid or not valid because they jumped the gun. I had made three points and elaborated on two before I got there. That is the matter. The first thing we discussed was that the markets, as I mentioned, were appreciated and that we agreed that cotton buying continues. That was point No.1.

Point No.2, which was talked about was the usage of the Cotton Development Fund. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal talked about it and I had not said any more than she did, except that she was enthusiastic and talked about it. It was indeed appreciated that the cotton fund is a private fund because the contributors, who are the farmers and the ginners, are private. However, there was that inconclusive idea that was reached at that meeting. This issue was referred to the Committee on Agriculture for further study, so was the possibility of the third point of setting up a price stabilisation fund. These two issues were deferred for consideration by the Committee on Agriculture here in Parliament and so they will be reporting back. 

That also answers a colleague who was asking whether we had set some time limit. Yes, the Committee on Agriculture was there, they were asked to handle these two issues and they have to report back. Parliament opened only yesterday and the committee has not sat to review this. I am sure they are going to report back when they have considered these issues. 

MR OKUPA: Hon. Minister, I was very happy when you were appointed the Minister of Agriculture because when we were in COSASE, you remember the issues of Cotton Development Organisation we handled under the accountability and the Auditor-General. You know the issues very well. 

I was happy with the recommendations we made, including the amendment of the Act, but now we are pushing back these issues to the Committee of Agriculture. Can you please separate those which the Committee of Agriculture handled? Your ministry should bring the issues relating to regulations and amendment of the Act. 

I had expected you to give us a timeframe within which this will be done. You went there knowing very well what we had recommended and you were a signatory to the report and the issues which we had isolated. Can you now possibly tell us when you are bringing those amendments? That will help us streamline those issues. There were issues that were of a managerial nature and those of a legal nature. How far have you gone with implementing, if you recall very well, that report? If you do not have it, I can still give you a copy of that committee report.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, if you could respond and conclude.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: First of all, the board is being constituted and once it is, then we are going to look at the statute that handles CDO. This is happening simultaneously but as you know, I have to - (interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I was restrained to give you this information but allow me to give it now. During that stakeholders meeting, I was shocked to discover that actually, the chairperson of CDO is the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture. Now, you tell me; we are talking about policies and supervising the CDO, which is a parastatal organisation, and yet the chairperson - the one who is acting chairperson because you recall that the chairperson, Dr Esele, passed away a couple of months ago- is the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture which is supposed to supervise the CDO. Can the minister advise us whether anything good can ever come from that office? (Interjections) Is it in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Members, I think we need to conclude this matter. Minister, please respond, and didn’t you say that the committee is coming back to report?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, just on that issue of the board, the Act is very clear. Section 6 of the Act says: “the Minister shall appoint the chairperson of the board.” How come now that it is the PS? Have you failed on your duties? That is section 6 of the Act. Did you appoint the PS?

MR BUCYANAYANDI: First of all, the current acting chairperson is not the PS of Ministry of Agriculture. The PS of the Ministry of Agriculture is Mr Rubarema Vincent. The current acting chairman is Mr Semanda. True, he is a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture but he is not the PS. 

The substantive chairman recently passed away, as you know, and so we are now in the process of reconstituting the board, and that is what I have said - [Hon. Members: “when?”] - Almost immediately, because at the end of February the interim board will have to expire but you know the process takes a bit of time. 

We have to get submissions from colleague ministers -you have to clear the list with Cabinet. Once it is cleared, then you write to individuals to form a board. That is the process. So, while this process has started, I cannot tell you a definite date because I do not know exactly when that will be put on the agenda of Cabinet, but we have started the process. That is it.

I think that answers most of the concerns on cotton and I hope the Committee on Agriculture is going to help us along these lines. 

Someone raised an issue of food security, which I said I was also going to comment on. First of all, I am glad to report that the country is food secure. As a matter of fact, we have been able to have surplus to sell to our neighbours in South Sudan, Kenya and Rwanda. However, as I said before, we adopted a policy of liberalisation, of not controlling or putting any restrictions on the farmers in terms of selling their food, and this was for three reasons. 

One, because the farmer is a private person, he needs to sell his produce at the highest price possible. Secondly, within the protocol of East Africa, we do not want to interfere with the free movement of goods and services. Thirdly, just in case there were traders, and indeed there were, who had long term commitments in their businesses and you interfere with that, it would have been a problem. So, that is exactly what is happening. 

Now, in that direction, we are having two policy issues to ensure that the country remains food secure. One, we have prioritised the question of food. Instead of Government coming out to support every item, of which we have very many, - we have more than 72 commodities- Government has picked on only 10, half of that for food security and another half for export. In terms of food security, the 10 are first of all beans, maize, cassava, rice, bananas, and then we have beef cattle and dairy cattle. On exportable crops clearly coffee, cotton, tea and cocoa remain important. So, our target is to concentrate on these and make sure we produce them in big quantities. 

To support that, we are now embarking on technology development so that we increase the amount of seed available, then we put in a bit of fertiliser and water. Now, if we can do those three things, we can substantially increase our food, and that is the policy we are trying to implement by way of food security.

THE SPEAKER: Deputy Prime Minister, as you come up, on page 3 you can say, “A lot of progress has been made to implement the resolutions” and stop there. To say, “The relevant Government ministries are constantly in dialogue with the ad hoc committee, which Parliament set, to study and investigate the oil and gas sector” is not true. The committee did not sit in the last two weeks of December, it has not sat in January and it has not sat this February. So, I do not want to give the impression that they are working behind the clouds.

6.56
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, much obliged to you and I think it will be corrected in the Hansard, accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: So, let it be expunged.

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank colleagues for raising all that they have done. Secondly, I want to thank the ministers for their clear explanations. At least, according to the acting Leader of the Opposition, today they have tried. I am very grateful. At least, we are not on the wrong side this time.

I do not have much to say really because most of the issues raised have been answered. I have three issues. One, I want to thank the acting Leader of the Opposition for raising hope in my mind. (Laughter) Much as he is in the Opposition, at least he is sincere and honest and does not play in the minds of electorates that since this thing is seen everywhere, you have to therefore, be careful about what you say and how vigorous you must fight to show the public that you are fighting for teachers. 

We are all concerned about teachers. Nobody should pretend to be fighting for teachers more than others. Government is responsible for everybody in the country including teachers. When Government comes with proposals, it has taken into account many things. That is why we say, “This is possible or that is not possible”. It is not to show that Government is against teachers. It is not. Therefore, to show you are the champion of teachers is deceiving yourself. It is pretending. You are actually campaigning because you do not even know how much it is going to cost the country to pay the salaries of teachers. How much? You do not know and you do not want to find out but here you are playing to the public. For that, I want to thank the acting Leader of the Opposition. If we only had few of them like you - anyway, thank you. (Laughter)

Secondly, I am in a very difficult position. One, in that meeting of Entebbe, much as I attended it I did not remember and I cannot pinpoint who in particular said you refused to give us a chance to talk. There are circumstances. The President has been accusing us many times that we are - sometimes, he refers to us as mum ministers. That is very serious, that his ministers actually sit here not defending the government. That is the type of talk when people are talking. (Laughter)

At one point, we almost collapsed here because sides appeared to have fused and I stood up and said, “By the way, it appears there is no Opposition; they have now merged”. So, the situation at that time was very difficult. Members of Parliament and ministers are under pressure like somebody drowning in water. He can try to save his life even on reeds, which may not help. Maybe you are the victim of circumstances. How could one save his neck - only when the Speaker refused to give us the opportunity to talk? So, for that I am sorry, Madam Speaker. Forgive us. (Applause)

We want to have good relationships with our Speaker because she is in charge. (Applause) She sits there and she conducts the business of the country through this House. (Interjections) No, do not push words into my mouth. (Laughter)
 
I want to be as reasonable as the acting Leader of the Opposition today. I am saying, we need the Speaker as a country and we elected her ourselves, so we must really respect her and we should make sure that we do not play on her sentiments like some Members here are pretending. They keep reminding us, trying to incite the Speaker against the Opposition by saying, “You keep accusing the chairman”. Why? This is very populist. So, going back to the standard set by the acting Leader of Opposition, I therefore say sorry for a second time and I hope you will understand our dilemma and our problems.

The third point is the issue on quorum. Madam Speaker, one time you adjourned for one hour because people were in a caucus but that was not the only time. On 15th December, that was Thursday, under your Deputy Speaker, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised a point of order that there was no quorum here. We were talking about loans. He said, “This is a very serious matter; is it going to be possible that we pass this Motion when there is no quorum?” The Deputy Speaker suspended the House for 15 minutes. The House was suspended at 6.16 p.m. and we came back at 6.35 p.m. and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi again said, “Mr Speaker, for the Members to make sure that we do not succeed, they simply run away. I do not know whether we are able to proceed”. The Deputy Speaker, said, “Hon. Members, we had important business to transact. The Parliamentary calendar dictates that we should go today after the session. I am constrained, I will not be able to do anything else but send the House on recess. This House stands adjourned.” 

So, Madam Speaker, that day, there was no quorum and my statement here has been very considerate. I must commend myself. (Laughter) Many have been commending me here but I did not think it was serious or was honest, but I cannot deny myself. I must thank myself for being very considerate on this statement. Maybe I would be reckless elsewhere but this time, I thought I had been – but really, with your permission.

Last year, this House faced some challenges; among them was the issue of lack of quorum. As I conclude, I want to advise Members to take attendance of Parliament seriously. I paused and said, “This applies to all sides.” I said it here as it is the only way we can effectively represent the people who sent us to Parliament and serve the country diligently. 

I do not see where I have insulted Members. It is definitely one of my duties to remind colleagues of past challenges, one of which is lack of quorum. If I insult you for saying so, I am sorry. But if you are over-playing it, then you are not insulted but you are guilty of your own mistake. (Interjections) Yes, because you come, sign the book, then you go away. This is why I said on the last day in the hotel that, that was dishonest. You cannot sign as a Member of Parliament and then walk away. You are cheating yourself, you are cheating the country and you are cheating the electorate. Why do you sign and go away? You should not have even signed, but because you fear that you will be discovered that you are absent, you deceive yourself by signing. So, if I now remind people that we should take attendance seriously and I insult people, I also feel insulted for that. 

THE SPEAKER: Lt Gen. Ali, at least let me commend you; you are always here. At least, I am commending you. Thank you. (Laughter)

MINSTERIAL STATEMENT 

THE SPEAKER: We will just receive that statement and debate it tomorrow.

7.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Copies of this statement are being distributed. 

Madam Speaker, in August 2009, the Ministry of Health received reports of a progressive disease characterised by nodding of the head, mental retardation and stunted growth, mainly affecting children between the ages of five and 15. The Ministry of Health, together with the World Health Organisation, Centre for Disease Control and Prevention and other partners thereafter initiated investigations to determine the cause of the illness. The investigations revealed that the disease was a new type of epilepsy that has affected at least 3,000 children in the districts of Kitgum, Lamwo and Pader in Northern Uganda. 

In addition, most of the affected children are malnourished, live in areas where Cirrhosis, otherwise known as river blindness, is prevalent and have dropped out of school. It is also important to note that this crippling disease has aroused a huge public outcry, justifying the need for urgent response.   

The disease presentation suggests that this is possibly a new type or epilepsy that is manifested by head-nodding episodes that consist of repetitive dropping of the head forward. The nodding is sometimes precipitated by food or cold weather and is often accompanied by other seizure-like activities such as convulsions or staring spells. During the episodes, the child stops feeding and appears non-responsive with or without loss of consciousness. There is deterioration of brain function in some of the victims and malnutrition with growth retardation in the majority of cases. It seems to primarily affect children as I have already mentioned, between five and 15.

The disease was first described in Tanzania in 1962, later in Liberia in 1983 and Southern Sudan in 2003. It is important to note that no definite cause and cure has been found in all these countries. 

The table that follows shows the number of cases affected and the number of deaths registered in each of the three districts. It also shows the most affected sub counties. These are: Awere, Puranga, Angagura, Atanga and Pajule in Pader District; Palabek Gem, Padibe East, Padibe West, Palabek Kal, Palabek Ogil and Lokung in Lamwo District; Akwang, Kitgum Matidi, Labong Amida and Namokora in Kitgum District.

The number of cases that have been registered so far is 3,094 with 170 deaths. Now, 54 per cent of the affected children are male. All the affected sub-counties are traversed by the fast-flowing rivers of Pager and Aswa, which favour the breeding of river blindness vectors. Similar observations have been made in other countries like Tanzania, Liberia and Sudan where cases have been identified.

The Ministry of  Health, together with WHO, CDC and other partners, conducted epidemiological investigations in 2009 and continues with investigations in the affected districts. Investigations have been able to exclude a number of possible infectious, toxic and nutritional factors but the cause of the illness remains unclear. 

The association between Cirrhosis and nodding syndrome is weak and requires further investigations. Other findings include a modest deficiency of Vitamin B6 in most of the cases; deficiencies in other micro-nutrients such as vitamin A, selenium and zinc. These findings still warrant further investigations. 

The investigations to-date reveal that patients with nodding disease cannot pass it on to others. The investigations have also revealed that patients can also be effectively treated with anti-epileptic drugs that are currently available in the country and can live a normal life provided the treatment is taken as prescribed by the doctor. 

The investigations will eventually lead to the characterisation of the disease, its distribution in the population and possible causes. 

Following the investigations, the following measures have been instituted:
    1. Quantification of the required medicines was  finalised and submitted to the National Medical Stores. The medicines, Carbamazepine, Syston and Sodium Valproate have been delivered to the affected districts of Kitgum, Pader and Lamwo. 

    2. A nodding disease response plan costing approximately Shs 7 billion has been finalised and shared with partners including the representatives of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. The initial funding of Shs 100 million to initiate the response has been obtained from reallocations within the Ministry of Health budget. However, additional funds need to be mobilised from other Government and partner agencies.

    3. Centres for screening and treating cases will be opened effective this month, February, 2012 and staffed with psychiatric clinical officers and psychiatric nurses in each of the affected districts. In the affected districts, Padibe Health Centre IV has been designated for Lamwo District, Kitgum Hospital for Kitgum District and Pajule Health Centre IV for Pader.

    4. Outreach services will be offered on a weekly basis to the affected communities and the lower health facilities by staff from the designated treatment centres.

    5. Lira and Gulu regional referral hospitals will receive and treat severally ill cases that cannot be managed in the screening and treatment centres.

    6. Cases that require highly specialised treatment will be referred to the national referral hospitals, that is, Mulago and Butabika by the regional referral hospitals.

    7. Psychiatry experts from Mulago Hospital and Butabika National Referral Hospital and also from the regional referral hospitals of Gulu and Lira have been identified to train and supervise the screening teams at the designated centres. This will facilitate screening and treatment of cases.

    8. Treatment guidelines have been developed to help guide the clinicians on the ground. This will be rolled out to all the treatment centres.

    9. Talking points for district leaders and local politicians have been developed and will be availed to the affected districts for the leaders to use for sensitisation and mobilisation purposes.

    10. The Minister of Health has requested the Office of the Prime Minister to supply food to the designated treatment sites for the affected families.

    11. A request for supplementary budget to handle phase I of the response plan, also known as the emergency phase, amounting to Shs 3,875,000,000 has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Challenges

    1. Despite the investigations conducted over the past year, the cause and cure for the disease remain unknown.

    2. The initial supplementary budget request that was presented to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development last financial year was not successful. The Ministry of Health made reallocations from the approved sector budgets but the funds mobilised were inadequate to support a comprehensive response.

    3. Since the disease has no definite cure, parents of the affected children have been hesitant to bring their children to the health facilities for on-going supportive treatment.

    4. There is a misconception that nodding disease is linked to witchcraft and this has resulted in poor health seeking behaviours.

Way Forward

A multi-sectoral nodding disease response plan has been prepared. The overall national and district response is being coordinated by the national and district taskforce and district disaster management committees with priority activities being implemented in two phases as already highlighted.

The initial intensive and emergency phases from January to December 2012 will prioritise resource mobilisation, establishment of screening and treatment centres and mobile clinics in affected districts to screen and offer comprehensive treatment including anti-epileptics, nutritional rehabilitation, psycho-social counselling, physiotherapy, and bi-annual mass treatment for river blindness. 

The subsequent post-emergency phase starting from January 2013 will prioritise consolidation and institutionalisation of phase I activities, in addition to addressing the special education needs of affected children, initiating livelihood projects for affected families, intensification of river blindness control to include mass treatment and vector control measures, and conducting research to identify the cause and cure for the disease. The funds for initiating the above interventions are in the process of being mobilised in Government and partner agencies. 

Lastly, there is need for the Ministry of Water, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to support districts with water requirements, educational and social consequences. 

The Ministry of Health, therefore, appeals to Parliament to support the supplementary budget request when presented to the House so that we can implement the response plan. The Minister of Health calls upon all political, civic, cultural and religious leaders to sensitise and mobilise the public on the need to control nodding disease. 

I also appeal to parents and guardians to take affected children to the nearest health facilities at the earliest opportunity. I appeal to the communities in the affected districts to attend the bi-annual mass treatment for river blindness. 

I also appeal to families to provide adequate care to the affected children. I also appeal to local leaders to mobilise communities to cooperate with on-going investigations and interventions to identify the cause. That is the end of my statement, Madam Speaker. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister. As we said, today we are just receiving. We will find time for the debate. Let us take the final item then we can adjourn.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON TRAFFICKING OF WOMEN IN IRAQ

7.25
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am presenting this petition as a member of UWOPA (Interjections) - (Laughter) - You do not know what UWOPA is? The acting Leader of Government Business does not  know what UWOPA is. I will invite you to join UWOPA.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this petition is moved under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. This is a humble petition of the Ugandan women who were recruited by M/S Uganda Veteran Development Ltd to work in Iraq. The subject matter of this petition is “the trafficking of women in Iraq.” It states:

The petitioners are Ugandan women who were recruited by the Uganda Veterans Development Ltd for various jobs in Iraq to work for the Americans, most of whom were to work as supermarket sales women.

Your petitioners were introduced to the company by friends and thereafter applied for various jobs after obtaining an application form at a fee of Shs 50,000 and Shs 15,000 for opening up a file. Your petitioners were never issued with any receipts acknowledging their payment.

Your petitioners were later asked to pay between Shs 100,000 and Shs 150,000 as medical examination fee, some of them were given receipts acknowledging payment and others were never issued with any receipts acknowledging this payment.

In early May 2009, some of your petitioners were asked to pay for the air tickets at a cost of Shs 1,300,000, which money was paid to some officers of the company, and further made to sign forms which your petitioners were never given an opportunity to read.

Around the end of May, your petitioners left for Iraq and reached Baghdad Airport on 28 May 2009 and were picked from the airport to Abu Sami’s office in Central Baghdad and were given hijabs to cover their heads. Your petitioners’ passports were taken away from them.

While at Abu Sami’s office, your petitioners were picked by Arabs who had your petitioners’ photographs and told your petitioners that they had paid for their air tickets to the company that recruited them to work for the Arabs.

Unknown to your petitioners, they were to work for the Iraqis, and not Americans, as slaves.

As a result of the deception made upon your petitioners by the Uganda Veterans Development Ltd, your petitioners were subjected to slavery, servitude, over work, non-payment for work, sexual harassment and loss of liberty, insults and several abuses.

Your petitioners managed to escape Abu Sami to the American base where the American military accommodated them as it contacted the International Organisation for Migration which repatriated them to Uganda.

The Uganda Veterans Board Ltd continues to recruit many women to date to export them for labour in various countries under false belief that the working conditions are good. The company does not provide clear guidelines in the contract entered with its clients.

Whereas the company’s license from the ministry to export labour was revoked by the government after local media exposed its activities, it was later renewed despite several complaints from the media and the public.

At least 100 of the Ugandan women who went to Iraq in 2009 remained unaccounted for and the Uganda Veterans Development Ltd does not know where they are. Your petitioners are constantly being harassed, threatened and live in fear for their lives.

Therefore, your humble petitioners pray that:
1. 	This honourable House carries out an investigation into the activities of Uganda Veterans Development Ltd and other companies engaged in the same business.

2. 	The Government through the Ministry of Labour revokes the license of the company pending investigations.

3. 	The Government provides assistance, support and compensates all persons who have been victims of trafficking to Iraq.
4. 	The Government rescues and repatriates all victims of trafficking still held in Iraq back to Uganda given that the Americans have also left Iraq.

5. 	The Government provides protection to all victims of trafficking.

6. 	The Government implements the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act 2009 and prosecutes all persons involved in the act.

Your petitioner, as in duty bound, will ever pray. And hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Madam Speaker, after this story was broken in the media and also by BBC, I picked up interest in this case and tried to trace the whereabouts of these ladies through the one who dared to present herself on television for an interview. There are 16 of them in number and if you hear their stories, you  just shed tears. Some of them have managed to come back pregnant and they will never again see the fathers of their children in their lives. Some of them have contracted diseases and they will never recover, apart from waiting for death. 

One or two of them today had agreed to come to be in the gallery but I think we took some time before this motion could be presented. They are ready to face any consequences. They are being harassed and the other 14 could not come but are within Kampala while others are upcountry. They are mainly from Mbarara, Bushenyi and parts of Buganda. Some of them were originally employees at Grand Imperial Hotel, just nearby here, but they were lured by this company.  

It is disheartening that the person behind this company here is one of the elders in this country, Col. Mudoola, who is the director. I think we need to come up strongly and help these women. There are those who have been here as you have heard their prayer and those who remain unaccounted for. There were more than 150 when they boarded the plane in 2009. I have a list of their names but I do not want to give them out; perhaps I will provide them to the Minister for Security such that he can be able to follow up with them. 

There are also other companies that have taken Ugandans to different countries like Iraq, Dubai and Syria. We all know what is happening in Syria and we do not know their fate. Some of these women were made to work in families of so many people. There is one story I was told about a lady called Agnes, and I will not give her other names. This family had three other brothers to her main boss but she would work for all these families. At night, she would be harassed and raped by these five men, one after the other. When these men were out during the day for work, they were being harassed by the wives of these men, claiming that they were there to take their husbands and had even brought diseases to them. So they had double or triple torture - by the men, the wives and then hard work.

I want to thank one courageous Ugandan who risked his life to rescue these 16 but he started with one, a courageous lady who managed to escape and hang around the American base where this Ugandan, Samuel Tumwesigye, risked his job and moved out of the American base. When he moved out, he was able to pick this lady and risked all by bringing her to their base. He brought this to the attention of Col. Theodore Lockwood. This American colonel even came here and we met with him. He wanted to follow up what the Government of Uganda was doing to save the situation of those who are still there, to prosecute those who are still there, and to initiate prosecution against those who lured these women into that type of slavery. However, to-date, Government has not done so.

While we still wait to hear from Government, we need to commend those two gentlemen for the great work they did to rescue and bring those women back to Uganda from where they have been able to tell the sad story. Two other American army colonels are the other great men who also helped these women to reach here.

My appeal to the Government of Uganda is that they should do what is expected of them to rescue the remaining Ugandans outside there, especially the women who are going through terrible experiences like torture, humiliation, rape and all the other sorts of sexual harassments, and bring them back home.

Madam Speaker, I hope that Parliament will handle this matter expeditiously to enable our sisters and brothers who are suffering from there to come back home. As the committee starts its work, I would like to ask Government to ensure they provide security to the women who have returned. I am saying this because they are being harassed by these tormentors for telling the bad story about them to the outside world. 

Thank you very much, and thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I hope we shall live to our expectations. May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Okupa. I also would like to thank UWOPA for picking an interest in this matter. This matter has come after UWOPA pushed through a Private Members’ Bill on the trafficking of persons. It was because they were concerned about what was happening, although it seems it has not been implemented.

I hereby remit this matter to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to handle it expeditiously. I only give them one month for them to report back. However, I would like to point out that Government has been told to rescue the remaining women, find out where they are, compensate them – these were some prayers directed to Government.

LT GEN.(Rtd) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I just want to say that the security minister will take charge of this issue. He will also liaise with the committee.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If I heard very well what hon. Elijah Okupa said, one of the prayers was that as investigations start, the license for this company should be revoked. To me, that seems to be urgent. So, can we get an assurance from the government that the issue of the licence will be urgently handled as the committee starts its investigations?

LT GEN. (Rtd) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, like I said, we cannot start taking decisions from here. The matter has been referred to the relevant committee and the security minister will take charge of what is required of Government. I think we need to hear from the owners of the company. Those are some of the issues that the Minister of Security will be handling.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, it is quite unprecedented that we are all tolerant enough even at this time when it is already coming to 8 O’clock, to allow hon. Okupa to read the entire motion because the practice is usually that the presenter only reads the title and prayers. That shows the importance that we have attached to these particular women who are suffering in Iraq.

Government can track these people. They can go to the airport, for example, get the date when the plane left, trace the names of all those who boarded that plane, move backwards to their families and use ESO to track where these people are. They could have been in touch with their family members. That can help in getting vital information. This will help them bring a compressive preliminary report to Parliament as the committee continues with its work, which is very important, because even now some women are being sexually harassed. 

My prayer is that there should be a commitment from Government on when they will present a preliminary report. This report will be a good resource for the committee. You know, the committee may find difficulties in engaging ESO and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to trace these people. If they can report in two or three weeks - Government needs to be more direct on that.

7.42
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has said, this matter will be taken up by the security minister. However, to be precise, the national security committee will look into the investigations. We will be able to provide a preliminary report to this House through the Prime Minister. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That means we expect a preliminary report on this matter within the month of March. Hon. Members, as we close, let me announce that there will be a Parliamentary Tourism Week tomorrow organised by the Ministry of Tourism. The week will be launched by the Minister of Tourism and he has asked us to walk from Constitutional Square to Parliament starting at 9.00 a.m. This will help in highlighting his sector.

I now invite members to go to the Constitutional Square at 8.45 a.m. tomorrow and walk to Parliament to support the tourism sector, which is an important sector for us. House adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 7.43 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 9 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
