Tuesday, 8 February 2005

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would just like to correct the Order Paper in item number 3. The Minister of Education is not giving a ministerial statement but she is responding to the Speaker’s directive specifically, on the issue of students whose registration forms were not sent to the Ministry of Education. Can I find out who raised the question? It was raised from the Floor of the House. 

2.36
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Thursday a question was raised on the Floor of Parliament as to what the ministry is doing to those head teachers who failed to submit forms for the senior four leavers, to facilitate the selection of those students to senior five and other institutions of higher learning. The Speaker ruled that I had to look up for the relevant information and give the oral answer this afternoon. 

Madam Speaker, probably I will take this opportunity to say that when the students complete senior four, they have forms, which they fill in to facilitate their selections to institutions of further learning, and it is very important that Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) and the Ministry of Education get these forms. So, this is the issue and Members wanted to know why some headmasters failed to submit the forms. 

Madam Speaker, Form A and Form A5 are issued by the Uganda National Examinations Board to head teachers of secondary schools to be filled by students of senior four, and this assists the selection exercise to senior five and other institutions of higher learning. Each candidate is required to pay Shs 1,000 and this money is submitted to UNEB to facilitate the process.  

However, because of either laxity or ignorance or both some headmasters did not realize the importance of these forms for the admission of students to senior five and other post 0’level institutions. A total of 377 schools, which are private, failed to submit these forms and a total of 77 government-aided secondary schools never submitted such forms to UNEB resulting into over 1,000 students missing to be selected for senior five.  

The Ministry of Education and Sports got more concerned with this problem in December 2004 and wrote to the concerned head teachers a letter dated 13 December 2004, reminding them to submit the forms, and they were given the deadline of 31st December. In that communication it was clearly stated that the head teacher who fails to submit those forms by the given deadline would be personally and pecuniary held responsible for non-placement of students due to this negligence of duty.  

However, even after the above reminder, still some school head teachers did not respond. Therefore, for the head teachers who did not submit those forms, disciplinary action should be taken and will be taken against them. 

In the letter of 4 February 2005, all head teachers of government-aided secondary schools who did not submit the above forms were required to show cause why disciplinary action should not be taken against them giving them up to the 18 February 2005 to respond.  

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education is going to take the following measures:

(i) The Department of Secondary Education, Ministry of Education and Sports, has initiated disciplinary proceedings against the errant head teachers of the 77 government-aided secondary schools. The departmental disciplinary committee will carefully scrutinize the defences given by the head teachers and will recommend appropriate action to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, for onward transmission to the Education Service Commission. The penalty involved should range from being warned to demotion should it be confirmed that the omission arose out of the head teachers’ negligence. 

(ii) Stern measures are also to be taken against head teachers and proprietors of private secondary schools. The matter has already been referred to the Secondary Education Department Disciplinary Committee for assessing the gravity of the matter. For head teachers and schools found to have been negligent on this issue, the committee will:

(a) recommend to UNEB to suspend or withdraw the examination centre numbers; and

(b) recommend to the Director of Education to withdrawal the registration certificates of such schools, which are not complying.

However, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have to take long lasting solutions, therefore, UNEB has designed Forms A and A5 so that it can be filled at the time of registration for senior four examinations. From there the information will be captured on the students’ register for the Uganda Certificate of Education Examinations.  

Probably, I should explain here that these two forms have been separate and were filled in towards the end of the year. But now the students will be required to fill the in and headmasters submit them early in the year when the students are registering for the examinations. This we think, as a ministry, will go along way in rectifying the above subject or the above problem, which has caused inconveniences to the students.  

Madam Speaker, this is what I can do now, and what is remaining is to get explanation from the concerned head teachers and then the gravity of the matter will be assessed and measures, as I have mentioned, will be taken against these people. 

Probably I should explain the seriousness of this matter. After senior four, there are so many other levels where these students can go; one of them is senior secondary education, others are teachers’ training colleges, nurses’ training colleges, technical institutions and so on. So, if UNEB does not get the forms, UNEB has no way of placing these young people to appropriate choices, which they make at the end of senior four. That means each individual has to go around the country looking for placement, which becomes very expensive, whereas with the forms the computer does it and it becomes very easy. 

So, Madam Speaker, it is serious because our young people have to find a way forward after their senior four. That is why we are taking the short-term measures, but we have also re-designed the forms to put an end to this problem. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, from what I have understood the minister saying, she has taken some measures which will bear fruit around the 18th of February. So, are you likely to come back to report your final action? 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Madam Speaker, we are seeking for explanations on this cause by the 18th February so that each head teacher can tell us what the problem is, but after that we shall look at the explanations and then decide on the measures. But for long term, by the end of this year we shall have only one form, which the students are going to fill in as they register and, therefore, the issue of submitting them later will not arise anymore. I thank you.

2.46
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO LUMALA (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister arising from what she has just said. First and foremost, I want to really register my appreciation to the honourable Minister of Education for being that exemplary, and taking time to report to Parliament within the required time. (Applause). On so many occasions, honourable ministers have been required to report to this House, others out of busy schedules, others could be utter negligence have failed to return to this House and give a substantive explanation. We wish to appreciate.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister has just said that in the original circular, which was issued by the ministry, the head teachers were warned that –(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, you must be aware that we have tried our best to answer questions. There have been a few ministers who have made mistakes and they have been rectified. Is the honourable Member in order to allege that this is a common problem, and to attribute it to so many of us when there is a lot of good performance from the first benchers?  Can he be in order? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, I know that you have been dealing with these matters assiduously –(Laughter)- but I think you will agree with me that occasionally, you have been frustrated. But I think the majority of ministers are compliant. What the Member was saying was that those who are not compliant should do the needful.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you for your ruling because it was those occasional moments that I was referring to. But back to the point, the honourable Minister said that in the circular that was issued warning the head teachers, they were warned that they would personally and pecuniary be responsible if the students fail to get registered.
  
On the side of the schools under the Ministry of Education, government-aided schools, the decision or recommendation taken would hold the head teachers personally and pecuniary responsible for their actions. But when it came to the private schools, you proposed a withdrawal of the registration centres. How would that hold a head teacher personally and pecuniary responsible, when the same head teacher would leave the centre and get a posting in another school and cause a similar mistake? Under such circumstances, would you have held the head teacher pecuniary and personally responsible?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would ask the Minister of Education that next time they are investigating on this issue, there is another issue that has been reported - on one occasion one parent has gone to the courts of law - where some head teachers receive registration fees from students but they categorize their students into super grade and those are registered in their schools, and then the those who are considered substandard are registered in other centres so that their weak performance does not affect the would be high standards of the school.  Under those circumstances, Madam Minister, does this really occur in your ministry? And if it does, how are you planning to redress it? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.49
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like once more to congratulate hon. Mrs Bitamazire for being elevated as a Minister of Education and I congratulate you for your first maiden speech in Parliament. (Laughter)
  
Madam Speaker, I would like just some clarifications, one of it has been asked by the former speaker. My concern is the students who are affected. Now, they are very many of them outside there, what plans do you have to make sure that these students are placed somewhere because it is not their fault, and if they are left, do you want them to go and repeat? Can we not do something for these students so that some forms are given and they are taken to their respective choices? Madam Speaker, thank you.

2.51
DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am one of those people who have had a lot of confidence in Mrs Bitamazire -(Applause) -ever since she was a Headmistress at Tororo Girls School where she did a wonderful job. (Applause)
There are a lot of shortcomings and areas of concern in education at the moment, and I am sure she will address them and we shall have confidence in our education system in the primary schools and secondary schools again.

Points in question: There is a strong rumour that in some schools they acquire examination questions in advance and these schools have perpetually done well. Some schools do very well this year, the next year they do not do well. It is an area of terrible concern and I hope you will investigate it. 

Secondly, one area you have mentioned is that there is a lot of bureaucracy, there is a lot of paper work in schools. I am glad that you mentioned that one of them is going to be withdrawn, and that is the requirement to submit these papers. We want to streamline education in this country. Let us go back to the time when education for rural children used to be of meaning. I went to a very rural school and I ended up in some of the biggest schools in this country because the education system was fair –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, you are now submitting, can you ask a supplementary? But now you are making a submission.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, that was only a preamble -(Laughter)- a very long preamble. My area of concern is, are you going to look into how examinations and papers are handled in rural secondary schools like Butebo Senior Secondary School, rural primary schools like Kashebai Primary School? I am of the opinion that these schools contain equally intelligent children, but our education system is gearing towards catering for the rich and the poor are being eliminated. What are you going to do about it, Madam Minister?  Thank you very much.

2.55
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Part of the question I was going to ask was asked by hon. Baba Diri, but I just wanted to expand it a bit. In most cases, those children actually whose papers were not submitted are from the rural areas, very disadvantaged and on top of that when they are girls. 

The honourable Minister said that the students will go around this particular year and get somewhere to go. Somewhere to go when they are girls who are 16 or 17 years even includes seeing a headmaster, going to bed with him, in order to get a place in that school and I think that is very serious! I think something central needs to be done during this week to look at these particular students, be posted and then at least for this year as a stop-gap as we continue to look at the following year and what the honourable Minister has said. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.56
CAPT CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to what hon. Kavuma has said, the parents of these children used their hard-earned cash to pay for the children whose forms were not submitted. Apart from the disciplinary measures that are going to be taken on the headmaster, what redress is the honourable Minister advising the parents of these children to take? What do you advise?

2.57
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi county, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to praise the Lord for having heard my cries and answered my prayers, and I thank the President for appointing hon. Bitamazire, the Minister of Education.  (Applause)

Madam Speaker, all Members know headmasters have been collecting money, some of them not remitting the money to the ministry and, therefore, the children missing even being registered. The cancer seems to be spreading; now those who have registered have had their forms not submitted. That means there is really a bigger problem that is developing in the ministry. My only hope is with the new broom of leadership in the ministry; these problems are going to be handled. 

Madam Speaker, what I would wish the Ministry of Education to bring to Parliament, either by the minister or the Permanent Secretary in a circular, is to give us details on the actions taken on various headmasters rather than saying that disciplinary actions are going to take place. We want to know that the headmaster of school X, who collected money and did not submit it to the ministry, has been demoted or has been dismissed; a certain headmaster of a certain school X, who did not submit the forms, has been jailed. Madam Speaker, the Permanent Secretary has been sending us circulars on how much money has been sent to which school, he can as well give us details about headmasters and actions appropriately, which have been taken on them. I would be happy for that. I thank you.

2.59
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)- I seek your protection, Madam Speaker, from hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected from hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo and all the neighbours there.

MR ERESU: The issue of 50,000 students having themselves not in position to proceed with the education is very unfortunate, and the Ministry of Education has registered these schools. They are registered and, therefore, that registration means they must comply with the expectations that this country wants them to have in order to give education to our children. They have failed to fulfil their part. I would ask the minister to tell us what remedial measures are in place so that this particular mistake does not happen again.  

I would propose the following: One, these schools should not only have their headmasters arrested, prosecuted, but the school management and the board of governors of these schools should also be answerable to Government and the people of Uganda.

Two, I would also propose that in order to save the situation from continuing, where possible the Ministry of Education should take over the management of some of these schools pending investigations so that better things are done the way you did with FUFA. (Applause)  I thank you.

3.02
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the person who raised this issue on this Floor and it would have been unfortunate if I had not commented on it. I raised it because I knew very well that my friend, hon. Bitamazire, has been promoted and she is an able minister and she will take action immediately.

Madam Speaker, when you see how they handle thieves who steal chicken, goats in the villages, the reaction is spontaneous, immediate but this is almost murder of 50,000 students now we start investigations, “we shall take disciplinary action.” What is anticipated was immediate arrest of these headmasters; we do not need to investigate things, which are obvious. What are we going to investigate, forms did not reach Uganda National Examination Board; that is obvious. Some of these are my constituents I think everybody is concerned.

Where is the future of this country, Madam Speaker, if we are going to go with investigations and what have you for the wrong doers and for those who steal chicken, they are arrested immediately, those who steal Government money, we need investigations.  We should investigate when these people are in jail otherwise, they will tamper with evidence, we shall not get anything out and that is what I expect from the able minister. This is the first time really the President - I should praise him for appointing the most able minister to the right ministry.  (Applause) So, I expect immediate action and I hope my friend will not disappoint me. I want to hear that all of them, 360 something, are in Luzira tomorrow; that is when I will be the happiest person.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let the minister answer.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Members who have raised some issues or questions.  Hon. Dombo is suggesting that withdrawing a centre is not very effective, but – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members, you have just said the minister is good, able please listen to her.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: But withdrawing a centre is a very effective measure because the parents and all stakeholders will put pressure. And probably, if that is the proprietor of a school, which might be partly an income, he will lose it and that is very effective, it has proved very effective and we think it will work. But of course we shall follow up on those proprietors and see what else can be done.  

Parents complain about categorizing students, we are investigating again. I know investigating is a long way of handling issues but sometimes it is the parents who agree that students should be registered in that school because it is near their home and so on. You know parents and stakeholders have a lot into these things, but we are looking at where the source of the problem is. Sometimes it is the headmaster, sometimes it is the stakeholders but we are also taking this very seriously because we think a student should sit for an examination in a very school where he or she is and should not be transferred to another school. But that is a serious matter, which again we have to assess and find out which is the problem.

Hon. Baba Diri, the future of the students, we are also helping to see how these students can be fixed. We are looking them up, categorizing them and assessing their choices and then we are going to assist in placing them in their schools of choice. They might have missed the first choice but we shall assist to get them in a school.

Dr Mallinga, you were talking about leakages of examinations. I think Uganda National Examination Board has done a very wonderful job.  Right now, we are almost fighting it to the end and, therefore, with your advice, we shall continue looking at the rural centres so that we do not have leakages there.  

The bureaucracy is very long, well, that is why we are collapsing the forms into one. We are trying our best to see that the bureaucracy is shortened and the handling of examinations in rural areas that is where the emphasis is. First of all, communication is difficult and then we have to facilitate the invigilators. So, we shall improve in that area, Dr Mallinga.  

Madam Kavuma, you were right about the security and safety of the girls in search for placement, but we are advising also the parents to guide these girls.  Do not just go an extra mile simply because you want to get in a school and we are going to ask them, if they fail on their own, we are also assisting them in placement.

Hon Capt Byaruhanga, was asking how we are going to help the students. The committee is already on this and we are trying to see that there are not badly disadvantaged.  

Dr Kasirivu, you were asking for regular brief, very soon we shall be bringing a lot of briefs on how the system runs. Madam Speaker, we are going to write regular circulars on how the education system runs so that we all know what we are expecting in February, November and October and how a student can transit from primary to secondary.  

Madam Speaker, since I was appointed into a new post, I have done very little but to assist people to place their children in schools, I think that should not be the job I should be doing. But once the people know how to go about it I think this matter will be handled properly.

Hon. Eresu, the students under reference right now under this answer are 1,000 students. There might have been a figure, which was given, but on assessment we found that it is only 1,000 students.  Those are very many and I agree that we should do something. But the recommendation hon. Eresu was giving, “dissolve the board of governors” and all this, take on management. Madam Speaker, we have over 700 secondary schools in this country for Government and 1000 for private schools. So, I will not say we shall take over the management but with the actions underlined above, we shall streamline this problem and it may never happen again.  

Engineer Byabagambi, well, immediate arrest. I will not promise, Madam Speaker, that we shall arrest all these people, but some of them who are public officers, there are Public Officers Regulations we are going to follow them and even the others, we shall find a way of handling this issue so that it does not happen again because, arresting people creates a lot of tension and in the education sector, tension is counter productive. So, we are trying to see the best way of handling this issue.

Finally -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Honourable Minister, the issue of students missing examinations, headmasters not submitting the forms is not a new case. So, Madam Speaker, this case has been lagging on in the ministry for last five years and there is an inspectorate division within the Ministry of Education. So, I would have expected the minister to at least hold responsible her inspectorate division for not having taken these cases very seriously. And when you are doing the investigation, do not lean on only this one year, you need to trace back where it started from and some of those head teachers who did this fraud should be brought to book.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, we are handling two issues; missing examinations where head teachers have collected money and they disappear, that one is arrest, we have arrested some already because that is really theft. But then we are also handling the issue of missing selection where the candidates have sat, but their papers did not reach the UNEB computer. So, that is where we are still working on some sanctions and remedies, but for missing the exams where students have paid and they are not given the examination papers, that is automatic arrest. So, I wanted to clarify these two issues, and thank you for raising that issue.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and Members of Parliament for the confidence they have indicated in my appointment. (Applause) I must acknowledge that confidence but I would like to say, with your support, with the support of the stakeholders the education system can be improved within the shortest time if we all take our responsibilities very seriously. I thank you.  

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nathan Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a status report of the Committee on National Economy as far as the loan request before it and other works is concerned.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, under Rule 138 of our Rules of Procedure, the Committee on National Economy is supposed to scrutinize all matters relating to the national economy, generally finance and any other matters referred to it by the House, and at the end of it report to the same House.

Before the committee went for recess and Christmas, last year in November it had the following loans before it: Apex Loan IV, which was laid on 6 October 2004, Phase III of Roads Project –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy is set to raise quite pertinent issues and Members may wish to raise clarifications after he has submitted. Would it not be procedurally correct for Members to have copies of the statement that he is about to submit?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually the difficulty is that even the Speaker does not have a copy.

MR NANDALA: Madam Speaker, a report was sent to your office, I am sure maybe they sent it up to the Speaker’s Office and it was an error they never sent it down. But it is because of problems with the photocopying machine, but right now they are working on the reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala Mafabi, really I do not think it is fair for only you and me to have a copy, which I have just seen now, the other Members do not have. Can you give the Clerk a copy so that they circulate them for tomorrow? Okay, that matter is deferred to tomorrow, the Clerk please secure the document and circulate to the Members.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE WHITE PAPER

(Debate continued)

3.24
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and I want to thank the Committee -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is the problem?

MR KIWAGAMA: When we parted here last night, the Speaker named me to be the first one to speak today, everybody knows.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The same Speaker gave me this list in his own handwriting. But you will speak –(Interjections)- honourable members, you are all going to speak. I have asked hon. Odit to speak; I will get to you, hon. Kiwagama, I am coming to you.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, I will not spend long in presenting the views of the people of Erute South on the White Paper and the report of the committee, but permit me to reflect on two or three key issues.  

We all recall that the Speaker regularly appealed to the church leaders to pray for Parliament during this critical time so that when we debate this matter, we debate with the presence of God. It is my hope and belief that we are tackling this matter putting the country as the most important asset for us in this Parliament. Number two, that we have the interest of the nation as item number one.  

I will only report that the people of Erute South concur fully with the committee’s report on Article 26. They are pleased generally that the report rejected the attempt by Government to grab the land of the people of Uganda compulsorily and in fact, in their opinion, if Government was an individual it would be charged with attempted robbery. So, we are very happy that this was checked and we are praying that when we come to resolve this matter we go by the recommendation of the committee.  

Madam Speaker, there is a Chinese saying that if you want stability, you keep the people on their land, but if you want wealth you can put up industries. This country is still poor and the majority of the people of Uganda can rely on only one single asset, and that is the land. So, any attempt to deprive them of this property would be very serious. So, we want to applaud the committee for standing firm in this matter.

Item number two, Madam Speaker, on the transition to multiparty politics, let me share one thing, which we heard from Kenya. Not long ago, our committee was in Kenya and we had an opportunity to meet some of the ministers and Members of Parliament who three years ago, were Members of Parliament belonging to KANU, but now they are Members of Parliament in NARC and some of them are government ministers. 

One of them told us clearly that three years ago, when they were defending KANU, they debated as if KANU would still rule for another 100 years and then President Moi was very silent on his position and on whether or not they would release parties to come on board in the politics of Kenya. But a year later, the President decided to put a position, which was contrary to what Members of Parliament who subscribed KANU were supporting and these Members looked confused when President Moi said, parties were released and he was not going to contest any longer. 

That resulted into mass change of mind and a big U-turn from the people who were supporting KANU in Parliament at that time and now as we speak, the Member of Parliament who was really on that side is a Member in the Cabinet in the new government. I want to say this to some of our colleagues who have formed NRM-O; we should not debate as if we are going to live under this party which has just started for another 100 years. 

There are so many funny reasons, which have been brought forward for hating parties and when I listened to a colleague from this side saying parties fought in Katonga and killed many people and that was a reason for hating parties, I was very amused because at that time there was a military government here in Kampala, parties had been banned. So, I do know what kind of party was fighting and killing in Katonga.  

Madam Speaker, during Amin’s time parties were banned but death continued to prevail in this country. I want our people, particularly the leaders like us, to guide the country on the path to right history. We need to have correct political history in this country. So, for us to sell the idea that parties were killing, when in actual fact there is no a single political party manifesto which sold the idea that when they come to power they would kill those who are opposed to them, this does not exist anywhere. 

So, I urge my colleagues, to really reflect when they are selling hatred against parties to think twice because this is now the thing of the past. The truth is that government and NEC of Movement have opened up so what we need to do is to preach the word of love and tolerance so that we can move together as national leaders in this country as we steer the transition.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to refer to the committee’s report on page 29. There is a paragraph here which reflects nothing but a state of uncertainty and fear about the future of this country. This paragraph is what I want to quote and conclude with.  The report says:

“Even if the vote is secured in Parliament, it will set a stage for an additional presidential term limit in which the President will have to be more oppressive unless tolerant. There are consequently very serious reasons as to why this proposal needs to be resisted, as it is political and related to implications quite dire for the country. But there is also a consideration potential for turmoil in the event that the measure is defended in Parliament. Will President accept the verdict of Parliament? How will the Army respond to such a decision? What will be the reaction of the Museveni supporters in the Movement? All this will have significant implication in the transition”

And above all- (Interruption)

DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute.

MR ODIT: And above all, Madam Speaker, the report says, there are two broad perceptions and these are irreconcilable positions and that is why it must be decided through the vote. This is in my opinion, the strongest weakness in this report. The report did not come clear, it did not guide us, it behaved as Pontius Pilate when he was deciding the fate of Jesus Christ. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to clarify on the quotation hon. John Odit made just a few minutes ago. That the methodology used by the committee to come up with this report was that we had to put in the report some of the views that were reflected in the Constitutional Review Commission report. We also quoted some of the views from the White Paper of Government. 

We conducted a whole month’s public hearings and the people’s views we had also to incorporate them in the report and then we came up with our own recommendations as a committee. I want to state that the page he has quoted has only one recommendation from the committee that, the issue of opening term limits should be decided here in Parliament as the Government White Paper proposed. What he quoted were public views that we were receiving from various witnesses. Thank you.

3.31
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first thank the Constitutional Review Commission for their dedication, commitment and very good report because when I went for my consultation, I found it very easy –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are carrying on so many meetings.

MS KYATUHEIRE: I found it very easy to carry on the consultations because the people were already in the know of what was taking place. I also want to thank the committee for the critical analysis of the Constitutional Review Commission report, and also their perusal of the White Paper that has given us the very document, which we are using for our debate.

Madam Speaker, on Article 1, the Kanungu people are of the view that any result from the referendum should be binding. And on the issue of change of political system, that is change from Movement political system to multiparty political system, the Kanungu people were very sceptical about this return of multiparty politics, and it is because of the experience we went through. But after analysing the reasons that were given for the return of multiparty politics, like for those who felt very conscripted under the Movement system and they wanted political space, for the donors’ strong conviction –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why do you not consult from the lobby?

MS KYATUHEIRE: And for the donors’ strong conviction that we should return to multiparty politics, the need to fit in the East African Integration and African Union, the Kanungu people reluctantly said we return to multiparty politics. However, Madam Speaker, we have had a very good experience under the Movement system and they are at least happy that one party has been registered and it has the principles and contains the leadership that did this very good job, and we are of the view that if these kinds of principles in this party were the ones to first do the good job, it would help us to heal the wounds that were realized during the party politics.

Madam Speaker, the issue of presidential terms: The Kanungu people are of the view that we should open the term limits, and the reasons are that if all the other elective posts are unlimited, why should we only tie one person or one office from having an unlimited term? Yes, these are the views of my people, and I do not part a lot from these views.  

Also in a situation –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)- I have very limited time my neighbour, if you can allow me to first build on my point. The other issue of where a leader is still wanted, is doing a very good job for the country and for the people, to have him limited on giving more services was not good for the Kanungu people. 

They referred, for example, to President Clinton who was still largely liked by Americans, but because of the term limits they could not have him for another term, and they did not have reasons why Ugandans’ hands should be tied and not allowed to give the leader of their choice opportunities they wish to give him other than being tied by the term limits.

The other is that the performance of the last leaders was - maybe because there was no Constitution that people believed in. But now that we have a Constitution, which says that we will have the elections after every a given period of time, this will be able to help regulate the bad leaders that we may want to get rid of, like they are doing to parliamentarians and also to the other elective posts.

The issue of federo was not discussed because people thought they had nothing to do with federo. And the issue on regional tier –(Interjections)- yes, Madam Speaker, I widely consulted in the –(Interjections)- no, I am not taking information because I have a number of issues I want to raise.  

The issue on regional tier, Madam Speaker, we do not want another power centre because as a new district, we think we have reaped a lot from decentralisation and we would not want to have other centres that will stifle the development of the lower local governments. 

The other reason is that we have had bad experience under regional arrangement. For example, there are certain services we are supposed to be sharing at a regional level like fire-fighting equipment, you can talk about some road equipment, and you find it very hard for the districts that are a distance away from these centres to benefit from these programmes. 

Even if we are to look at, for example, the referral hospitals, which have been distributing out the Anti-Retroviral (ARVs), you find that the districts that are far from these centres are not benefiting. And for those strong reasons, Madam Speaker, we would not want the regional tier arrangement.

The issue on language: Yes, English be the first official language and Swahili the second official language, and this will help to fit in the East African region and also Africa as a whole; and also French to be taught in schools so that we can be able to fit in the whole arrangement.

On the issue of presidential, parliamentary and LC5 elections, the Kanungu people strongly believe we can have these elections on the same day so as to reduce on costs, to reduce on the fatigue, and also to stop some people from de-campaigning others. For instance, if somebody went through at any given level, then he would not be given chance to go and de-campaign another person at another level.

On the issue of legislative powers of the President, the Kanungu people vehemently opposed that because each leader is elected under different mandate and they do not see why the President cannot lobby a given number of Members of Parliament to support this, especially that we are going under multiparty arrangement.

The issue of ministers being appointed from Parliament: The four sub-counties say yes, but the five sub-counties say no because it would not be easy then to differentiate between what they are supposed to do as a different arm and then the other arm.

On the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), the functions are okay. But the problem they have is the qualification. They feel the qualification of the RDCs should be the same as that of Members of Parliament.

The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), we strongly believe that he should be appointed by the centre, that is, Public Service Commission, to avoid interference by politicians for effective implementation of Government programmes and easy monitoring, and also to make it easy for them to be transferred.

Finally, on the issue of individuals being allowed to stand as independents, Kanungu people are not for this. They think everybody must have a side. However, as their representative, I think you can get a leader who necessarily does not have to have any political inclination to do a very good job. The executive of LC I should be directly elected. That is because we find problems of people that have taken the chair and want to elect their relatives or people that cannot even do a good job for the people. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.40
MR WILLIAM KIWAGAMA (Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by welcoming back everybody from the recess and also wish you a happy new year. We have started on the final year of this Parliament. I wish you well, everybody.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR KIWAGAMA: Madam Speaker, the debate we have embarked on is very important in the history of Uganda, but it is not a crisis like many people will believe. We are going through a normal transition, which has been imposed on us by some of our friends overseas and the people inside here who think that democracy can only be practiced under multi-partism. That is why we are going through this transition. Otherwise, the country is progressing, the nation building is on schedule and the fact that we have come to talk about the –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, this country is certainly going through a constitutional amendment process and the Constitution is for the Republic of Uganda and this House is mandated to do that job. Is it in order for an honourable colleague to allege here that this House is doing a job, which has been imposed on it by other countries? Do we have no capacity to design what is befitting to amend our own Constitution? Is he in order to make such an allegation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was talking about the process of transition from our Movement to multiparty. I think that is what he is saying has been forced on us. The amendment is our right, it is enshrined in our Constitution.

MR KIWAGAMA: Some people pretend not to know the history of this country, but I am reporting what is happening in Bunya County West. On the big question of changing from the Movement system to multi-partism, the people there are not enthusiastic at all. It is not a long time ago that we were the very people explained to them how good the Movement system is and they still maintain that. I still maintain that the Movement system is the best because it has helped us to build this country’s togetherness. We have a big Parliament, which caters for every –(Interjection)- wait, which caters for so many people from every corner. We all sit here and amicably agree on our programme. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way and that is very good brotherhood and neighbourhood. The information I would like to give to my colleague here is that the people he is representing should not be saddened by what is happening, namely the change from the Movement Government to a multi-party system. Why should they be surprised that the same course of action is taking place when at independence - new as political parties were - we were obliged to contest government on the basis of multi-partism? Those are facts on the ground.
 
MR KIWAGAMA: The people of Bunya West have been here since time immemorial and they remember multi-partism, which we had here. There was nothing in multi-partism at all. It was destruction, bickering and so on. When they asked me to explain why we are going back to multi-partism, the reasons are well know, it is because our donors sort of forced us or threatened to withdraw their donations to us if we did not change to multi-partism. And also the multi-partist citizens in this country have been going overseas telling everybody that there is no democracy here. That is why NEC decided to recommend that we go back into multi-partism. It is not because we like parties. No, the system has been imposed on us.

On removal of term limits again they wondered, “What are you taking about? You mean you want to chase away Museveni?” This is what other people are saying. So they say Museveni must stay under all circumstances and they commanded me to come and advocate for the repeal of Article 105 (2) so that whoever wants to be a president can stand every five years. To talk of live presidency they do not know what you are talking about when every five years we have got elections and people have a choice. 

In 1996 we had elections here. We had so many candidates and they chose one and in 2001 again –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have two minutes.

In 1996 we had half a dozen candidates and they rejected them. In fact I congratulate hon. Muzoora for thinking loudly, expressing his wishes that the West will rule this country for 50 years or indefinitely. (Laughter). This is very good, I am going to explain. There is no way they can do it under a democracy –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for my honourable colleague to deliberately misguide this House by misreading the dreams of hon. Muzoora? He never said that power shall rest in the West forever. He came back and clarified. Are you in order to mislead those of us who were here and heard his correction?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately I have not read the Hansard, so I do not know whether he came back and corrected. But please, conclude. You only have one minute.

MR KIWAGAMA: I was going to explain that there is no way the West can do it because there are no political groupings in the West, in the North or in the South. And if the West or the East presents a candidate and he is not elected, how can you blame –(Interruption)

MS ANGUPALE: Madam Speaker, I am listening to my honourable colleague persistently saying, “West, West”, and yet the august House does not understanding which “West”, he is referring to. Do you mean Western Europe? Which West; West Nile? Is he in order to persistently talk about the “West” with the House not understanding him?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can hon. Kiwagama clarify to the House: what is this thing called “West”?

MR KIWAGAMA: This is North, this is West, this is East and behind me is South. (Laughter) If you come from this way, you come from the West; if you come from that way, you come from the East.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Kiwagama.  

MR DOMBO:  Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, hon. Kiwagama’s time is up.

MR KIWAGAMA: I want to conclude, Madam Speaker.

3.50
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Can you switch off, please? –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MS AMONGI: I want to commend the committee for the good work done and I want to start by a quote from the committee’s report on page 3 where the committee stated that; “We agreed that no view would be suppressed; all views would be received with tolerance and given fair treatment based on known facts and reason.” I want to thank the committee for that principle. I agree with the committee. 

On page 6 where the committee talked about the binding force of a referendum, I think this is the worst suggestion in the White Paper, suggesting that any decision of a referendum should be binding on all arms of the state. This is even worse than the third term. I say so because in a democracy - I am speaking now as a political scientist with a professor in her presence - in political science there are two types of practiced democracy. There is direct democracy and indirect democracy. 

In a Parliamentary system where we are, we are practicing indirect democracy. Indirect democracy presupposes that the people give their power to their representative to go and exercise the power on their behalf. How then would you start exercising direct democracy in a situation where you want the result of a referendum on any contentious issue to be binding on all arms of the state?

First of all, what is contentious? Who determines that an issue is contentious? The White Paper does not talk about it. I am very grateful that the committee rejected that proposal and I implore honourable members that kindly reject it and go with the committee’s report. This is actually outlawing the jurisdiction of the court. If what the referendum feels is contentious violates the fundamental human rights of a person and the court cannot deal with that, then really will the referendum also go and say you have to kill somebody then it is just binding on everybody and I do not have legal redress? So on that particular one I want to agree with the committee.

The second issue is on page 21, I agree with the committee on representation of interest groups. However, I do not agree with them on representation of the Army because we are going now to a multi-party system and in a multi-party system people are partisan; the Parliament is partisan. Why should the Army be represented in a partisan Parliament if the Army is supposed to be professional and the Army is supposed to abide by civilian authority? If there is a stand and there is voting in a multi-party system, are the army representatives going to vote? 

If they are subjected to civilian authority and we are going to vote in a party system; if the army is supposed to be professional and non-partisan, are you going to allow the army to vote? And what would be the repercussion of that if the army takes side? How then would you expect the army representatives to take sides against the ruling party if the President then is their commander-in-chief? That is why I think the representation of the army in a multi-party system is not called for.

The other issue upon which I agree with the committee but disagree on the format, is the return to multi-party politics. The committee agrees on return to multi-party politics but proposes and agrees with the Government that it should be on the basis of a referendum. My understanding of a referendum is that you go into a referendum with two distinct opposite views. In a situation where the Movement’s national conference has already adopted the multi-party system, there is no contestation. All of us are agreed. 

Why then should you go for a referendum for the return of multi-party politics? For me, considering the cost and the reason why a referendum exists, there will be no necessity for a referendum.

Time is a problem; I want to go to page 27 on the question of lifting the presidential term limit. The committee came up with two proposals. The first proposal was that we maintain the term limit but extend for the sitting President, like it was done in Namibia. Then their second proposition was to amend the Constitution to have a three-term limit of five years each. I think the committee was in a dilemma and I want to examine the dilemma of the committee. People have very good reasons for wanting to lift the term limit, but we should go ahead and examine why people thought of actually putting a term limit in place. 

Having the term limit lifted presupposes that there will be free and fair elections, which is not possible in Africa. It is not possible. It is very impossible to have free and fair elections. If there was time I would give you the reasons, but I want to cite some studies. There were studies done in many places talking about the advantages of incumbency.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to categorically declare that we cannot hold fair and free elections in Africa? Is she in order, when we have been holding fair and free elections in this country, especially when the Movement Government started taking charge of political affairs of this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, can you confirm why you think Africa has never had free and fair elections, if that is what you are saying?

MS AMONGI: I refer the honourable member to the court ruling on the presidential elections petition between Mr Kiiza Besigye and His Excellency the President. Please, go and read that and then you will find the answer.  

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Is the honourable member in order to say that the whole of African can never have free and fair elections and then she gives just the Uganda experience in which still the President won the case? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Amongi, if you are not in a position to confirm that all the 50 countries on this continent have never held free elections, confine yourself to Uganda.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you allow me more time I would state categorically, with all the contestation in courts in the 53 countries, but I am citing countries like Zimbabwe. There was a contestation and there have been court cases, I have studies. If you want I can prove it for you because I have studies. I do not speak about things I cannot substantiate. I am just –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: No, I do not have time now. Let me move on to my argument on the term limit. I want to give a study, which was done by the Political Action Committee in the US and stated that incumbency has advantages. And it stated that even if you put a superior challenger up against an incumbent, the incumbent would still win the challenger by 11 percent. He is always ahead by 11 percent.

4.04
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, County): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for producing this report. During consultations I discovered that there were external factors that influence what the people were talking about in the White Paper. For the case of Pallisa, the factors that influenced the decisions on the White Paper were the pending programmes that the Government promised the people of Pallisa. They say if these programmes are done, then the White paper will have no problem. 

The problem in Pallisa is that people want a new district to be created in the district. The people of Pallisa want their road to be tarmacked from Tirinyi to Pallisa and to Kumi, the people of Pallisa want the Government to fight poverty hard, then all the programmes as far as the White paper is concerned will have no problem.

During my consultations on the issue of dual citizenship, the people of Pallisa support the issue of dual citizenship on the understanding that the children of Uganda should be given a chance to benefit from the dual citizenship. They also said that investors coming to Uganda to benefit from this dual citizenship, they do not support that. However, the children of Uganda should benefit from dual citizenship.

Then the issue of the death penalty, the people of Pallisa County support the upholding of the death penalty and they also agree that they should use the quickest means of ending one’s life if he has committed an offence and is sentenced.  

As far as defilement is concerned, they categorised this into two. For those who defile children from zero to 12 years, they recommend that they should face the death penalty. Then those who defile children of 13 to 17 years, the judicial system would get an appropriate punishment for those types of people. 

On land management, in Uganda there are several types of land tenure: there is customary land tenure, freehold land tenure and the mailo land tenure. In most parts of the country the land is customarily held meaning that the land belonged to the clan. There is no person who owns land in our place; the land belongs to the clan. So, they deliberately reject the issue of the Government getting that authority to acquire land compulsorily.  

On legalising the status of persons who have occupied the land for 12 years, people from Pallisa are saying if you bring a nephew to occupy land for 12 years, the Constitution says the nephew automatically takes over that land. They reject that provision and they are saying land belongs to the people of the clan and, therefore, the Government should leave the land issue with the people. (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to confuse this House and the whole public - because everybody is listening - that land in his area is owned by the clan? Is the clan in Pallisa above the Constitution of Uganda, which states that land belongs to the people? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the clan is made up of the people of that area. So I think it is okay.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. As far as the land is concerned, I present the views of the people of Pallisa County and I am the voice of the voiceless. Whatever I am telling you here, I talk on behalf of my people.

Then on the issue of transferring from the Movement to the Multi-party System, the people of Pallisa County say they should be given authority, through the referendum, to decide which way to move. But according to my consultation and personal touch, the majority of the people of Pallisa prefer that they would rather remain under the Movement System, than going into the multi-party system.  

As far as the presidential term limit is concerned, the people of Pallisa –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to mislead this House to think that the people in Pallisa County, are in favour of retaining a one-party system? I have traversed the same area as the district representative of the Uganda People’s Congress Party in that area, and the people of Pallisa are totally against the continuation of a one-party system. The courts of this country have declared the Movement System a party? So, is the honourable member in order to mislead the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mallinga, you presented your views here as the Member for Butebo. Allow the Member of Pallisa to tell us what emanates from Pallisa.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to categorically state in this House that in 1980 I was a youth winger under the Uganda People’s Congress and we saw the problems in this country. The people of Pallisa County are saying that despite the problems Uganda People’s Congress had in 1980, there is no need for us to go back to multi-partism. We would rather remain under the system, which has been tested for all the programmes, which have been taken to the communities. 

The people of Pallisa County say the presidential term limits should be opened up because for example when a lion is in a cage, we are now opening the cage for the lion to go to the people, under multi-partism whereas now there is somebody who can control the lion in the cage and we are in a system without any problem. That is why the people of Pallisa say they would rather have His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni proceed.

Then on the issue of centralisation and federalism, the people of Pallisa County support the strengthening of the centralisation system. On the issue of appointment of the chief administrative officers, people of Pallisa County say these officers should go to the central government. When they go to the central government, the best performing CAO in this country is the one who has been rejected by the district council.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next person to speak is hon. Kalule Ssengo. May I appeal to you, I know these are very exciting contributions but just speak normally. The microphones are going to assist us.

4.11
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): I thank you for the opportunity you have offered to me –(Interjections)- can I seek your protection, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow hon. Kalule Ssengo to speak.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Speaker, I thank you. Because of the limited time, I will concentrate on only one item and that is the item of federo. I want to thank the committee for the good report that was given to us. However, I was disappointed when, on page 10, they recommended that the item of federo should be put aside for the time being. I am wondering why they should put it aside? Their argument is that people have not understood it properly. That is being very unfair because federo is not a new thing in this country. We had it in Uganda up to 1966. So, it is not new. People know what it is.

If the committee were able to recommend that we go back to parties, then what is the problem of going back even to the federo system? I am guided by a number of principles on the issue of federo and on the issue of amending this Constitution. In the first place, we are told that federo will be granted to those people who want it. So, if some people do not want it, they are not obliged to have it. 

I am guided by another premise that when I went to stand for elections in Gomba County, one of the assignments that I was given was to come and bargain for federo in this House. That is why I am appealing to this House to lend me their ears and to appreciate my position, because that is what my people want. 

I want to inform you that I come from a region, which has had a number of setbacks. We have had a number of turbulences, we have had a number of wars in this region. In 1964 we had an incident in Nakulabye when many of our people were butchered. Again in 1966 a number of our people were butchered when the Lubiri was attacked. In 1971 we had another war when Idi Amin was overthrowing Milton Obote; again it was here. In 1985 when Tito Okello was overthrowing Milton Obote, again we had problems here. 

Then lastly we had the war of liberation. Madam Speaker, I want my honourable colleagues in the House to appreciate the contribution that the people of the Central region made towards the liberalisation of this country. A number of our people shed blood for the good of this country. A number of people sacrificed a lot of their property; a lot of things were destroyed here.  

What do we see in federo, Madam Speaker? In federo we are saying, “Let us have a bit of rest. Let us be given more responsibility to manage our affairs here”. We are saying, “Let us have a more equitable share of the resources so that we can experience fast development”.

I want you to appreciate that I come from a region, which is very accommodative. I come from a region where almost all the members of this House own property, and almost every tribe of Uganda lives in this region. So, –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take information?

MR SSENGO: I will not take information because my time is limited. So, when we ask for federo we are actually saying we are looking for unity in diversity. The region that is asking for federo, the Central region, accommodates everybody in Uganda, it allows everybody to have property in the region. It welcomes everybody and indeed as an example Madam Speaker –(Interjection)– okay, I will take that information.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, hon. Kalule Ssengo. The information I want to give you is that the people of Bunyoro-Kitara kingdom suffered under the colonial rule. They lost their land till today and we need to recover that land. Thank you very much.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, I would like to assure hon. Ssengo that he is not alone. I was one of the first contributors when we opened this debate and I clearly told the House that the Government and this Parliament can forget their support in whatever way for as long as the kingdom of Buganda is not given what it requires, and that is federo. So, my information to you, Sir, is that you are not alone. Bukoto East is with you, and I am very sure the rest of the country is with you. We just need to explain that. Thank you very much.

MR SSENGO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my two colleagues for the information. I want to advise my colleague from Bunyoro that whether she is demanding for land here, it is not an issue against federo. We can have the federo then you can advance your demands for land. But I am surprised, because the honourable member owns property in this same region that is demanding for federo and she has never been disturbed. I even know where that property is! I do not know why she is really worried about –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to insinuate bad motive on me; that I own property here, when I did not grab any land and when I am staying here in Kampala City, which belongs to Uganda and not to any other region? Is he in order? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are out of order if you are insinuating that hon. Jalia Bintu grabbed land in Buganda.  

MR SSENGO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for that protection. I was developing a point and trying to prove to you the magnanimity of the people of the Central region. Only recently when the Kabaka was appointing a new cabinet, that cabinet included Asians and it included Somalis, so I do not see why people should have any fear about the federo in Buganda. We welcome everybody. This federo will be for everybody; it will be for all Ugandans.  

Indeed, Madam Speaker, I think the writers of the report and the White Paper were very wise because they said that those who want it will have it. So, let us try it. If it works very well then the others will take it. If it fails then we shall abandon it. I do not really see any problem with people advocating for federo.

4.21
MRS AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to the debate on the White Paper on the constitutional review and political transition. I wish also to take this opportunity to commend and appreciate the committee for the objective and well-balanced report presented to us.

The 19 year-old situation of conflict in Kitgum District and the Northern region in particular has still continued to confine over 90 percent of our people to the internally displaced people’s camps; with its attendant problems of poverty, poor social service delivery and others.   

As we went to seek views from our people on the Government White Paper, the biggest concern of our people has been the restoration of security and peace in the sub-region. On this note, allow me to bring the gratitude of the people of Kitgum to Members of this Parliament and to you, Madam Speaker, and the Speaker of Parliament for the support you have given, for the solidarity you have shown in trying to find ways and means of ending the conflict in the North and other parts of this country. The people are grateful. (Applause)

We would also like to register our recognition particularly to the gallant commanders, the officers and men of the UPDF who have continuously exhibited admirable commitment in their service to this country. Knowing that our situation is rather a precarious one, I have taken a rather long time in giving a preamble. But allow me now to give the views of the people of Kitgum on the Government White Paper - some of them of course - given the short time.

On the change from the Movement political system to a multi-party system there was general agreement that people should not be confined to belong to a system where their political aspirations cannot come out. It was generally felt, in all the 19 sub-counties of the two counties of Kitgum, that the political space should be open up, albeit with a lot reservations.

We may recall in our history how operating in a multi-party system had brought divisions along religious and even ethnic lines. We feel that even if this phase is to be opened, government should put in place strong laws that can curtail some of the lawlessness that can arise out of a multi-party kind of operation.  

The people of –(Interruption)

CAPT. GUMISIRIZA: Madam Speaker, in Sempebwa Constitutional Review Commission Report, it is reported that over 70 percent of both verbal and written memoranda were still in support of the Movement System of administration. I have been seated here for a number of days listening to Members of Parliament, giving their reports from their constituencies. Everybody is saying, “The people have said this…”. I have not heard a single Member of Parliament who has said that, “No, people do not want multi-parties” and yet –(Interjections)- over 70 percent of the reports and memoranda submitted to Sempebwa Constitutional Review Commission said, “My people are …”. I would like to hear the report of the Constitutional Review Commission Report being reflected here.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Fortunately we captured all our proceedings on video. Should this Parliament give us time we will be able to show what views our people gave. Initially we had to really entice them to agree to even go back to a multi-party system. Madam Speaker and honourable members, envisage a situation of a multi-party system in a setting of camps, which camps are really crammed. We know what multi-party politics can do, the divisions! Imagine multi-parties –(Interjection)- I will not take that information. I know the zeal that the Vice-Chairperson of FDC has as of now, but I wish to assure him. And it is known fact; he also knows it as a Member of FDC, if I may even divulge other information, that -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA: Madam Speaker, I rose up and requested to inform my honourable colleague. Is she in order to inform when I am not able to inform her?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is up to the member to yield the Floor. I can only indicate that there is some information, then he or she can yield the Floor.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Madam Speaker, against my own time, it is not information. It is a known fact that he is the Vice-Chairperson of the FDC, it is not information. 

The people of Kitgum vehemently oppose the suggestion of government to forcefully take land purportedly to give to investors. We feel that land should be given away on a willing basis between the investor and the land owner, or land owners.  

The majority of the people in Kitgum support the lifting of the presidential term limit, and I say this with all honesty. I say this with the backing and the support of the people of Kitgum. I reiterate that we have a video recording of what the people have said. They say, “It is Museveni who knows how we have gone to the camp. It is Museveni who knows how we will get of this camp”. None of these other people has talked about the North. It is this Movement Government that will help our people recover. And on the issue of the presidential term limit, the people of Kitgum support the lifting of the third term.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The President of Uganda has been asked several times whether he is interested in contesting after this term expires, and he has said categorically that he is not interested and that the issue of the term limit is not linked to him. Is hon. Akwero Odwong Jane in order to mislead this House by saying that the term limit is specifically meant for President Museveni, when he has not asked for it? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was not in Kitgum when they were consulting, so I am not in position to rule on that matter.  

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Madam Speaker, I just gave the example of Museveni, in case he wants to stand. That one is the lifting of term limits, not third term.

And the people say the President should not be given any additional powers to dissolve Parliament because both Members of Parliament and the President are elected by the people; he should not be not be given additional powers.

The people of Kitgum also say Swahili should be adopted as a second national language.

Elections for Members of Parliament, the president and chairmen of Local Council V should be held on different days.  

As I wind up, the people of Kitgum say, for those who are sounding war drums purportedly giving the impression that this country in the process of transition, will fall back to problems that will bring insecurity, they say, “Learn from what we people in the North have gone through. Let the North be the last place where conflict in Uganda should prevail. Do not call for war; we do not want war”. Thank you.

4.31
MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA KIBANZANGA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are in a process of reviewing our Constitution after ten years. Some of us would love to do a duty for our country, not ourselves. When you read the 1995 Constitution you find there is nothing we have in common as people of Uganda apart from our history, and chapter 4, which talks about the fundamental human rights. What am I saying? Much of our Constitution is based on our history. I will not tell you what my people told me. When I am in my constituency, I am a consultant to my people. 

The framers of our Constitution largely wanted to tame, to control and stop the dark history of our country. In fact they were hostages of our history. Today, after 10 years, when I see people debating the way they are doing, to even suggest to remove provisions that tamed this dark history of our country, I feel saddened. What have you done for the last ten years to completely suppress the dark history of our country from repeating itself? What have you done? Almost zero.

MR ERESU: I would like to inform hon. Kibanzanga, the consulted and the disputed king, Prince of Rwenzururu, that over the last ten years the dark history of Uganda has been tamed. Attempts have been made to tame it because  there have been insurgency in this country, which have been suppressed. There are also some insurgencies in this country, up to now, which have been suppressed. For example, the ADF in the Rwenzori Mountains have been suppressed, the Kony rebellion has been suppressed. That is how the Constitution has over the period of the ten years suppressed the dark days that have been in this country.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much. I think I mislead the honourable member by using the word “suppression”. When you suppress something, you have not created a mechanism for it never to surface again. It is this mechanism of taming this violent history of ours that I have been looking for for the last ten years. And if he had suppressed the dark history of our country, they would not be wanting to invest the entire nation in the hands of individuals and not institutions. Let us be fair to our country, let us speak the truth. Madam Speaker, I do not have time. He has eaten up my time, but let me say this.  

On compulsory acquisition of land, what are we talking about when we are leading a liberal economy? Well, I have my own opinion on land. I do not want to see landless people in Uganda. If government were to acquire land in trust of its people, I would understand. But a government acquiring land for the investors and at the same time you are leading a liberal economy, what are you talking about? Why do you not let the investors acquire land by negotiating with the owners? 

With the corruption eating up our country, the moment you leave this loophole - and I know some leaders in this country who own sub-counties – the moment you use this loophole, they are going to use it to rob people of their land. Wait for the Government, which will own land in the trust of its people, wait for it; it is coming.

There are certain issues we do not even need even to debate. Like moving from a monolithic political system to a multi-party. Natural justice demands that people express different views freely. It has been criminal on our part because of our history, to gang up people. So, if we have realized that people must be free, we do not have to debate it. Let people be free.  

Madam Speaker, about the language, I would love us to evolve a language but now that we do not have capacity, let us take Swahili for a national language.  

About traditional leaders, I kindly request government to come up with a policy so that the people of Kasese stop quarreling with hon. Kiyonga.  For how long are we going to quarrel with an individual against the rights of our people?  So, please, come up with a policy to guide us.

MS NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the member holding the Floor to start writing a new report different from what Sempebwa and the committee produced? Because really, it is even different from the White Paper. There is no consideration of a national language. We have see, and you can open the reports, the Sempebwa Commission, the White Paper and the Legal Committee, are not mentioning that Swahili should be a national language. They are saying that Swahili should be a commercially integrating language in the East African region, but not that it is a national language for Uganda. 

Uganda has almost a national language, which is Luganda. There are so many books; so many of us, none of us here does not speak and understand what Luganda is and is unable to speak it. So, is it in order for the member to start writing a new report, to confuse the House? The House has been considering a commercial language integrating the East African region, but not a national language for Uganda. Uganda has not considered that aspect as yet. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think it is mandatory that you confine yourself only to what was commented on in the White Paper. The Sempebwa Report had many other areas, which I believe the Government did not take interest in. So, all these documents should be taken together and the member thinks that there should be a national language called Swahili. That is his view, so let him present it.

MR MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is even in the White Paper. I think the member she has not read it properly. I was saying that the Government should come up with a cultural policy so that people can see what to do.

About the referendum decision binding to all organs of government, I think we are stretching the people’s power too far.  

4.41
MR WILSON MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a lot of admiration for the committee for this beautiful report that they gave us. In fact the report exhibits a high sense of patriotism and boldness especially in the decision, which it took regarding the fact that the issues they were discussing were quite delicate. I believe that we shall also be equal to the task as this august House so that we take decisions and execute this task before us in a manner that is honorable. We should be able to be a point of reference for the people to come.

On page 6 the committee discussed the issue of the sovereignty of the people. In fact in their discussion it is quite clear that the sovereignty of the people is not in dispute; it cannot be contested. Even Article 1 of the Constitution is quite clear and that Article talks about referenda and elections. So in the end it is quite clear that when all other avenues have been exhausted, the final voice is that of the people. The people should express themselves finally on any matter that should arise. 

What is needed, therefore, is for Parliament - if you are going to make the sovereignty of the people a reality is for Parliament to put in place an Act, which can detail how the results of a referendum can be binding, taking into account the various stages, which the country can go through to that final referendum and then the results binding on all organs of the State.

The committee discussed the issue of Local Government and all these regional tiers and so forth.  My colleague yesterday was able to tell this august House the feeling of the people of Nakasongola.  I do not want to dwell too much on this, but it is quite clear the people of Nakasongola, especially the majority, did not see much merit in regional Governments.  They do not see any merit in a federal arrangement, and this is I think quite understandable given the long history of over 100 years of colonialism.  

What they see is meritorious, is actually the principle, the policy of decentralisation and devolution of power at the district level.  They felt that if there are any shortcomings in decentralization and devolution of power at district level, then this is the time for us to iron out those shortcomings and make the system stronger and better, instead of glossing over these shortcomings, wrapping them up in a bigger body, which is at the regional level. I think that would be compounding problems -(Interjection)- I am well informed, Madam Speaker, and I would actually advise my Colleague that we could meet outside after my discussion here over a cup of tea and we inform each other.  

The question of dual citizenship is okay.  However, the people of Nakasongola, just for their information, would like the Minister of Internal Affairs and the committee to explain to them how the Barundi also qualify to be one of the indigenous communities of Uganda.  Otherwise, indigenous communities must be put down and dual citizenship is okay.

The question of compulsory acquisition of land that the committee discusses on page 13 was quite controversial. In fact, the consultations in Nakasongola were obscured by the current land problems there.  The people, as a result of 1900 Agreement, are now subject to various violent evictions and so forth.  But after they had more or less –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon. Members!  You see, when you carry out other meetings the member is obliged to shout into the microphone.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with a lot of humility I am standing on a point order.  The dynamics of the concept of federalism is internationally known, and it cannot be distorted; by description, it is a political arrangement where State powers are constitutionally shared between the regions and the centre.  

The impression the honourable member was giving was that the people of Nakasongola, being not homogenous, are not ready for federalism.  Well knowing that there are many places where federalism is enjoyed without necessarily commanding homogeneity, is it in order for the hon. Member to openly distort an internationally known concept to give an impression that the people of Nakasongola cannot choose federalism simply because they are not homogenous?  Must they be homogenous to choose federalism?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I do not know who has recruited you to conscript other tribes into the federo.  You allow the hon. Member for Nakasongola to tell us what the people of Nakasongola have said; you had your opportunity to speak.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much for that wise ruling, Madam Speaker. Now, as I was saying the question of compulsory acquisition of land was clouded over by the current land problems that exist in Nakasongola.  These problems, as we very well know, were created by the 1900 Agreement, which dispossessed the indigenous people of Nakasongola of their land.  

Today people are facing violent evictions here and there because the owners carry out shoddy deals somewhere in the capitals, in the big towns of the country, and the new buyers go and they send off people.  So, they were asking Government to really take this matter seriously and make sure that Nakasongola District also benefits from the Land Fund, just like Kibaale is benefiting this coming financial year. 

Otherwise, afterwards they appreciated the idea of Government acquiring land for investment because investment is really good; it helps everybody when it is around and if it is carried out in good faith.  So, if Government wants land for investment, it can acquire that within the spirit of Article 26; when they buy land, there must be prompt payment and adequate compensation. What can be done, therefore, is just to include investment as one of those avenues, which Government can use to acquire land compulsorily.

On page 16 and 17 the committee was talking about the functions of the Electoral Commission.  They are saying, why don’t we establish a body, which will specifically register parties?  We felt in Nakasongola that this body would largely be redundant, because I think after all the excitement has died down we are going to have a few parties, which will endure, maybe two, three or four, then what will the body be doing?  So, I think really there should be no body specifically to register these parties; another arrangement can be put in place to register parties as they appear.  

On the question of the representation of the Army as was discussed by the Committee, that is Article 78(1)(c) of the Constitution, in a multiparty situation, I think really we might inadvertently be pushing the Army to be partisan if it is allowed to be represented in Parliament; and we may put the Army in an awkward situation.  Supposing there is an issue they have to vote on, will they vote for or against Government?  If they vote against Government, what happens?  So, I think if we are going to have a National non-partisan Army, let us keep it out.  Definitely the Army can follow trend of the political developments. 

PROF. 	LATIGO: Thank you my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is that in a multiparty system there are two sides in Parliament. One side is Government side; the other side is opposition side. In those circumstance which side does the army say?  

MR MURULI MUKASA: So, the army obvious has to be neutral. So we are saying, therefore - the people of Nakasongola are saying why not keep the army out?  It can follow the political trend through another mechanism, through a Commiserate in the army, through another institution which can be put in place so that it keeps trend of the political situation in the country and is able therefore to defend this country without partisan bias.  

On page 40 the Committee discusses special courts relating to terrorism, although the Committee does not favour this special courts. The people of Nakasongola were of the view that given the intricate nature of terrorism and the fact that terrorists are motivated by certain feelings and events sometimes which even defeat logic, I think there is merit in having special courts to try these crimes of terrorism. 

What should be done, however, is to strike a balance between human rights and a fair sense of justice. Therefore, guidelines can be put in place for these courts and they make sure that they execute justice, they also do not trample down on human rights, they do not abuse anybody but we really get a chance of having these fellows tried in a competent court and if they are found guilty they are put out of the way and society continues.

The committee discussed the issue of cooperate governance. In other words formal consultations between the President, the Speaker and the Chief Justice may be twice or three times in a year. I found merit in this that really when in situations like ours where we are in the process of creating a nation it is important to consult, it is important not to be adversarial, it is important may be to have around table and we talk about matters of national importance; and this should be made formal, not to be left at the whim of the President or the Chief Justice or what. And if it is formalized, then it will eliminate suspicion. 

I remember sometime back last year I think there was a Newspaper story that the Speaker had been seen compromising conditions of consulting. Now, that kind of thing will not happen if it was formularised. And in some African countries this has been put in place and it is working well and I think it is worth really supporting so that twice or three times a year consultations of this nature can happen.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I am winding up.  On page 61, there was a question of Regional Service Commissions and Regional Land Boards. We people in Nakasongola think that really the District Land Boards are doing a good job. Let land matters be managed there at the district. The District Service Commissions are doing a good job. Let them continue to do so, let us not regionalise; otherwise we shall actually now run the risk of falling in the passed abuses. If everything is regionalised at Mengo, we regionalize something at Fort Portal and so forth, maybe some people can really get a raw deal out of this regionalisation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, for the benefit of the public, perhaps you might just mention your constituency so that the public can connect the voices to the constituencies and the names. (Interjection)  Excuse me, Hon. Arumadri, did you speak? They are saying you contributed.

MR ARUMADRI:  Madam Speaker, I have not contributed on this matter and my name was included on that list by the Speaker yesterday. I will be grateful for a chance today. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

4.56
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): I want to thank you Madam Speaker. I want to thank also the Committee for the work well done.  Consultations that I did had variant views, but largely the highest percentage had this to say.  In the circumstances of deadlocks the masses thought that giving the President powers to dissolve Parliament would rather deprive them of the sovereignty that they are being given and therefore thought that they would continue having that sovereignty in as of determining who is faulty in what area. They, therefore, said the President should not be given powers to dissolve Parliament.

They also advanced reasons like – the reasons that the White Paper is proposing to have elections for Members of Parliament, the President and the LCVs on the same day is because of the costs incurred in different elections. Why then would the deadlocks tantamount to sending them back for elections?  Because it would also, therefore, increase costs; and they were for the argument that the President should not be given powers to dissolve Parliament.  They proposed that under a deadlock there would be another method on how the deadlock could be handled.

On the issue of acquisition of land compulsory:  With Basoga’s land is something that you do not joke around with. It is the only wealth that people in Busoga have. The only asset that a peasant in Busoga has is land. There were such questions like, in the circumstance will they shift with graves? Others were asking why didn’t Government allocate Government reserves to investors other than looking at the individual lands?  And they were of the view that the issue of compulsory acquisition of land is not acceptable to them. 

The issue on dual citizenship, as colleagues were debating here yesterday, it sort of came to my mind that some other colleagues thought that dual citizenship was going to be given to none Ugandans as well. To my conception and the constituents, dual citizenship will only I believe occur to Ugandans who have declared their citizenship out of Uganda after settling elsewhere. And this one is really highly welcome by the constituents of Bukooli Central.

From Movement to Multiparty politics, the constituents are saying that the Constitution requires that they vote this on a referendum.  Then how come we did decide without consulting them to move to multiparty politics? In other words they were not for the multiparty politics. But given that the National Conference in Kyankwanzi, various reasons were raised, we had to explain and in a way tend to woo them to the side accepting multiparty politics.  

The issue on the recall of Members of Parliament, the White Paper talks of at least of the registered voter in the constituency that would petition a Members chair in Parliament. Now the constituents are saying in the circumstance that multiparty or opposition owns 50 percent in a constituency of the voters, they would therefore qualify to petition an opposition Member possibly who might have gone through and recall you. They are proposing that, is it possible, therefore, to amend and include that 50 per cent of the registered voters of the party would petition the Member of Parliament to pull him or her out of Parliament?  

On Article 105, constituents had this to say, that the President is constrained by the Constitution, that is two terms, but other electoral offices like the Members of Parliament and the local councils are not constrained by the Constitution.  Why then would the Constitution look at the President alone and not the Members of Parliament as well?  So, they propose that there should be consistency in policies, and, therefore, urged that we either constrain the Members of Parliament as well or Article 105(2) be deleted (-Mr Ken Lukyamuzi rose_) I have a short time.  

Then they raised an issue- because to the best of my knowledge, Article 105(2) can best be decided by Parliament; they asked, why waste more funds to go for a referendum?  On my explanation, I advised them that it is important for their views as well, because in our survey or in my tour it was not very easy to quantify in totality the people who attended the meetings I held vis-à-vis the population of the constituency.  So, a referendum would best give the percentage of the total constituency, and, therefore, the country would know those for and against the article, whether to be deleted or to be upheld.  

They advocated that Article 105(2) should be deleted.  The majority supported the deletion; a tune of 86 per cent said the Article 105(2) should go.  The reasons some advanced included, why would the Constitution constrain the party?  The interest of any party after we have gone into multiparty politics would include floating a person who is able to win, because the interest of multiparty politics is any party to hold power as long as it can; that is the interest of multiparty politics.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I had no intension of interrupting my good Friend, but I got overwhelmed by the many mistakes he was making, especially with reference to the Constitution of Uganda, Article 98(1), in accordance with that Constitution, the President is the Fountain of Honour, he is the Chief Executive; and Article 98(2), the President shall take precedence over all persons in Uganda.  That being so, Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor right now to have confused his constituents when he assumed that all elective positions are the same in weight?  The President is unique and it was wrong for him to have confused the image of the President with the rest of the electable offices.  Was he in order in so doing?  I wish I was there- (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I believe the people of Bukooli South are sufficiently intelligent to question matters that have been brought to their attention, so accordingly they are neither confused nor silly.  It is within their right to question what has been put in the White Paper.

MR MULENGANI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your very wise ruling on that issue.  I want to emphasize here that the people of Bukooli Central and Bugiri are not confused; these are people who eat fish.  

When we reached at the point of appointments of Ministers that have previously been censured, the constituents also realized that even Members of Parliament that have got questions in Court, especially issues that would thereon affect their Parliamentary seats, should not also be proposed for Ministerial appointments.  Those are their views in Bukooli Central.  

On the issue of death penalty, especially on the defilement of the minor age, the members of Bukhooli Central said that it should be put under consideration as well that it includes the women; that the old age women or the elderly women that tend to go with young boys should be put under consideration in this one.  They also said that the Army, for purposes of professionlisation of the Army, the Army could be left out of –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon. Members, you seem very happy about that point- (Laughter)  

MR MULENGANI: The Army should be left out of the House.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.10
MR BENEDICT ETONU (Amuria County, Katakwi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me chance to air the views of people of Amuria.  I would like to add my voice to those who thanked the Committee for the good work done.  I will go straight on to say this. The matter before us is very important; if we do not handle this matter properly, it will haunt us.  It has haunted those who went to Lancaster House in 1961, and it is also still haunting now those who made the Constitution in 1995, including me, because there are certain things, which we should have actually corrected at that time, but there were different views and I think we got tired and left them go.

Madam Speaker, I will go straight on to Multiparty system. You all know that Uganda started with Multiparty politics and on the way politics was banned, it came back again.  Again, when the Government was overthrown by military coup, multiparty system disappeared and it came again recently in 1986, starting from 1996.  

Now, Madam Speaker, Ugandans have a tendency of not putting their country before anything else.  Ugandans from my little experience for the years I have lived in this country do not behave like they are Ugandans. What do I mean here?  By example, our neighbours, the East African countries, Kenya and Tanzania have not had all these problems, why? 

I will tell you because I lived in Tanzania in exile; people there are united, they will not mind what party they are, but if anything is against their State, they will stand very firm against it. But here in Uganda, something is going wrong and many nationals know about it, they keep quiet because they say it should be for the Government, that is the wrong which I think we need to correct if we are to have a peaceful and a prosperous Uganda.  

For that reason, I am saying this. We have had some peace for over 18 years now, why, because the Government in power is tolerant and also because it listens to the views of the people that is why we are now airing all this.  Therefore, when people of Amuria are very reluctant about going back to Multiparty System, they support our move back to Multiparty System.

In Article 105 (2), lifting of term limits.  They are saying in Uganda we have been living like that, without time limits and in actual fact, at the time of 1995 when we made the Constitution, we wanted it, we did not want any term limits but it happened as I said, I think we got tired and left it there; but the lifting of term limits is a normal thing for Ugandans, they want it.  

Amuria people want us to lift this term limit because they believe they are capable of choosing their leaders.  Since we have regular elections now, every five years. But before I leave this Multi-Party system, I would like to warn Ugandans, it is a very tricky situation. There is a tendency in Uganda here for some parties asking for patronage from outside Uganda and that one is very dangerous for our country.  

Now, I am continuing with the lifting the of term limit, people of Amuria are saying through regular elections, they are capable of electing correct leaders, whether be a President or a Member of Parliament. I will give you an example.  I have been elected three times, I lost once because every time I stand, I win but at one time I also lost.  So I do not think, people of Amuria are very, very incapable; they are going to vote a correct President and that correct President they know is the one who has stayed in power more than eight years otherwise, other Presidents have gone after eight years.

I move on to decentralization as against to regional governments.  People in Amuria are saying, in the 1995 Constitution, there is a provision for districts to cooperate and, therefore, there is no need now to have another region to create and let the districts direct the Central Government being allowed.

Compulsory acquisition of land, in Teso if you want to cause problems to yourself there are three things you can risk.  The first one is land, recently in Soroti district, there was a problem because some pilot project was being introduced in one of the sub counties and people have not been sensitised enough.  So when these Government officials went to survey the land, they got into problems, some of them are still lying in Soroti hospital now.  So do not tamper with land.  The second one I think you have already said and the third one-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  One minute.

MR ETONU:  For the Chief Administrative Officer, the people of Amuria would like to retain these people in the district so that they control them otherwise they may frustrate development in their country. The Chief Administrative Officers- and Madam Speaker, I want to repeat, let us Ugandans- if you want to call it land, and it could even be stronger to take our country above our individual interest or party interests.  If you are going to get out of that, I think we shall get a good Uganda.  I thank you.

5.20
MR JOHN ARUMADRI  (Madi-Okolo county):  Thank you Madam Speaker.  I want to start by paying my respect to the committee, which I consider has done a very beautiful job dealing with a complex subject. I am reporting what I told my people.  I asked them whether they agreed with me on what I was telling them. They tended to agree with what I said. If we crystallized the process we are going through, we will find that the jewel in this process is the issue of third term; the rest at best are accompaniments or at worst just wool in our ears.  So, I will confine myself to the issue of third term.      

When this matter came up, Madam Speaker, I rang the alarm bell in Madi-Okolo County, I said, “I am seeing a dangerous trend coming up”.  Since I am the one going to vote in Parliament on your behalf, I am going to decide as to what my conscience will tell me because it will be me an individual who will lose sleep if I go against my conscience; and I was very clear to say that this position as of now I am not convinced that there are enough grounds to abolish term limits.  

I have heard my colleagues, and seemingly very educated Ugandans, advancing reasons, “LCI Chairman has no term limit, LC III, LC V, Member of Parliament has no term limit; why are you gagging one office?”  It is you as a leader to explain to the people the power of this office called the Presidency.  If you did not know, Madam Speaker, let me tell my colleagues.  

If His Excellency, the President, is seated 100 meters away and he sees you passing, he can say, “That person passing there has annoyed me,” you will be arrested.  You can annoy the President, and the definition of annoyance here is not qualified; you will be arrested.  The President can say, “Let there be a road here” - for 15 years in West Nile we have been asking for a road until His Excellency, the President said, “Let there be a road” and we are getting a road.  The High Court can condemn you to the gallows, His Excellency, the President will say, “This person will live and you will live.”  

We have an example.  One of our colleagues went down to the university of understanding in Luzira, His Excellency, the President said, “This man should come out.”  In the twinkling of an eye, this man was out.  

This is the kind of power, colleagues, we are talking about.  It is not a small matter; do not take it to LCI Chairman.  As a Member of Parliament I do not have those powers; these are the powers, which the term limit is trying to tame.  It is incumbent upon you as a leader to tell your people what the dangers are.  What our people are seeing are short-term benefits –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, hon. Arumadri, for giving way.  By way of information I just want to draw your attention to an article in today’s Newspaper, “The Monitor”, and it says, “Read Julius Caesar before voting on Article 105.”  Since you do not have the newspaper, for the purposes of informing let me read just an extract.  

This is Brutus, who was a very close friend of Caesar, having knifed Caesar and he went to Caesar’s funeral and he told the crowd that gathered after the assassination, “If there be in this gathering, any dear friend of Caesar’s, to him I say, that Brutus’ love to Caesar was no less than his.  If then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer: Not that I love less, but that I loved Rome more.”  Thank you.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, and I will ask my colleagues to get acquainted with that work of Shakespeare.  Two, Madam Speaker, I have heard my Colleagues here saying, if the people do not like the leader, if the leader is becoming dictatorial, he will always be voted out.  

The committee has drawn our attention very aptly to this kind of scenario.  Page 29, mid-paragraph four, Madam Speaker allow me to quote and I hereby quote: “But there is also considerable potential for turmoil in the event that the measure is defeated in Parliament.  Will President Museveni accept the verdict of Parliament?  How will the Army respond to such a decision?  What will be the reaction of Museveni supporters in the Movement?”  

These are very pregnant questions.  Even as of now, there seems to be a guillotine hanging over our heads.  If we decide otherwise and we do not lift the term limits, how will these groups I have mentioned react?  How about 20, 30 years down the road when the law is already in place?  A dictator finding it on a silver plate will put it in use; he has got the instruments of coercion, he has got control of the national kitty, what will he not be able to do?  These are the reflections, my hon. Colleagues, we should reflect on.  These are not simple matters.  If there was a way – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  If there was a way, as an individual, outside this law for the incumbents to continue for another period of time so that we transit, we could look at it.  But to say that this term should be open-ended for any person to come, and for me to tie this chain around my grandchildren, Madam Speaker, I am not prepared to do it.  I do not support this position unless another arrangement is brought, but outside the Constitution.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA  (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to add my voice to my colleagues.  First of all, I would like to thank the NRM Government for having instituted the Sempebwa Constitutional Review Commission to gather the views from countryside and also for the White Paper proposals and recommendations that were meant to enrich the Sempebwa Commission Report.  

When you hear from outside, the whole world was worried that when we debate this report there was going to be fireworks.  People were expecting confrontations; people were expecting verbal artillery between members.  But I would like to congratulate the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for their exhaustive and well-researched and balanced report, which has made all Members debate very humbly.  I also wish to congratulate my Colleagues who have so far contributed on this historic debate.

Madam Speaker, when my Brother Kibanzanga was contributing on the Floor of this House he said that NRM Government has failed to tame the turbulent history of Uganda.  I think members all of us will agree with me that it has been NRM Government since Independence which has had the core competencies to tame the turbulent history of Uganda.  

As you remember, this is not the first time we have had to discuss the Constitution of this country since Independence. Hon. Otto “my old man” said that when you go to our neighbours in Kenya and Tanzania, you find that they are more patriotic than our fellow countrymen in Uganda; and you also wonder why of all countries in East Africa Uganda has changed regimes eight times and Kenya and Tanzania have changed regime three time peacefully; and you also wonder why we have changed Constitutions time and again and when our neighbours have been stable.  

I think our political history does not begin with the making of the constitution nor does it begin with the advent of NRM Government, it definitely dates back to the pre-colonial times and post independence.

Therefore, it is against this background, Madam Speaker, that when we are discussing and debating this report we must appreciate where we have come from and where we are, so that we do not repeat the mistakes of our colonial masters and our fore-fathers of independent Uganda.  We must, therefore, make sure that caution is taken so that we do not slide back into the abyss of sectarian politics based on religious and ethnic divide lines.

Madam Speaker, anyone who pretends not to know our past history, the pre-colonial history of this country like some of my colleagues who had been debating on this Floor either suffers from incredible short memories or is pathetically dishonest and partisan to be a credible leader.  If Ugandans like my Friend, Hon. Kibanzanga, cannot learn from our past painful political history at least they believe in evidence of the eyes looking at what is happening with NRM Government since it came to power.  

MR MBALIBULHA KIBANZANGA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  In my contribution I did say that much of our Constitution is based on our history and I did caution that as we are in the process of the constitutional review, let us not behave as if we have tamed this dark history.  Is he in order to insinuate that I either have short memory, or I do not understand the history of my country?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, hon. Member, I think you were clear in you submission; you are concerned that we should tame tyranny.  I think that is what you are saying, yes.

MR BAMWANGA:  Thank you very much for your ruling, because I was saying that since independence we have had eight regimes, but since NRM Government came to power, we have not had a change of regime and we have not had any changes of Constitution.  So I think the NRM Government has tamed our political turbulence which we had experienced before.

 There was a question, which was raised in the report of the Parliament about whether a constitutional review was necessary. The Government White Paper and the committee made it clear that since 1995 when the Constitution was made, a lot of things in Uganda have fundamentally changed.  Therefore, it will justify a constitutional review process.  

Uganda has gone through a vibrant political history, economic and social evolution that the constitutional review was necessary to put people’s call for political road map as we go through the transition.  The Constitutional Review Commission was meant to address those political, economic and social concerns of the society so as to avoid any potential conflicts clashes between Government institutions.

Madam Speaker, about the Constitution as if it is curved up a marble that is so hard to change: I think the Constitution can be changed or even repealed under the prescribed provisions and procedures of its amendments by this very Constitution.  Therefore, even if guarantees the majority their rights and also protects the minority, it also protects the majority so that we do not have mob justice in this country.  So, when we are quoting the Constitution, Madam Speaker, there is need to state and interpret the law correctly by giving it its true and natural meaning that the Constitution can be amended and can be repealed.  

It is not the matter of Ugandans saying we want or we do not want to follow the procedures, but the Constitution which is the Supreme law makes us duty bound to do so.  So the procedures of the Constitution must be both respected by the Parliament, by the Executive and by the judiciary. 

The Government White Paper was necessary document to give and prepare Cabinet by giving White Paper proposals and recommendations to the Sempebwa report, because presenting it to Parliament for debate required the Government input because at the end of the day the Government is also a big stakeholder. It is not that because the Parliament has the ultimate voice on making a decision, but Government at the end of the day must give their own contribution.  Therefore, the purpose of this White Paper was addressed to those identified problems as have been talked about.

On the supremacy of the people, the Constitution is very clear –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You have got one minute, hon. Member.

MR BAMWANGA:  Madam Speaker, on the supremacy of the people I thought the Constitution is very clear about the sovereignty of the people.  I think since the Constitution is the supreme law of the country, let the people have the sovereignty, but say a decision that has been taken in referendum be binding on everybody including the Judiciary and human rights, I think it will be dangerous. It is like really giving the Pope supernatural powers over anything else, because already what the people want under the Constitution under Article (1) can be done whether everybody likes it or not.

On the removal of Presidential term limits, the people of Ndorwa West, and as their voice, told me openly and frankly that they do not see any reason why President Museveni, energetic as he is, revolutionary as he is, popular as he is, should be stopped and his political life terminated by a few people who do not appreciate his achievements.  

President Museveni is highly regarded internationally, is now being ranked as the next Mandela in the making. As we talk of going to the East African Federation, come 2010, it is likely that a man like President Museveni will be a better candidate for the first President of East African Federation –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, we are here debating a very serious issue, the issue of amending our Constitution; we are not here campaigning.  Is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to bring campaigns for the Presidency in this House and confuse us, and take our mind away from the most important issue we are discussing, namely, amending the Constitution?  Is he in order, Madam Speaker, to confuse us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we sent you out to consult your people on the White Paper.  The hon. Member for Ndorwa is reporting the outcome from his consultation; that is what he is reporting. 

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you very much for your ruling, Madam Speaker.  Finally, on the dual citizenship, the people of Ndorwa West have asked me to actually put the case in this august House, that this dual citizenship has helped many Ugandans go for greener pastures.  When you look at our budget support and foreign exchange inflows -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is it, hon. Member, I am sorry.

MR BAMWANGA: Thank you.

5.30
MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  First of all, I would like to register my appreciation for the Committee for having produced a report that is addressing a number of issues that the public has been concerned with.  I would also like to thank Government for having initiated this review process at this time because the Constitution had left some issues inadequately addressed, and others were omitted.  So, the review process has come at a right time.

The product of all these deliberations in Parliament and outside will be a reviewed Constitution, and this reviewed Constitution is going to be measured by the people of this country; and it will be measured on acceptability - how acceptable will it be for the whole country?  Therefore, the process of coming up with a very good reviewed Constitution is equally important.  It should, therefore, be characterized by values as mentioned by our report on page three. The values of harmony during debate, the values of mutual respect, the values of putting national interest above self or any other interests.  

I consulted the people of Bujumba constituency and they sent me to address specific issues and among those issues, the major ones were: One, concerning the size of Parliament.  They agree totally with the Committee that the status quo should remain; the size of the Parliament is adequate.  They have been hearing a number of Members of Parliament and other people debating this issue, especially those people who were advocating for the reducing of the size, and in order to justify their cause, many people have been giving Kalangala as an example because of the small population.  

I want to remind hon. Members and other people who have been using that example, that the people of Bujumba appreciated the wisdom of the delegates of the Constituent Assembly, especially on this matter, who decided to put Article 63(4) in the Constitution, which clearly stipulates the grounds and the formula on which constituencies should be demarcated.  Population quota is just one of the many grounds; other grounds included uniqueness of the geographical features like Kalangala. 

 Another ground in that article is the size of the area, and about the size of the area, the Constitution does not talk about area as land area, but even water area.  So, how big is the area?  Then other ground is the population density and so forth. So, Kalangala really qualifies properly to have the number that they have now.  So, the status quo of the size of Parliament should remain.

The second issue that my constituents told me to advocate for seriously was federalism; and about federalism, the people of Bujumba constituency we debated this matter, and when we debated this matter, the people of Bujumba were clearly aware that federalism is just reduction of powers from the centre and you descend some of the powers nearer to the people at a regional level.  Secondly, the people of Bujumba were clearly aware that federalism does not necessarily mean feudalism.  So, federalism can even work properly in areas that do not have cultural leaders.

The people of Bujumba were clearly aware that federalism is not backward because it is even used in modern democracies.  The people of Bujumba were also aware that federalism is very compliant with modern systems of administration; and they are also aware that federalism is compatible with decentralization, because we have heard a number of people while debating here say, “For us we want decentralization and not federalism,” as if federalism is a substitute of decentralization.  That is not the case; the two are very compatible, and I would like honourable members to support us –(Applause). 

MR KIBANZANGA MBALIBULHA: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving me this opportunity.  In your definition of federalism you did say power from the centre to the region, and right now we have some powers from the centre to the districts. Now with your definition, which power are we going to get from the district back to the region and we get some from the centre to the region?   What powers do you want the centre to give to the region and yet you retain the district powers.  What powers, can I be clarified?

MR BADDA: Thank you very much, hon. Kibanzanga, for that wise question. I am going to lecture this to you –(Laughter)- The powers I am talking about which are going to be descended from the centre are not all the powers that are in the centre but a few of them.  For example, powers concerning regional healthy matters like regional hospitals, the secondary education, the matters of regional roads and so forth- (Applause)- But, hon. Kibanzanga and hon. Members, Madam Speaker  –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have one minute.

MR BADDA: The powers, which are on the district currently are not going to be touched; they are going to stay there– (Applause) - So, hon. members, I urge you that you all support me that we support this arrangement because federalism is the only catalyst for development.

Madam speaker, because time is short, I am going to conclude. I have a number of things but let me conclude about the lifting of term limits.  The people of Kalangala after a long debate, the 60 per cent who accepted that the term limit should be lifted cautioned me that as we lift the term limit, we should make sure that a strong mechanism is put in place to ensure that regular free and fair elections will be conducted so that people can vote in people who will promote the country and vote out freely on their will people who will not be performers. So, that is the position.

Lastly, on one day election of Parliamentary and Presidential, the people of Bujumba said that is too big for one day.  We should elect the President and Members of Parliament on one day and then the local authorities on a separate day.  Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.54
MRS ROSE SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the wonderful job done by the Committee.  My people are in agreement with most of the issues and recommendations in the report.  But, Madam Speaker, because of time I have just picked out a few just to emphasis my peoples concerns. 

As far as dual citizenship is concerned, my people strongly support it but they say it should be granted to only Ugandans, the nationals that this their concern. They do accept the principle of dual citizenship but they emphasize it should be to only nationals and they base their fears on the land problems almost all over the district.

About the change of political system is concerned, majority of our people had failed to understand why we convince them into what they called driving them back to problems of the past.  But after labouring on justification to this cause, they have accepted hoping that it will strengthen democracy.  In other words, they are ready for this change as long as there is civic education.

As a principle decision is based on the majority, Wakiso district having different types of people as you may agree with me, in regard to lifting of term limits, the majority of our people say the power of the vote should be decisive.  My people strongly support the lifting of term limit because if we say the power belongs to the people then we should give them that responsibility. 

However, I would like to wave the fear that any incumbent President may manipulate elections. We should remember that we are in a changing world and our people have been civically educated. We can borrow a leaf from the United Kingdom where Thatcher was liked but time came when Members of her Party realised that she was no longer the right representation for them to lead the country and at the end of the day they dropped her. So, in other words, my people strongly believe that once we lift the terms people will be in position to choose the right President basing on the party.

Let us be convinced that time has come for Uganda to grow politically.  The time has come for us to show that what we think is impossible can actually be possible. Again, I believe, any President will be under the guidance of advisors from his party.  So, Madam Speaker, the issue of dictatorship I believe cannot arise. 

My people strongly disagree with the issue of dissolving Parliament with a fear that it will disorganise the democracy that has been ushered in by this good Government.  In addition, Madam Speaker, it will contradict with the laws of Parliament and Executive as Arms of the Government.  

When it comes to elections of LC I and LC II, my people do not agree with going back to the system of open voting.  People are politically alert and we should know that they might be dangerous.  There is a fear that this will deny many of the freedom to vote the candidate they honestly want.  I can give an example, Madam Speaker, in my constituency where a candidate got only one vote and yet he had a family, he had a wife and children but when the box was opened he had only one vote, which was significant that his family members realized he was not the right candidate.  Now if we are to go back to lining up, people will fear to vote. It will also lead to conflicts and crimes so I believe we should maintain the system of secret voting for LC I and LC II. 

As far as federo is concerned, my people support federo and request for it.  (Applause). However, my people appeal to the Government to continue consultations with the Mengo Government and harmonise positions on federo.  Though my people are in support of federo, they are also aware that issues concerning any change of regional governance is a national issue; it is not only for Buganda.  So, they humbly appeal that Government should sincerely harmonise positions with the Buganda government.  

Madam Speaker, Buganda being so accommodative is not in any way going to antagonize the non-Baganda as some people may fear. On this note, however, I cannot hesitate to thank the Government for being flexible and understanding in as far as its people’s demands are concerned. I have no doubt that this august House will support this issue for further development.

Madam Speaker, my people further request that once regional governance is established, regional land boards, for instance, Buganda Land Board, should be given the opportunity to play the supervisory role on activities of district land boards because of the increased land conflicts.

Madam Speaker, in agreement with the payment for LC 5 chairpersons directly from the centre, my people request that LC 3 chairpersons should also be under the same arrangement because many sub-counties, due to poor tax collections, cannot effectively pay their chairpersons and this demoralizes them.

Finally, Madam Speaker, although this is not in the White Paper, my people have requested me to express their concern to this august House about nude dressing. Much as it is a right and freedom of individuals as it is provided for in the Constitution, they feel it deprives the freedom of others. The people of Wakiso feel that many cases of rape and spread of deadly diseases is a result of nude dressing. So they have requested me, and I would also like to request this august House, to consider Article 23(1)(d). My people strongly request that this august House should consider including in the Constitution the issue of dressing code.  

I would like to thank you very much, Madam speaker.  Although I would have raised so many more issues about my people’s concerns, but these are the few I have actually picked out basing on the time.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE, CULTURE (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who contributed before me in commending the committee for the task well accomplished.  Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to contribute on this very important topic in the land of my birth.

From the onset, Madam Speaker, I agree with the report of the committee on page 3 that our deliberations should be guided by national interest and the common good of our motherland Uganda. As we deliberate, the unity, peace and stability of our country Uganda should be paramount. There are indeed matters we can disagree on. We can disagree on whether there should be term limits, whether we should move from a Movement system of government to multiparty, but there are certain salient factors we cannot afford to disagree on. These are things like security, unity and stability of the country, and the fundamental rights of an individual. 

So, honourable members, as we deliberate, we must agree on those factors that promote common good. In that way, we shall then achieve a free, just, and democratic society.  With those few remarks, I have now the pleasure to present to this august House the views of the people of Bufumbira South, whom I represent in this august House.  

On the change of political systems, I consulted widely in all corners of the constituency and the people of Bufumbira South were really reluctant to change from Movement political system to multiparty system. But because we explained the Kyankwanzi resolutions, the resolutions of the National Conference, they were very convinced, and they are therefore ready and they recommend that we should transit from a Movement Political System to Multiparty Political System.  They believe we should open political space to allow other political parties to organize, campaign and to form political parties. 

On representation in Parliament, this matter was given due consideration in the consultations held with my constituents –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Member for giving way. Could the Member holding the Floor clarify how long that transition would be?

MR BITANGARO: The position of the people of Bufumbira South is that, right away, the Constitution should be amended to pave way for change of political systems from Movement to political parties.  

Representation in Parliament: This matter was given due consideration in the consultations and the people were of the view that the criteria of determining the size of Parliament as it is today should be maintained. It is their view that for better service delivery, each county should be served by one Member of Parliament; and using a clear-cut criteria as is expressed in the Constitution would avoid ills of the past like gerrymandering and would therefore enhance transparency. They therefore recommended that the situation should remain as it is. 

The electoral process: The people of Bufumbira South support the government proposal that the elections for the President, Members of Parliament, and the chairman, LC 5 should be held on the same day to save the national resources. And for the same reason, elections of the lower Councils should be held on a different day, while those of the special groups should also be held on a separate day.  

On term limit, the people of Bufumbira South were unanimous on this issue. They are of the view that Article 105(2) should be amended to lift the term limit. They argued that it was a mistake in the first place for the Constituent Assembly to have included this in our Constitution. The people of Uganda should have an unfettered liberty and freedom to choose who should lead them as President and for how long. So, it is the position of the people of Bufumbira South that this Article should be amended.

On the issue of dual citizenship, the people of Bufumbira South –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if he does not want to yield, I cannot force him.

MR BITANGARO: They have no problem with a citizen of Uganda acquiring duel citizenship and they indeed support both the government and committee reports on the subject. 

On the issue of cultural institutions, the Bafumbira are by tradition and history republicans, but they have co-existed peacefully with other communities and respect cultures of other communities. They recommended that where applicable, should recognize traditional or cultural leaders while they exist.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, if we go by the accord of Parliament, is it not saddening for a whole Minister of Government to refuse to heed to a point of clarification from a Back Bencher?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, hon. Member, the hon. Member informed you that he is reporting from his Constituency of Bufumbira South. Let him tell us what happened in Bufumbira South, not in the Cabinet.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Order, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, you have ten minutes each; why don’t you allow another Member to speak?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, we agreed when we started to debate this important debate that it is at the discretion of the Member to allow information, clarification or not to allow it. Is hon. Lukyamuzi, having been here since we started, in order to rise on a point of procedure or on a matter he is well versed with?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Hon. Lukyamuzi is out of order; the procedure has been set and agreed upon.

MR BITANGARO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. On the issue of cultural institution, they recommended that there should be recognized traditional or cultural leaders where they exist.  They further recommended –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, you have one minute.

MR BITANGARO: They further recommended that the welfare and sustenance of a traditional leader should be the burden of the community that wishes to have that traditional leader.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of death penalty, it is the view of the people of Bufumbira South that this should be maintained in our Constitution and on our Statute books. 

On decentralization, the system of decentralization should be encouraged and strengthened. The autonomy of Local Governments should be maintained and effectively capacitated to improve efficiency.

On national language, they are unanimous on this point that Kishwahili should be adopted as a national language. 

Madam Speaker and fellow Members of Parliament, as I take leave of this debate, I once again wish to emphasize that this debate should be guided by national interests and the common good of Uganda.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.12
MR NELSON GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you Madam Speaker and welcome you from Kaliro, to see how poor the people of Kaliro are.  

Allow me Madam Speaker, to thank you and your colleague, hon. Edward Ssekandi, for communicating my constant noise on this Floor to the Prime Minister and eventually to the President that the people of Kaliro really need a district to make us part of Uganda. Anybody who denies us that is telling us that we are not part of Uganda. We thank you very much for doing that –(Mr Ekanya rose_) You know time is very little; you will just excuse me.  

I will go straight to the matter on the Floor, the White Paper. I consulted with the people of Bulamogi and the first question they asked me was about the district, and I told them it was coming.  Therefore, I must thank you and request my colleagues in Parliament that it is very important for you to take seriously the issue of decentralization for some of the people in the country who are not yet enjoying the fruits of decentralization to allow them to do so, especially like that of Kaliro. 

I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to my colleagues to take this issue seriously; it is not a joke. You have seen it yourself, Madam Speaker. You even persuaded the people that it is an issue, which must be taken seriously, and I thank you colleagues for encouraging me to disturb you. But I would like you finally to allow me what you said you were really going to do, that is, to eventually recognize Kaliro a district. 

The issue of omnibus when eventually we are following a referendum: I think it is very important for the sake of time to have a bill, which will eventually change the Constitution once and we go on permanently with a new Constitution. 

On the issue of lifting the term limit, this is a very serious issue. I think it was debated in the Constituent Assembly and it was really a debate between presidential and parliamentary democracy.  Eventually, the Constitution came out and the Constituent Assembly was not firm enough to do what the USA did, to peg the issue of changing term limits to the presidency who takes it in future.  Since also the Constituent Assembly did not do it, it is clear in this Constitution that the issue of 105(2) left it open and I think it was left open for a reason that if we do not leave it open, it will cause us problems. 

Therefore, my constituency says, they would like the terms to be lifted, because actually even the Constituent Assembly, which took a whole year, also did not do it and the performance so far of the Movement is okay and even any party, which comes to power, should not be fettered. We should leave it clear that if DP or UPC or FDC eventually comes to power, they should have a leeway to move forward so that they govern us with a free hand. 

So my constituents have authorized me, Madam Speaker, to articulate this issue; that the terms should be lifted to allow all governments, which will come in the future to have a free day; if they are popular they will be allowed to come on, if they are not popular they should be told that, “You are not popular, therefore we are not voting you.”

On dissolving Parliament, my constituents were very emphatic that they voted the President on his own terms and they voted the LC 5 on his own terms.  The Parliament has been put in as a check; therefore, there is no need for anybody to tamper with powers of Parliament. They emphatically say the Parliament should be left to do its oversight role as a third leg. 

Moreover, they said that if we start encouraging removing the second leg, and you leave only the Judiciary and the Presidency, you will end up with one leg, that is, the Judiciary, and the pot will not be cooked; it will collapse. Therefore they insist that the three legs must be left in place so that the government functions as per the request of our constituents. That is something you do about dissolving Parliament, they are emphatically against anything of that nature.  

Another method, if a crisis between the Executive and Parliament arises, it should be maybe by way of referendum, but certainly not dissolving Parliament because if they dissolve Parliament, they will keep on doing it; they might elect four or five times and yet we said it is expensive.  So, any time they dissolve Parliament because there is a crisis, you might find you vote three or four times a year, which is too expensive for this type of republic.

The other issue is Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) or Chief Financial Officer (CFO). My constituents know the complications and the levels of corruption of these officers, so they accept the proposals in the White Paper that the Chief Administrative Officer should be re-centralized and monitored from the centre because at the moment there is no money being collected in local governments, all the money comes from the centre. So, I think the centre should have a say in what is going on with that money; both the Chief Administrative Officers and Chief Financial Officer. 

Moreover, even Government policies are originating from Parliament and the Executive. Therefore, I think it is very important for the one who pays the piper to call the tune, and that is the way we think that the Chief Administrative Officer should be.  

Opening up of parties: The population is not yet very comfortable about opening up parties, but they have realized that it is necessary to do it and they have accepted on the conviction, which has been sold by the Movement, that it is very important to allow competitive politics, therefore they have agreed. So, I urge my friends in parties that let us work together to sell this idea and we open so that the whole world knows that, in this country power politics is competitive. So my constituents have allowed me, that if a vote comes on this Floor, I will vote that the parties should be allowed a free day in this House.

Regional tier: Since 11th is Kyabazinga day, certainly I have been mandated to stand here and say that a regional tier is a good thing; it is not negative, it is positive because it can become very economical, it can also help in organizing society.  I thank you for according me the opportunity, but I take this opportunity to invite all Members of Parliament on 11th to come for Kyabazinga’s day; especially those from those areas, which have got Kingdoms, who know the value of what a regional tier is all about.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.18
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the good work, which was well researched, well balanced, and for the good report. I am here, Madam Speaker, also to remind the colleagues here that some of us who are here were involved in the Constitution making exercise, and the Constitution we made was made by great people and it has been a superb document, which has helped us to be in this House.  

Madam Speaker, this Constitution brought about fundamental issues, revolutionary issues, and one of them is the ushering in a unique democratic approach by handing over power to the people.

The second issue was the revolutionary approach concerning land. Land was given to the citizens of Uganda and therefore, Madam Speaker, because of these fundamental issues I would like to talk on behalf of the people of Fort Portal Municipality.

One of the issues, which we discussed when I met the people of Fort Portal Municipality was concerning land. The people of Fort Portal Municipality feel that land should not be given away to investors. This land should be bought by investors, after all they said people like Mukwano have bought big chunks of land all over the place and they have been able to invest; what about other investors who come? Unless they are quack investors, then that is how they can acquire land, but any person coming to invest here in the country puts in their calculations, in their planning, the issue of land. Therefore, the people are saying no one should tamper with their land, but Government either should buy the land for the investors or the investors should buy the land.

Madam Speaker, another issue, which we discussed with the people of Fort Portal Municipality was concerning the issue of lifting the term limit.  The majority of the people of Fort Portal Municipality agree that the term limit should be lifted because if a person has performed very well, why doesn’t he continue if the people so wish? Why should they be limited by the Constitution? After all we are now revising the Constitution, if the people accept that the term limit should be lifted, then it should be lifted. 

Therefore, the people of Fort Portal Municipality are saying emphatically that - Of course people are saying that the lifting of the term limit is being tagged to His Excellency, the President. To a certain extent, yes, but we are saying now, even if another good person comes, the lifting of the term limit should help him to continue ruling; if there are bad ones as you are saying, the people will decide through the ballot box.  

Madam Speaker, another issue was in connection with going into pluralism. This one is a problem to the people; they do not understand why we are going in for multipartism, to pluralism. But after discussing these issues, that the modern trend is to go multiparty - in the whole world they are saying democracy, according to them, is based on multipartism, on pluralism. Well, people accepted that, okay, let us go pluralism; let us allow a few people, those who feel they are conscripted like my colleague here can go to their parties.  But they are saying, all in all, that for them at least 98 percent they will go to NRM/O, which is emanating from the Movement System of governance. 

So although the people of Fort Portal municipality have accepted that we should go multi-partism, that Uganda should be a pluralist country, they are at the same time saying they will be behind a party, which has got a vision.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Army getting involved into politics or coming to Parliament, the people of Fort Portal Municipality are saying this would send a wrong message, although it has been good under this system. But when we come to multi-party, then the Army should be left out of politics. They should go back to the barracks. If they resign then that is when they should be allowed to join politics as some people have already done.

On the issue of cultural leaders, the people of Fort Portal Municipality and Kabalore as a whole, are hailing the Movement Government for having restored the institution of cultural leaders, but they are saying that the Article concerning cultural leaders should be operationalised because, now there is preferential treatment between the Kabaka of Buganda and our Omukama. Here you find the Government favouring Buganda, then sometimes for us we get some little money or chicken feed.  

So, we are saying that that Article should be operationalised so that we can have equal treatment. But they are not concerned about federo too much but the regional tier, which is different from federo is acceptable. That we can combine our efforts with other districts for the sake of development and then develop as a region but not this question of federo.  

The people of Fort Portal Municipality, on the issue of language, are saying actually we have English as a national language but we should also have Kiswahili because it is spoken all over East Africa – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wind up.  

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, as I wind up I would like to say that the people of Fort Portal Municipality are saying that Kiswahili should be another lingo franca so that we can also join the rest of the people of East Africa to speak the same language. So that when we have one Government then we shall be able to operate effectively together as a region. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.27
MR KADDUNABBI  LUBEGA (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the job well done. My people in Butambala fully support federo governance and they support it with one Council and not a regional tier. They say wide consultations have been made about this federo and there are statistics to show that the people of Butambala and the people of Buganda have been consistent in demanding for federo.

Madam Speaker, at first I was of the view that Constituent Assembly might have done a bad job.  Actually, when I read the report, the reasons which given by Government as to why we need to do constitutional amendment is because there were some defects and some things which were left out in the 1995 Constitution.

The second reason, the people of Buganda or some people have been demanding for federo. In the Odoki report, Madam Speaker, more than 90 percent of the people of Buganda demanded for federo. Sixty eight percent of the people of Uganda demanded for federo. I am comforted by Article 1 of the Constitution, which says that power belongs to the people. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, if truly power belongs to the people, which other evidence do we need to give these 68 and 98 percent people who want federo?  

Madam Speaker, experience is not what happens to you but what you do with what happens to you. If this Parliament does the same mistake as the Constituent Assembly did, to ignore the people who are consistently demanding federo, we shall not have solved the problem. We shall not have learnt from the problems of ignoring, if you say that we leave it out. I urge my colleagues to fully support the people who are demanding for federo because there are clearly laid down ways of how we want it to operate.

Two, Madam Speaker, some people have been worried that when we talk of federo we are talking of Kabaka being the head being involved in politics; this is not true. In the consultations which have been going on between Government and the Mengo establishment, there have been some proposals which are clearly showing what Mengo would want to be done under federo arrangement and even which powers should go to the regions for those who want it. If that information is availed – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way.  The point Hon. Kaddunabbi is articulating is so important that there are some living examples worldwide, which we should relate to the case of Uganda. As I speak now, Malaysia is a federal Government, it has five kingdom areas amicably living with nine non-kingdom areas and it is an economic fantasy. So, we should not give an impression that where you have kingdoms and you have institutions you just kill them.  Harness what is harnessable so that you do not minimize institutional behaviour.  

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you for that information.  Madam Speaker, about Kampala being out of Buganda, this is a historical fact. Even if we put it in the Constitution or not, Kampala is found in Buganda.  Let us rectify it, if you are doing the rectification; let us put the record straight and put Kampala where it belongs. Otherwise if it does not belong to Buganda, where else does it belong?

Madam Speaker, on page 19, the committee said that we should hold the presidential, parliamentary and Local Council 5 elections on the same day. My people are of the view that we hold presidential and parliamentary on the same day, and we hold all Local Council elections on a different day because parliamentary and presidential have a five-year term and Local Councils have a four-year term; let us separate the two and we move forward.  

On page 52, Madam Speaker, the committee talks of secret voting when we are changing the Constitution and was of the view that we do open voting. My people are saying that to avoid intimidation of other governments, which might come in - We are lucky today you might not be intimidated and you might stand up and say whatever you want, but those other governments, which might come in, might intimidate the Members of Parliament and force them to change the Constitution the way they want it. They are saying, let us maintain secret voting in Parliament.

On page 22, the committee recommends that when you go to contest the primaries and lose, you should not come as an independent candidate. My people and I are against that because when you lose, there are so many reasons why you might have lost. One of them might be because of being sidelined or being unfairly treated, and the only fair treatment you can get to show that you are popular, to show that you are the person of the people, is to go to the people themselves and they vote you.  

Madam Speaker, I do not know why this is a problem, because you are talking of two different units, the electoral college and then going to the people and they decide. Power belongs to the people; nobody should be stopped from standing as an independent candidate at any level if he feels unfairly treated.

About the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and the proposal to remove the powers of being Accounting Officer, we strongly believe that if a CAO is not an accounting officer, then there is no reason why he should not be appointed by the District Service Commission, because the only problem was coming in because of money. If you remove money out of the CAO’s office, then you do not need to appoint him or her from the centre.  

Madam Speaker, about national language, my people say it should be a local language because Swahili is a regional language.

About Banyarwanda being in the Constitution, I just want to be educated whether Banyarwanda is a tribe per se, or the tribe should be Tutsi, Hutu or Twa. I think if we put Banyarwanda we are missing the point, and in Rwanda you might not find that tribe called Banyarwanda.  

The size of Parliament -(Interruption)

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Kaddunabbi, the Banyarwanda are already there in the Constitution as an ethnic group in Uganda. So, there is no way the committee –(Interjection)- unless you are questioning the Constitution, not the committee’s report.

MR KADDUNABBI: We are changing the Constitution; if we made a mistake in 1995, we should correct it now.  

Madam Speaker, about the size of Parliament, we should have the Kadhi courts in order to have no problems with the Domestic Relations Bill.  

6.38
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the work they have done. I attended some of their meetings and I realized that they made a lot of consultations and their discussions were very frank. 

However, I feel that it is now our responsibility as Members of Parliament who represent the people to analyse these recommendations and see what the best way to go about it is. I feel there are many suggestions to be acted on in the Constitution and as representatives of the people we shall not have enough time to educate them so that they really understand what an amendment of the Constitution is.  

When I listen to some of my colleagues here saying what they found in their constituencies, the impression I get is that the people have not really understood what amending the Constitution is and are acting on excitement. Indeed my colleagues in the House are acting on excitement without really analysing and finding out how we need to amend the Constitution.  

I will go to Article 105, “Ekisanja;” lifting the term limitations of the presidency. Ten years for somebody to lead this nation is enough. The present President has been there for 20 years -(Interruption)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to underrate the capacity of our people to understand what it means to amend the Constitution, when the Constitutional Review Commission went around educating the people and collecting their views? Is he really in order to underrate the capacity of our people to understand?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the power to amend the Constitution is within the Constitution. So, it is not a question of being confused; it is provided for. 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  We have never amended the Constitution in this country; this is the first time we are doing it.  When did you amend the Constitution? So, Madam Speaker, this is the first time we are making a major amendment of the Constitution, and we have to do it when we are really well informed, and when we are making decisions based on reason, not excitement. 

There are people who like this President and they are putting him forward, and then they want to change the Constitution with this President on the pedestal. They are not changing the Constitution or amending the Constitution so that it can stand forever and ever, that is what we want to do. If we amend the Constitution, let it apply to President Museveni or someone like the President Amin who comes in future. That is what we have to keep in mind. (Interruptions)

MR AACHILLA: Madam Speaker, the Member has continued deliberating on redundancies, exposing the citizens of this country as being ignorant, not capable of deciding their own destiny, not capable of knowing how to decide the leadership of this country and having no capacity - in fact rendering the citizens of this country senseless and useless. He goes ahead to deliberate that even the Members of Parliament and this Parliament has continued discussing these things out of excitement, underrating the capability and the capacity of the Members to handle this Constitution. 

More so, under rating Article 1 of the Constitution, which states that all power belongs to the people who shall exercise the sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution, the sovereignty, which was exposed clearly under the various elections we have had in this country.  I do not need to mention 1996, 2001.  Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to continue deliberating on redundancies, which expose this Parliament as being incapable?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I listened the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee when he was presenting the report, and I think there was no evaluation of the capacity of Members of Parliament. Therefore, I do not see if there has been a term of reference, which you took to Butebo. Can you tell us what you and people of Butebo said about the White Paper? I do not think the people of Butebo evaluated Members and concluded that they are confused.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I think you heard, Member of Parliament. For every reason when you use those words, I have a reason to be concerned, but I will not follow that line any more. I will go to what the people of feel.  

The people of Butebo feel - but at the same time I am a Ugandan, I have to evaluate areas of Uganda and see, I represent the whole of Uganda.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank Dr Mallinga for giving way.  The issues advanced by Dr Malinga are pertinent; he should not just be forced to jump away from those realities on the Constitution –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, at the beginning of this debate, I think we agreed that we are going to be civilized in our conduct of the debate; we are going to be polite to one another and tolerate with one another. So I am not going to accept a situation where a Member of Parliament declares that others are confused, they do not understand, no, no. We agreed in the beginning how to debate this matter. So please, tell us what happened in Butebo, leave evaluation of the Members to me and other people.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, the people of Butebo, after serious discussion and understanding do not want to lift Article 105. They want the presidency to be limited to two terms, period. That is enough period for someone to lead the country if they want, and the people of Butebo have found weaknesses. We have been sidelined as far as development is concerned. So why should we continue with the same government?

Madam Speaker, we cannot say that Uganda can be isolated from democracy. We cannot have democracy under the present system. There is this word, which I think is misused, where we say, there is Movement democracy. There is no such a thing as Movement democracy; look it up in the dictionaries. There is democracy and under democracy, you have a choice.  If we are going to advance and develop, we must emulate countries, which have developed. No country has ever developed under dictatorship or a one-party system; it is under democracy that countries have developed. China has never developed so do not waste your time on that one.

The question of land: I think my friends have mentioned that and the feeling in Butebo is also that land belongs to the people and the land should remain with the people, it is the only thing they own in this country. If someone wants to acquire that land, he should appeal to the people or go to the people to acquire it. After all, we are saying; power belongs to the people. How do we say power belongs to the people and then we take away land from them? So land should remain in the hands of the people.  

Special interest groups: It is an irony for us to call it a Movement type democracy and then sort of we draft the military to come into Parliament; it has its own weaknesses. First of all, the military should be neutral; they should be willing to serve under any government. Their duty is to protect the people of this country and the boundaries of this country, not to take part in politics. We have made the military part of our political system; the military should not be here.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  One minute.

DR MALLINGA: I had quite a bit of consultation and discussion with the people as far as the special interest groups are concerned. What we have done in our system is to make the interest groups part of the political system. In other words, we have politicised the special interest groups by bringing them into Parliament. That we should not have done.  These are the political issues.  

The status of women is a political issue, the status of the disabled is a political issue, the Workers status is the foundation of politics. 

MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO: Madam Speaker, can I be educated by the Member on the Floor whether he is really right to tell us that the workers, the disabled and women are political whatever and we are now trying to politicise them? How many times has the UPC government, since it came to power that ever considered these interest groups to come aboard the political arena? I do not understand; you are not in order at all! (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has made a ruling.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I think I will wind up.  But you can see, I am not going to comment on that.

Madam Speaker, the question of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC): The CAO should be a civil servant from the Central Government to deal with issues we have discovered at the districts and an RDC should be a civil servant, not a political agent at the district level. They should be like the district commissioners used to be. They oversaw the development projects of the Central Government at the –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

6.52
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the committee for the job well done and to call upon Members of Parliament to take this job and the recommendations herein very seriously. 

Madam Speaker, when you are given the task of making or re-making a Constitution as we have, that is a great burden you carry because the fate of this country will be upon you. If you carry out this job selflessly with devotion, we are sure to have democracy, we are sure to have peace. If we choose to be selfish, myopic in our approach, and to be driven by sectarian considerations, we are preparing this country for disaster. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to request that my colleagues take this advice very seriously. Because of these considerations, the committee has come up with various recommendations, which I support very strongly. The committee, having listed purposes for a Constitution, having looked at the historical perspective, have recommended that the Constitution should remain supreme above popular perversities because it is very important to avoid a situation where the regimes in power manipulate the population and referendum to ensure that they remain in power; 

that the Presidency should not be given any power to dissolve Parliament so that we do not stand intimidated in this Parliament; 

that there should remain separation of power between the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary; 

that we should now move back from the one-party state under the Movement System to a multiparty system; 

that we should hold elections of the presidency and Parliament on the same day. 

I also add my voice; the election of the chairperson, LC5 of the district should be on a separate day. Madam Speaker, I urge the Government to accept these recommendations, which have been made on our behalf after a serious study, after a serious interface with various groups and stakeholders with the committee.

Madam Speaker, on the vexed question of the third term, I wish we could be sober and less excited because then I am sure we would come out with what is required and most appropriate for this country.  Madam Speaker, various arguments have been given for and against; I want to look at a few of those arguments, which have been given for it. 

It has been argued that term limits will violate the right of somebody to stand as many terms as he wished. It may be true but, Madam Speaker, some of us who argue in this manner will also stand on the Floor of this Parliament and say, “If you do not qualify, if you do not have “A” level qualification, you should not come to this Parliament.” But certain countries continue to have death penalty, even though the right to life is a fundamental right. It is important for certain rights to be prescribed because of the good of the society. Right can never absolute, I did not agree with this argument.  

Some people argue that President Museveni has to be rewarded by a good job well done. I am one of those to accept he has done a good job in difficult circumstances. But, Madam Speaker, if this was the way states were run, how many times would Nelson Mandela have to stand to serve South Africa? How many times would Nyerere have stood to serve in Tanzania? Then in that case, what do we do for people like Eriya Kategaya, Mugisha Muntu, who served with decision in this country? Do we also give them additional terms? Madam Speaker, these are important issues; we should not be selective when we are considering what is important for this country.  

There are those who argue that it is only President Museveni who can lead this country. Madam Speaker, this argument is out of either ignorance or dishonesty. In 1980 the people of Nyabushozi voted off President Museveni and they choose hon. Sam Kutesa above him, but Movementists can now argue that this was a big mistake and I think Museveni has accredited himself. It is therefore important to know that, it is until you have been given power that you can show your own capability. So this argument, Madam Speaker, is fallacious. 

As a person, I see my colleague there, hon. Dr. Kiyonga, a very capable man, why don’t we think about him?  Why don’t we think about hon. Amama Mbabazi, who has been leading the queue of leadership very competently? Why don’t we talk about other people like hon. Gilbert Bukenya, who can –(Interruption)

MS NUSURA TIPERU: Thank you very much. Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to discuss individuals instead of discussing the merits and demerits of term limits? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you see this argument has been moving back and forth, but I think you should confine yourself to the White Paper and the recommendations of the Sempebwa Commission, because some of those people - I may want to know from them whether they want to be given a term and they are not in this House.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I would not wish to contradict your ruling, but I have great respect and admiration for the persons I have mentioned.  

Madam Speaker, then there is this important argument that term limits deny Ugandans an opportunity to exercise their sovereignty. Madam Speaker, in 1994 the people of Uganda elected a Constituent Assembly (CA) putting into effect their sovereignty; and the CA on behalf of the people of Uganda made a Constitution, and in this Constitution these term limits were provided. 

In a minority position report, which we have, in fact the people Uganda, when the Constitutional Review Commission (CRC) went to them, most of them preferred that the term limit should remain. You remember that this term limit came after more or less when the Commission was finishing its work.  Now, we are saying this must be changed because the people want to exercise their sovereignty. But the argument I am advancing is, at that time they had decided on their own; it was their decision.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it will not be appropriate that every time a major decision like on this third term should be changed, because when you make a constitutional decision, you agree on the rules, you agree on the procedures, you agree on a number of issues. In this particular case, among the issues which we agreed were checks and balances, controls and so on, and the term limit was one of those most important issues which was agreed to, bearing in mind our historical factors.

Madam Speaker, this is a very important point. Let us not take issues lightly. The point is that the issues, which were considered important for bringing in the term limits, have not ended.  Members of Parliament have argued on the Floor of this Parliament and I want to repeat it, because I think it is important that it is very difficult in a third world country more so in Africa for us to argue and say people will decide in a free and fair election.

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR ANANG ODUR: It is actually erroneous; it is pretentious. In many of the African countries, it is difficult to get a free and fair election. In Uganda, it is going to take a long time to conduct a free and fair election. In the report, which is on the Floor of this Parliament, we found that in 1980 the incidence of election violence actually is on increase. Madam Speaker, there is nothing to convince me that it is otherwise. That being the case, this provision would be a good pointer to renew society.  Madam Speaker, if we can be able to renew leadership and society, then you are bound to have peace. You can make sure that people are able to appreciate that we can wait even if we are not happy. But if that opportunity is not there, Madam Speaker, we are laying a foundation for instability, because that is what we are going to have. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for your contributions; we shall complete this debate tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. sharp tomorrow. (Interjection)- Well, the Cabinet will find us.

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 February at 2.00 p.m.)

