Thursday 1st February, 2001

Parliament met at 3.10p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala,

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, if there are other Members within the lobby, I request them to come into the Chamber so that we can proceed with Business uninterrupted. You will recall that by the time we adjourned, there was a motion on the Floor to recommit Schedule Two of the Bill. In particular, it had to do with an amendment, which this House asked relating to the inclusion of another medal on the list of the military medals, which appear on the Schedule. That is the “Order of Lukaya” – was it the “Order of Lukaya” that you asked? That was the one. I will, therefore, call upon the Mover of the motion for recommitting that Schedule to talk to his motion.

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: To the best of my recollection, that motion was not seconded by anybody yesterday. 

THE SPEAKER: Was the motion seconded or not?

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, as far as I can recall, the motion had support from some of us -(Interruptions)- and I even stand here to second it.

MR.PINTO: The Speaker asked a very simple question. Was the motion seconded? All we want to know is that so and so seconded the motion. I think it is improper for hon. Toskin to rise now as if he wants to second today the motion of yesterday (Laughter.). So, if it was seconded, let us know by whom and the Hansard should have that record that so and so seconded it, then we proceed. Otherwise I am afraid the motion collapses.  

THE SPEAKER: Was the motion seconded? Right, it was seconded. Can you speak to your motion?

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, to put our minds at rest, I request that the record should be verified that the motion was actually seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a very simple question. Was the motion seconded?

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Yes Mr. Speaker, Kabakumba Masiko seconded the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE (Army Representative): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I raised this motion knowing that we are laying a foundation of this country and we are putting in place fundamental landmarks as legislators. One of them is awarding medals to those who perform exceptionally, meritoriously and heroically to promote patriotism for this country. 

If you look at the medals for the military honours, you will see that none of them refers to a particular battle because they fall into categories. There are two categories for which military medals are given. One category is overall participation; when people participate in a group, in units and they accomplish a mission. The second category is of individual performance within the overall participation in a particular battle, in different battles or a campaign. Individual performance depends on the degree of courage and heroism.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor. He said we are setting examples in awarding these honours based on battle lines, which were fought basically between Ugandans. Are we really charting the correct line so that in the future we may encourage such battles between Ugandans so that we can then distinguish who performed well in killing each other?

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, the clarification I can give to him is that in the world, there are two permanent battles, of good people and good things against the bad.  There is a constant battle. We would like to recognise Ugandans who stand on the side of the good for the people of Uganda against the side of the bad against the people of Uganda. 

I would now like to continue with my motion and I do not entertain other clarifications as of now. I said the two groupings of the already passed medals in the Bill are, medals, which cover overall participation in a given period which are Kagera medal for the period between 1971 and 1979 and Luwero Triangle medal for the period between 1981 and 1986. All who participated in these periods are eligible in this Bill to get those medals in recognition of their contribution in the liberation struggle of Uganda.  

The second grouping is of medals given to individuals because of their individual performance and these are not limited to time. Individual performance is not limited to time, is not limited to a particular battle, neither is it limited to a unit of participation. Any Ugandan in the past, present and future is eligible as long as he or she falls in the description. And these are the other medals: the “Order of Katonga”, “Kabalega Star”, “Rwenzori Star”, “Masaba Medal”, “Damu Medal” and “Kyoga Medal”. 

The individual medals can even be got many times (Interruption.).

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure so that I can get clarification whether the hon. Member is arguing as to why this matter should be recommitted, not on the merits and types of medals which are being awarded. Can he explain why the motion, which was passed, should be recommitted? I thank you. 

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Yes, I will give the clarification –(Interruption)

MR.NYAI: I am seeking a procedural clarification from the Speaker and not from the hon. Member holding the Floor.  Mr. Speaker, I was asking for guidance from you; that if he is moving for a recommittal, can he give reasons why that motion should be recommitted, not the merits of the various medals and honours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think, the hon. Member was trying to give a background to why he thinks the House should re-visit the issue of a particular medal which was inserted by way of amendment, and I think he was making references to various medals and how they are awarded. Can you be expeditious?

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I was saying that these individual medals could be got many times depending on one’s performance. One could get a medal for having performed very well at Kagera, he could get another for either having performed at Mutukula, Kikagati, Mbarara, Masaka, Lukaya, Kampala, Koboko, Kabamba, Masindi and so on, as long as he performed exceptionally well. 

The group of people hon. Col. Omaria would like to recognise and cover are either covered in the Kagera medal or in the individual performance medals that I have talked about. It should therefore, be understood that when we are taking about the background of the 1979 war, there were three fronts. There was the central axis of Kikos Malum, the western axis of FRONASA, and the one of Kisumu, which tried to go through the lake. 

Different battles cannot be given specific medals because choosing one particular battle field would make it a precedent that all others would demand for a particular medal. It has also taken a long time for analysing, studying, considering, looking at the different aspects and possibilities of what type of medals we could give to our people, and we have studied other countries on how they have done it. When it comes to defining, that is where I would like further information from hon. Omaria. You need to define what category of people you would like to give a medal. And it needs time to study this definition it by the Army, by Government to see how it relates to all the other categories that have already taken care of all the other medals already passed, which have taken care of everybody. You will have to take time to see how it relates to all these other medals, and it requires these organs to come with more information. 

The reason why I had to recommit this is because I thought people did not have enough information about these medals. Having had the opportunity to participate for three years now under the chairmanship of the Commander in Chief and President of the Republic of Uganda, a lot of effort has gone into this, which I think we should study further. Unfortunately, Article 30 of the Bill, which was raised by the chairman of the Committee yesterday, provides that while we have finished deciding on this Bill, the President and his committee are free to look at all the new concerns. And if there is need to bring a new medal, it can be raised. You would achieve two things; first, you would have passed this Bill today, and you would have allowed more ideas. Because I hope there are more ideas, which will be coming, discussed, studied thoroughly and always being brought here for final confirmation without having to rush through. That is the main reason why I thought it would be recommitted. And I appeal to Members that this is a fundamental thing that we should not just do because we are many. Let us do it consciously; that is how we shall move properly. I beg to move, Mr. Speaker. 

MS.KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mine is a little appeal to hon. Members that if not for anything, let us recommit this Article for purposes of defining the Lukaya Medal. As it is now in the Bill, we just mentioned that let there be Lukaya Medal but what is it. For purposes of describing it and giving the type of people and the time frame about the Lukaya Medal, we should really recommit this Clause. I really beg hon. Members to agree that we recommit this Clause. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I implore you that we recommit this motion so that, as the hon. Member for Masindi said, we define what the “Lukaya Medal” is. When we have defined it, it will be possible for the serving members of the UPDF, for the people who have passed away, and for the future generations to aspire to qualify for the “Order of Lukaya”. 

Otherwise, as it is, how can I, an individual serving the UPDF, qualify for the “Order of Lukaya”? What is it? The other Orders like the “Order of Katonga” have been very well defined. It is in the text. If you may allow me, I can read the definition of the “Order of Katonga” so that everybody can aspire to get it. I can read the definition for the other Medals, Mr. Speaker.  

Based on the studies done, I just want to read the definition of the “Order of Katonga” so that Ugandans living, dead and those yet to be born can aspire to win this medal.

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you. The hon. Member holding the Floor is going to read a definition. Could he tell us from where he is reading it? I have the Bill and I want to know where he is reading it. I thank you.

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Mr. Speaker, in the Committee’s report, the definitions of these Orders and Medals were given as the Chairman of the Committee can precisely inform the Members. It is in the report of the Committee so that when we adopt the report of the Committee and pass these laws, we really know what we are talking about.

THE SPEAKER: Are you referring to Schedule Two?

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Schedule Two carries the definition. Is that what you are referring to?

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed please.

MAJ.KATIRIMA: So, Mr. Speaker, I was just going to read the definition of the “Order of Katonga”.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, proceed if it is the one we have. Hon. Member, you are referring to Schedule Two. That is what we are discussing.

MAJ.KATIRIMA: So, Mr. Speaker, the Members should be very clear about the definition -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What I have said is, proceed to read it, you are making reference. You want to read a definition, proceed to read it. You have the Bill?

MAJ.KATIRIMA: The definition was given in the Committee’s report.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but do you have the Bill? Schedule 2(2)?

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You wanted to read the definition of the “Order of Katonga”?  

MAJ.KATIRIMA: The definition of the Order of Katonga.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.  Hon. Member, you are debating in favour of recommittal and that recommittal refers to Schedule Two of the Bill. You are saying, for example, you would like to read the definition of the Order of Katonga and we take it that your source of the definition is from the Bill and that is why I am saying, do you have the Bill? Proceed to read that portion.

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Mr. Speaker, the definition is given in the Committee’s report.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the Committee’s report and the amendments resulting therefrom is what I am looking at and that is where the definitions are or you want to use some other -(Interruption)

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, the information I want to give is that the Minister here yesterday in his presentation read those definitions and if he wanted, he could refer to the one the Minister read and I think he has it.

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Mr. Speaker, “The Order of Katonga shall be the highest and most rarely awarded military decoration of the Republic of Uganda for rewarding individual extraordinary instances of heroism in the army. The instances referred to are those that involve voluntary acceptance of additional danger beyond the normal call of duty at risk of life.” That is the definition of the “Order of Katonga” and every time it is presented, the citation shall clearly indicate the reasons for the award. The Order may be awarded to an individual more than once on different occasions and apart from the Order awarded on the very first time, a bar attached to the ribbon by which the Order is suspended shall record each subsequent award.  

This shows that if an individual today performed over and above the normal call of duty and would otherwise not be punished for not having done that task, he can be considered for the award. For example, if there was fire in an ammunition dump and without getting orders from anyone, I, Major Katirima, pick up the fire extinguisher and go to the ammunition dump to extinguish the fire at great risk to my life. I could live; I could die there.  That single act can be considered for award of the “Order of Katonga” and if I qualify, I get it. 

In the case of the Lukaya Medal, how can Major Katirima aspire to get that Order unless this House defines it? That is the very reason I want to request the House to come back and define this Order.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I wish to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor. I have listened very intently to his example that should there be a fire and he took up a fire extinguisher to douse that fire, that such an action could be recognised for this kind of award. I want to make a distinction. Is this, as we see here, the Order of Katonga in the performance of military duties, or would it also apply elsewhere? In the Order here, I see that military honours are restricted to military services only. Therefore, the services rendered by civilians like fighting fire or rescuing people from the river or going to Karuma Falls to rescue people, would not qualify for the “Order of Katonga”. Could he clarify to me because I am getting confused?

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Mr. Speaker, Schedule 2(1) talks about civilian decorations and medals and number four of the civilian medals talks of the distinguished order of the crested crane classes one to four. It says that there will be five classes that will be awarded to people who have distinguished themselves in leadership and service both public and private. I think if the fire brigade performed so excellently they could be considered under this part of Schedule Two. 

On the other hand, in Part Two we are talking of military decorations and medals strictly for the military in the performance of military work either in the field or even in the camp. And if somebody performed over and above the normal call of duty at great risk to his life, such a person could be considered for the award of the “Order of Katonga”. If he qualifies as an individual he would get it. So, in that context, if somebody has to qualify for the “Order of Lukaya” what must he or she have? This is why I think we need to revisit it and give a definition. Once that division is adopted, then living Ugandans and those who have passed away and those yet to be born can aspire to get it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I suggest that you come to your concluding remarks; I think you have made your point.  Your point is that yesterday the amendment included the “Order of Lukaya”, but what is it? And you are saying that it is for that reason you would like –(Interruption)

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Mr. Speaker, I want to submit that research had been done to cover every area where an individual would qualify to get a medal either for participation or excelling as an individual in any battle, campaign, or any given war situation. People who would perform so excellently above the normal call of duty would be given the “Order of Katonga” and the orders and medals progressively go downwards to the person who would get the lowest like the “Masaba Star” for individual performance. For general participation, an individual would either get the “Luwero Triangle Medal” for having been in Luwero or would get the “Kagera Medal” for having participated in the anti-Amin war or would get the “Kyoga Medal” for having participated in the counter-insurgency war since 1986. But, if we introduce Lukaya what is it going to serve? Who is going to qualify for it who has not been covered so far? That is my submission Mr. Speaker.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, when hon. Elly Tumwine moved a motion for recommittal of this amendment, it was to the effect that it should not be considered. He gave reasons that there were other participants including those they fought in different battles, which could not be given special medals, so he was excluding it. That recommittal should not accept the Lukaya award. When hon. Kabakumba stood to second the motion she said let us recommit so we can define. Now not to object to it when hon. Katirima speaks in support of the recommittal then he says we must define but in – as if he is accepting that the award of Lukaya should be there but let us define and give it a qualification. So, I seek your guidance. Did hon. Kabakumba support the motion such that the award of Lukaya should be recommitted or should it not be recommitted because there are three versions?  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is very simple, that Schedule Two of the Bill be recommitted. Various people have given various reasons for recommittal. Hon. Kabakumba says she is supporting recommittal so that the Order of Lukaya can be defined like the others, and I think that is the impression I get of the hon. Katirima.  

Unlike these two, hon. Elly Tumwine is saying he would like recommittal so that the Lukaya medal, which was introduced by an amendment yesterday, is deleted. So, I think I will put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: I want it on record to know what we are going to pass which is not –(Interruption)

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I stand on a point of order. I have some little experience in the procedures of Parliament, a question has been put and it has been determined conclusively by the House. As far as I am concerned that brings the matter to a close. Is there any other procedure, which you can use to re-introduce a subject for means of record as proposed by the hon. Member?  

THE SPEAKER: I think we are pronouncing ourselves on the motion; we are now proceeding to the next item.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I can see that Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine, Capt. Masiko and Maj. Katirima, the army officers here are very concerned about our decision. Can I appeal that the Army officers should accept the decision of the people the way it is? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not want you to waste our time. We have made a pronouncement on the issue. Can we proceed to the next item?

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr. Muruli Mukasa): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999' be read the Third Time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE NATIONAL HONOURS AND AWARDS ACT, 1999.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998

THE SPEAKER: Is the hon. Minister of Justice around?  The Learned Attorney General is here. Hon. Attorney General, are you with us? The position is this; the House considered The Political Organisations Bill last time and reached up to a point when they were about to pronounce themselves on the motion for the Third Reading. But the Minister of Justice is not here; can you move that motion?

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Katureebe Bart): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled 'The Political Organisations Bill, 1998' be read a Third Time.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, I do recall that when this Bill was brought to the House to be read a Third Time, a motion was moved under Rule 108 of our Rules of Procedure for recommittal; and I did that motion and it was passed.  The motion was on the Floor and the House adjourned. I am seeking clarification from –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you clarify, was it passed or not?  

MR.OKUMU RINGA: No.

THE SPEAKER: Why? Was the question put?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: It was adjourned due to lack of quorum.

THE SPEAKER: Right, is it your intention to proceed with your motion?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, it is my intention to proceed with that motion for recommittal. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Was it seconded?

MEMBERS: It was.

THE SPEAKER: It was seconded. Can you proceed? Guide me, I was not in the Chair, which provision are you seeking recommittal for?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, it is the amendment Clause to the Political Organisation Bill 1998, which was brought by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs under Clause 26, Section 24. It was in the amendment Clause and I do not know if the Learned Attorney General has that. But it refers specifically to the provision, which empowers the political parties to open branches at district level and my contention –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What Clause is that? Can you refer to the number?

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Section 24 of the amendment of the Minister, which is not part of the original Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, proceed, I do not have it.

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with details of a Bill, which eventually will become law. I think it is procedurally right that a Member who seeks to deal with a particular Clause of the Bill tells us exactly what he is talking about. The hon. Member seems not to know exactly what he wants done. Maybe it will be wise if you gave him time and you gave the House time to come back with proper documents.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu Ringa, I am also at a loss because that is why I was asking specific questions as to what exactly you are dealing with. I do not have this document and the impression I am getting from hon. Wacha’s intervention is that the Members do not have those documents. I think if that is the case, we will stand over this matter and we proceed to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION MISCELLANEOUS REPEALS (No. 2) BILL, 2000

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Katureebe Bart): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Law Revision Miscellaneous Repeals (No.2) Bill, 2000' be read a Second Time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR.KATUREEBE: Mr. Speaker, my Colleagues will recall that this is the second time I am bringing before this House a Bill to repeal certain laws which our Commissioners for Law Revision have identified as inconsistent with the Constitution or are no longer applicable. I informed the House last time that we have the Law Revision exercise to update the laws of Uganda because they have not been revised since 1964. The effect is that whenever you get hold of our Statute Book you do not know which law is still in force, which has been amended, which is repealed, and which has been substituted. 

This exercise is going on and I am pleased to report to the House that it is nearing completion. We have now set the target date of 30th June for the Commissioners to come up with complete revised Statutes. By 30th June, all the laws up to the year 2000, will have been revised and due for printing and publication. And by 31st December 2001, all the subsidiary legislation such as Statutory Instruments and Legal Notices, will also be ready for printing and publication. This will be a major achievement that this Government and Parliament will have done for this country to getting a complete revision of the laws.  

Therefore, the purpose of this Bill is, simply to give express repeal to the identified laws in the Schedule. The appendix to the memorandum gives clear reason as to why each particular piece of legislation is being recommended or repealed. This means that the Commissioners will omit these laws from the new revised edition of the laws of Uganda. In other words, a Law such as the Detention Act, which hon. Nsubuga Nsambu raised last time, will no longer be on our Statute book. 

This is a very short Bill of only two Clauses. I will only move, at the Committee Stage, to remove “No. 2” and the year “2000” because when it was presented last year, it was supposed to be number two, but it is now “No. 1” of 2001 and the draftsman will make the necessary corrections. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Mr. Speaker, after the Law Revision Miscellaneous Repeals No. 2 Bill, 2000 was read for the First Time, it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs as required by rule 99(5) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.   

The Committee observed that this is the second Bill brought to Parliament by Government seeking to repeal laws that are no longer desirable or obsolete due to constitutional changes or have lapsed by operation of the law. The Committee commends Government and the law Reform Commission for this effort. 

The passing of the Bill will enable easy access to legislation and also save time of legal researchers. It will also allow the Law Reform Commission more time to concentration on reform of the law rather than the status of the law. 

The repeal of the proposed laws will make it possible for the said laws to be left out of the edition now being prepared. If they are not repealed, they will re-appear in the final edition yet they are no longer relevant. It is therefore, important that they are repealed. 

The justification for the repeal of the particular laws is contained in the Schedule in the Memorandum of the Bill and the Committee therefore, recommends that this Bill be enacted into law. Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAW REVISION MISCELLANEOUS REPEALS (No. 2) BILL, 2000

Clause 1.

MR.KATUREEBE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause (1), where it says “This Article may be cited as the Law Revision Miscellaneous Repeal (No. 2)”, the words “No. 2” in brackets be deleted and then the year “2000” be substituted with “2001”. As I explained before, it is actually No. 1 now and we do not need to mention any number. So we delete the reference to No. 2.

THE CHAIRMAN: And then, the 2000?

MR.KATUREEBE: Becomes 2001; this was consequential.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title.

MR.KATUREEBE: Mr. Chairman, there is a consequential amendment in the Title of “No. 2” and “2000”.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Katureebe Bart): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR.KATUREEBE: Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled the Law Revision Miscellaneous Repeals Bill 2001 and passed it with minor amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Katureebe Bart): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LAW REVISION MISCELLANEOUS REPEALS (No. 2) BILL, 2000

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Katureebe Bart): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Law Revision Miscellaneous Repeals Bill 2001' be read the Third Time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)
          
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members for that.  Proceed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Philip Byaruhanga): Mr. Speaker, I seek your guidance on this matter. The Government is going to proceed but the chairperson of the Sessional Committee is absent and the Vice-Chairperson has informed me that he has just arrived and is not ready to proceed.  So, I seek your guidance on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Any other Member of the Committee who can proceed? Hon. Dick Nyai, were you saying you are a Member of the Committee and you are ready to proceed?

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker I am grateful for catching your eye, but I am not a Member of that Committee.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Speaker, I am the vice chairperson but I am sorry I just came from upcountry today and I did not know that my chairperson was not around and I am not ready; my documents are not with me. So I beg that we postpone it to the next meeting.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think that brings us to the end of today’s proceedings, - I recognise hon. Akika Othieno.

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Before we adjourn, I would like to be guided on a certain Resolution this House passed in November. It was spelt out clearly that the Leader of Government Business should report here within a month on the extent to which he has implemented the Resolution concerning Members’ Motor Vehicle Scheme. I asked that when hon. Ssekandi was in the Chair and he said I would be clarified at a later date. It has now taken again one month before I am clarified. How far are we going? Are we going to be chased away without reporting back about this thing? I beg your guidance, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, did you say –(Interruption)

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to say that hon. Members of this House can be chased away? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know, chased away from where? But if it is from the business of the House, I think there is no intention and nobody is contemplating chasing away hon. Members of Parliament. The hon. Members of Parliament might, if necessary, go on a short recess to be able to undertake certain duties. But that is not to say that we do not have to give an explanation to what you have asked. Otherwise, it is out of order to refer to hon. Members being chased away when they are actually supposed to be going on recess. I do not know whether the hon. Prime Minister can shade some light on when he is likely to report back on that Resolution.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the best of my recollection, there are sector Ministers who deal with these matters and it was the Minister of Finance to handle this matter and not the Prime Minister. But since the Minister is not here and I am always disaster-prepared, I am in a position to throw some light on that scheme. 

The position is that the Auditor General was requested to revisit his report and he agreed to do so. In addition to that, a Committee was instituted chaired by hon. Rugumayo but it also includes Members of Parliament like hon. Musumba Proscovia. This Committee was harmonising politically what had gone wrong and the latest I have gathered is that this Committee has also been interfacing with the Auditor General, and that they are doing a good job. And if the Minister hon. Rugumayo was here, he would have been in a position to give you further details. But I understand that they have moved quite well and we shall be delighted by their measures, which are likely to cure a number of problems. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: With that, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 4.14p.m. and adjourned until 6th Tuesday at 2.00p.m.)
