Tuesday 9th February, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I wish to welcome you back from the recess which I hope has rejuvenated you and was also equally well spent interacting with your constituents, and that you are now ready to tackle serious business which is before us.  

When the Business Committee met yesterday, it established that we still have a backlog as you will see from today's Order Paper, that there were one or two other matters which we ought to have disposed of before we went for recess and that there is still more to come.  The business which was discussed and agreed upon by the Business Committee refers to Bills which are already with the Committees and also Committee Reports as well as Motions for Resolutions of Parliament.  

In this connection I am hoping that you have already received copies of the Legislative programme indicating the business available and how it has been prioritised.  I am sure you must have already received a document containing no less than 10 items referring to the type of business which we are to conduct during this meeting.  But that is not all.  

One month from now,  we will be in a position as a Business Committee to agree on more business for the House and then you will be advised accordingly.  I therefore request those Committees with pending work in any of the three categories which have been mentioned namely Bills, Committee Reports and Motions for Resolution of Parliament, to expedite their business and ensure that the necessary quorum is realised as and when you wish to transact business.  

And there will also be regular attendance of these meetings both at the Committees and also here in the House.  I would like to appeal to all of you to at least strive to improve, so that the old problem of quorum does not continue to disrupt our Business and also to frustrate those of you who would like to come out here and transact Business.  And this appeal for regularity of attendance is not only limited to Back Benchers, but also to the Front Benchers.  I therefore wish you a fruitful deliberation during the Third Meeting of the Third Session of the 6th Parliament.  Thank you.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:   Mr. Speaker, let me wish you a happy new year, I hope we are all fresh for the year 1999.  I have looked at the business line up here but I am putting my question for clarification on the issue of questions to Ministers in the House.  I think the Second Meeting of the Third Session of this Parliament had a lot of questions which the Members asked the Leader of Government Business or the Government itself.  But most, if not all of these questions were never answered and they are still pending.  In the line up of Business this time, I would be grateful if you could assure me because I am one of those with a number of pending questions.  

One; that in accordance with our Rules of Procedure a day will be allocated for questions.  
Two; I would also be grateful if all the pending questions could be published so that Members are aware of the questions which are pending and possibly this will wake up the Government.  Mr. Speaker, if you look at the Rules of Procedure on the question of questions, I think the maximum time given to Government is 14 days.  My question I think was asked somewhere in August or September.  It is three months and nobody was able to come up with it on the Order Paper,  and there are many Members in the same situation as I am.   I think as we start and we put ourselves on the course of the new year,  I would like this point of questions to Government to be attended to.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, hon. Member you are quite right.  This matter came up in the meeting of the Business Committee, it was discussed and it was agreed that any backlog questions should be attended to,  and that question time finds a place in this programme which we have just outlined and I think the point is taken and that it will be attended to.

BILLS 
FIRST READING
THE POLITICAL ORGANISATIONS BILL, 1998.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to Move that the Bill entitled the Political Organisations Bill, 1998 be read the First Time.

THE SPEAKER:  The Political Organisations Bill be read the First Time.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FISCAL YEAR, 1998/99 
           
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Lt.Col. Mudoola): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  But before I present the Report, let me wish you and all Members a happy new year and active recess.  Thank you.  

I have the privilege of presenting the Report of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Budgetary Estimates of 1998/99.

The Committee's mandate  covers policies, proposals and budgetary estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Fiscal year 1998/99 for the Ministries of Defence, Internal Affairs, the Uganda Police and Uganda Prison's Service.  We held a series of meetings with the Ministers concerned together with their technical staff to discuss the figures presented and made some recommendations for implementation.  

The Committee did not look at the budgetary estimates of the Internal and External Security Organisations because earlier on, we had agreed that the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs will handle their budgetary estimates since the Minister of State for Security is under the President's Office and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs handles security matters.  I wish to inform this august House that despite all the recommendations that Ministry Policy Statements be received by Committees by 30th June, we received ours at the beginning of September,  two months later.  

2.0 MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
2.1 Mandate
The mandate of the Ministry of Defence is derived from Chapter 12, Article 209 of the Constitution of Uganda.  In pursuit of that constitutional duty, the UPDF has continued with the struggle to liberate the whole country from internal turmoil and external threats from tyranny and all forms of injustice.  In view of the above duty and commitment by our Defence Forces, the Committee wishes to commend our gallant soldiers and salute the dead comrades who have lost their lives defending this country.

2.2 General Background
The Minister informed the Committee that Government is committed to eliminate banditry in Uganda.  The Government has all along used both political and military means to deal with the various armed groups and it intends to maintain this approach.  The above strategy yielded good results in the East and North east of Uganda.

2.3 Security
The task of eliminating banditry has been long and not easy to achieve by our forces due to operational challenges as pointed out by the Minister of State for Defence in his Policy Statement namely:
(i)   Porous Uganda/Sudan and Uganda/DRC borders.
(ii)  Communication Roads/Tracks.
(iii) Difficult Terrain.
(iv)  Logistical handicaps.
The Minister of State for Defence assured the Committee that Government is doing all it can to overcome these challenges and to resolve the lingering security problem decisively.  If this year's budget is approved, the above challenges will be tackled through strengthening and equipping the Army.  The Committee was informed that the Government's strategy is to ensure that by the end of the year, security at all troubled border areas is beefed up and that the Army will attain 80 per cent of its re-equipment programme.  

The Committee observed that insurgency has lingered for a long time in the North and of late in the West.  It also feels that the general security of the country is worrying the public though of late there is general calmness in the North and West, except for some isolated incidents and occasional bombing from Sudan.  That is when we wrote this Report.  The Committee urges Government to maintain this calmness leading to stabilisation and restoration of security in the whole country in the shortest time possible.

2.4 Performance of Ministry Budget 1997/98
In spite of the approved budget being grossly inadequate for the year, there was a further cut back of Shs 5.1 billion due to poor revenue collections.  As a result of the above, several important programmes were not undertaken, notably training and improvement of the welfare of soldiers.  The Committee was very upset about this interference in our soldier's welfare whenever there is a shortage of funds.  The welfare of our soldiers should take priority and the Ministry should desist from this practice of undermining the soldier's welfare.

Recommendation
The Committee still recommends, as it did last year, that the sum of Shs 2,500 be paid per day per person (family) as Ratio Cash Allowance from the present Shs 2,000 due to raising market prices.

2.5 Areas of Emphasis during 1998/99 Financial Year
The Committee was informed that this year, emphasis will be put on the following as recommended by the Committee last year:
(i)   Welfare of soldiers.
(ii)  Training of soldiers.
(iii) Equipping our Army so that it is superior to all rebel groups.
(iv)  Organisation and training of the Reserve Forces.

2.6 Recurrent Expenditure
Land Forces
Item 1010 - Salary and Wages
A sum of Shs 60.9 billion is provided for the above item.  Hon. Members, you will notice that the highest percentage of the Recurrent Budget goes to soldiers' welfare. A consolidated pay system is going to be introduced in the UPDF and a soldier's take home package will be Shs 115,000 per month.

2.7 Veteran Programme
The Committee was informed that last year, Shs 3.5 billion was released to pay the veterans and Shs 15 billion was approved this year and for the following two years.  The Committee was not satisfied with this arrangement of taking three years before all the veterans are paid now that some have waited for five years before payment.  This will mean a period of eight years before they receive their money.

Recommendation
(i)  The Committee recommends that Government borrows money to pay all the veterans' benefits at once.  
(ii) Payment process of benefits for soldiers and officers who served in previous armies should also start as soon as possible.  

2.8 Compensation
The Minister of State for Defence informed the Committee that verification of claims was still continuing.  The Committee was very much upset as this has been going on for the last two years, which is a long time.  However, the Committee was informed that some claimants have been paid and those claimants who were fraudulent,  legal action has been instituted against them.

2.9 Programme 03 - Air Force
The Committee was not happy with the reports that prices of helicopters for the Air Force were inflated in spite of the urgency of acquiring equipment at that time.  The Committee was informed that the helicopters' prices were not inflated and that the helicopters alone cost US $6 million for the four and that US $6.5 million was for spare parts, ground equipment, training, armament and ammunition.   The supplier breached the contract by supplying helicopters which were not overhauled to ensure a life time of 1,000 hours on the airframe and 800 hours on the engines.  

When the Ministry discovered the anomaly, a Committee was set up to investigate the matter.  The Committee found out that the two helicopters were not overhauled and therefore, not airworthy and could not be legally utilised.  The Ministry considered the  overhaul as a fundamental breach, and terminated the contract.  Allow me to lay on the Table a brief report on the contract between Ministry of Defence and Consolidated Sales Corporation to purchase MI-24 helicopters as presented to the Committee.  

2.10 Capital Development
A sum of Shs 17.6 billion is earmarked for capital development this year.  Shs 10 billion is to be used for construction activities and Shs 7.4 billion of the above Shs 10 billion will be spent on major priority projects, like:
(i)   Rehabilitation of Tororo, Masindi and Mbarara barracks.  (ii)   Rehabilitation of military units under 4th Division, Gulu.  (iii) Construction of the proposed Joint Clinic Research Centre Hospital at Lubowa Estate.
(iv)  Rehabilitation and expansion of Army Headquarters at Bombo with emphasis on construction of 15 blocks of three bedroom flats, Officer's Mess, Army shop stores, equipping the barracks hospital and provision of a new sewerage treatment lagoon.  
The remaining Shs 7.6 billion will be used for acquiring logistical requirements.  

2.11 Parastatal Organisations
A productive Army is a constitutional function provided for by Articles 208 (2) and 209 (d) of the Constitution.  In view of the above, UPDF is engaged in social economic activities like education, construction and manufacturing industries and also to attract joint ventures. 

In spite of the Committee's recommendation of last year that audited accounts of the parastatal be submitted to us, no accounts have been sent to the Committee up to now.  However, the Minister of State for Defence reported that he parastatal is being edited and as soon as the exercise is completed, a report will be sent to the Committee.  

2.12 National Enterprise Corporation (NEC)
NEC has been restructured and reduced to four economically viable subsidiaries namely Luwero Industry, NEC Pharmaceutical, NEC Works Ltd and Neclime LTD.  

2.13 NEC Pharmaceuticals
The Ministry has installed modern equipment worth US $10 million to produce tablets, syrups, antibiotics, creams and ointments.  A quality control laboratory and equipment to manufacture packing containers is completed.  The Committee was informed that the enterprise has been handed over to the Privatisation Unit.  

The Committee strongly objects the selling of this factory because:
(i)  The Government has spent a lot of money to instal this unit and that money may not be realised if it is sold.  
(ii) This unit is very useful for our Forces because of the medicine it will produce.  
(iii) The factory has not started working to indicate whether it is making losses so as to get rid of it.  The Committee thinks this factory could make profits if managed well.  We should look for good management rather than selling it.   
(iv) This will be defeating our objectives of having a productive Army as provided for in the Constitution by Article 208 (2) and 209 (d).  

Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the enterprise should not be sold but privatise management only.  

2.14 UPDF Construction Directorate
The purpose of this unit is to build capacity to undertake civil and other maintenance works in Army barracks at minimal costs while gradually phasing out private construction companies.  The Directorate carried out the following works:
(i)  Opened up roads at Kakiri site where the 1st Division Headquarters is going to be situated.  
(ii)  Expanded Gulu barracks hospital where a surgical theatre building was completed.  

The Committee was informed that a substantive director was appointed and that consultancy contract between M/S Corder Management Consultancy Ltd and Government of Uganda was terminated on the 29th of April 1998, as per recommendation of this House last year.  

Recommendation
The Committee however recommends that the Construction Directorate should be supervised more closely.  

2.16 Uganda Air Cargo Corporation
The Corporation has been limping since its formation as a corporation in 1992, due to poor management.  The only aircraft owned by the Corporation L-100-30 commonly known as a C130 was impounded in Zaire, now DR Congo, for about eight months.  Again,  the plane had an accident in Cairo in 1995 and it has not started operating commercially up to when we wrote this report.  The plane was again grounded at Cairo Airport,  for about nine months, from where it was taken for repair at Sorgema, Bordeaux, France, by a Company knows as AVISTO Ltd., at an estimated cost of US $8.5 million,  on top of the US $965,505 spent at Cairo for the ferry flight.  

When the Committee was told about the above figure,  Members thought that these figures were too high.  On the 10th of April 1998, the Chairman of the Defence Committee wrote a letter asking for more details on the figures.  There was also a letter from the IGG requesting for an explanation on these figures.  Details were not sent awaiting completion of the repairs.  As of now repair costs have accumulated to US $9,526,417.55.   The Ministry of Finance has spent about US $ 3 million from the divestiture account at an interest rate of 10 per cent.  The Aircraft as of recent is mortgaged between Stanbic Bank on a loan of US $4 million, at an interest rate of 8 per cent and AVOSTO Ltd at US $2.5 million at the interest rate of 7 per cent per year.  Earlier on, the Corporation had spent US $1,480,872 US on repairs in 1994, in Israel.   

The Chairman of the Uganda Air Cargo told the Committee that the aircraft was not repaired in Israel and that is one reason why the figure of the repair in Sorgema is so high.  But those who were in charge then, claim the repairs were done.  Due to the concern of Members of the Committee, Members of Parliament and the public regarding the high figures of repairing the plane, and the fact that the Committee recommended that the Aircraft be sold as it was in Cairo, yet the Government went ahead to spend such a large amount of money on repairs which cannot be realised if the plane sold, the Committee recommends that the Select Committee of Parliament be instituted to investigate the high costs of repairing the aircraft in Sorgema.

2.15 General Recommendations (Defence)
Last financial year, the Committee made a number of recommendations and some of them were worked upon.  

1. It was recommended that UPDF should responded quickly to rebel attacks.  The Committee was informed that access roads have been constructed to allow the Army to move easily from place to place.  More roads will be constructed in the insurgency areas to facilitate this rapid reaction of the Army.  

2. The Committee recommended that UPDF should have a coordinated method of passing the information to the public.  The Committee observed that this has not been adequately implemented.  However, the Minister informed the Committee that in the field, Division Commanders will be the spokesmen of the combatants while at the Headquarters, it will be the Army Commander as Director of information.  The overall spokesman of the Ministry of Defence is the Minister responsible for Defence.

3.  The Committee recommended that justice in the Army should be expedited and the Minister informed the Committee that the Court Martial of Appeal has been constituted.  It was also recommended that more funding should be provided to enable legal departments provide assistance to soldiers in pursuit of their legal rights.  This has not been done due to insufficient funding.  The Committee still recommends the above to be done.  

4. It was recommended that all veterans should be paid.  It was revealed that Shs 3.5 billion was paid to some veterans and Shs 15 billion has been earmarked for this year and the following two years.  
The Committee recommends that releases from the Ministry of Finance for these monies should be continuous.  However, payment of persons in thee former armies has not been processed.  The Committee is of the view that soldiers who served in former armies should also be paid.  

5. It was recommended that the welfare of soldiers should be improved.  The Committee is happy to report that this is a priority this year.  However, the Committee recommends that whenever there is a budgetary shortfall, it should not affect the soldiers' welfare.  

6. The Committee recommended that the annual leave of soldiers should be given and the money should be paid in lieu of leave in case of a soldier who does not go for leave.  This was not done.  The Committee still insists that this should be done as a right.

7. The Committee recommends that a clear policy regarding comrades injured or maimed while in action be made to enable them benefit from Government schemes and resettlement programmes.  Nothing has been done.  The Committee still strongly recommends the above as a priority.  

8. The Committee recommended the establishment of the army shop.  We have to report that this financial year that the Army Shop will be reopened.   

9. The Committee recommended quick payment for death gratuity/pension.  The Committee was informed that payment is being processed quickly but with caution to avoid abuse of the process.  

10. The Committee recommended burial cemeteries for fallen soldiers.  The Minister informed the Committee that land has been acquired for that purpose and all Division Commanders have been directed to acquire land in their locations.  Burial in these cemeteries however, is not mandatory.  

11. The Committee recommended training of UPDF.  The Committee is happy to know that it is a priority in UPDF programmes this year.  This year they have secured some money to train our soldiers.

12. The Committee recommended that a bill in connection with Article 210 of the Constitution be tabled before Parliament.  We were informed that the draft will soon be presented to Cabinet for discussion.

13. The Amnesty Bill as recommended by the probe Committee is in Cabinet and will be in Parliament for debate.  
That ends the Ministry of Defence and now I go to Ministry of Internal Affairs.  

3.0 MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

The Ministry is responsible for ensuring and maintaining security by enforcing law and order, conducting crime investigation by analysing exhibits, ensuring safety of foodstuffs, water and other consumables, at the same time controlling people's movements in and out of the country.  This mandate is implemented through the Uganda Police Force, the Prisons Service, the Immigration Department, the Chief Government Chemist, the Finance and Administrative Department.

3.1 Achievements
The Minister informed the Committee that although the Ministry had been underfunded in the 1997/98 financial year, a number of achievements had been made.  
(i)   With difficulties the Ministry executed its mandate.  
(ii)  Office accommodation for the border post at Mutukula was completed and another was started at Ishasha.  
(iii) Computers and office equipments were procured. 

In the Police Force, 44,980 criminal cases were reported of which 31,192 were taken to Court and 13,685 convictions were secured.  (i)   Shs 532,099,000 was realised from fines;   
(ii)  34,410 traffic cases were reported; 20,972 cases were taken to Court; and 19,495 convictions were secured.  Out of this, Shs 761,809,500 was realised from fines.  
(iii) General repairs and renovation were carried out in a number of Police stations/barracks namely, Mbarara, Kabale, CID Headquarters, Mbiko, Jinja, Gulu, Lira, Nsambya, CPS, Kalisizo and Jinja Road stations.
(iv) The introduction of the smart fuel card assisted the force to cope with shortfalls in the monthly releases on the item.  

In the Prisons Service, despite the persistent problem of under-funding, the service managed to execute its mandate and some achievements were recorded:
(i)  The re-roofing of two wards in Namalu Prison and construction of staff quarters.  
(ii)  The re-roofing of Jinja main prison and rehabilitation of water supply,  sanitation and electric lighting in Jinja Remand Prison.  
(iii) Completion of renovation work at Prisons Headquarters.  
(iv)  Rehabilitation and electric lighting in upper prisons,  among others.

3.2 1998/99 Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure
The Committee observed that there has been no improvement in terms of the budget given to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  The Police force was in 1997/1998 financial year given 50 per cent of the amount it had requested for.  In the financial year 1998/99 the Force has been provided with only 54 per cent of its requirements. It is therefore very difficult to maintain law and order with this kind of provision.  The security situation in this country is not improving, instead a new phenomena are cropping up for example terrorism is a new situation at hand that the money provided cannot suffice.  Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, generally the Police Force and Prisons are inadequately  funded for all the items.  

3.3 Uganda Police Force
The Police has a mandate to do the following:
(i)   To protect life and property of people in Uganda.
(ii)  To prevent and detect crime when committed and apprehend and prosecute offenders in courts of law.
(iii)  To enforce law and order and avail an enabling environment for political, social and economic development.
(iv)   Perform military function when demanded by the State.
(v)   To ensure that peace and tranquillity prevail in the country.

3.4 Operation and maintenance of Vehicles
It was reported to the Committee that the Police vehicles are old and could not be used to chase criminals who would be over speeding.  An amount of Shs 15.3 billion was requested but only Shs 5.84 billion has been allocated.  This means that there will be no improvement in catching up with over speeding criminals.

3.5 Electricity, Water and other utilities
The Committee was informed that the bills for water and electricity are not paid because of the meagre funds allocated. This leads to disconnections which disrupt the operations of the Police Force whose services are required 24 hours.  Very little money has been allocated for that purpose.

3.6 Rent, Rates, Conservancy and Service Charges
The Police rents buildings and houses to accommodate officers, Police posts and stations.  Some of the landlords are threatening to evict the Police posts, especially where the charges are exorbitant. This slackens the performance of the Police Force.  To clear these bills, a sum of Shs 425 million was proposed but only Shs 120 million was allocated, leaving a shortfall of Shs 305 million.

Recommendation
The Committee recommends that money should be released to construct buildings which can be used by Police posts so that the Officers can serve the people efficiently.  

3.7 Feeding while on operations
The Committee was told that the Police in most cases is called upon to go on operations and the Force needs to be fed.  While Shs 2.1 billion was requested for, only Shs 917 million has been allocated.  In order to co-ordinate the operations of the Ministry, mileage allowances have to be paid to the eligible officers who perform these duties. A total sum of Shs 105 billion has been earmarked for this item.

3.8 Training
Whereas it is necessary to recruit new people to join the Forced, there is no money to train the Police which makes it rather impossible for the small Force to handle the reported cases and also curb the crime rate in the country.

3.9 Office expenses - Telephone and Fax 
The amount of money required was Shs 880 million but only Shs 425 million was allocated.  The Committee recommends that supplementary for the above purpose be availed because this is a very important item in fighting crime.

Advertising and Public Relations
Out of Shs 377 million required only Shs 20 million was allocated.  This means that media programmes and advertisements of criminals will not be possible for the Police to combat crime.  The Ministry policy is to have a Police Force which is enlightened, motivated, well educated, efficient and accountable to the people of Uganda.  In order to achieve the strategy of the Police force there must be improvement in personnel, training, construction, transport, technological advancement,  supplies and services.  The Police needs adequate funds to carry out their duties properly.  

3.11 Personnel 
The Police Force is at 15,228 personnel and over 600 support staff who have been operating through hardships.  The whole country needs a total force of 30,000.  There is need for recruitment and training of more Policemen and women to cater for the crime rate and acts of violence that have become rampant.  

Recommendation
We recommend that money be made available to recruit more Policemen, there was a suggestion that they should be recruiting 1,000 every year, but this has not been possible because of lack of funds.  

3.12 Staff Salaries
Funds are required to pay salaries of staff working at the Ministry Headquarters, Immigration department, Passport office and Chief Government Chemist, and a total of Shs 1,101 billion has been proposed to cover this item.  However, some staff by their nature of work need to work during lunch time and others are deployed on a 24 hour basis.  There is need for overtime allowance.

3.13 Transport and Travelling of Persons Inland
The two Ministers and the Heads of Departments need to travel to various places upcountry, to check on security, at the same time doing supervisory and administrative duties, but the funds are too little to do their work efficiently.

3.14 Feeding Suspects
The Committee was informed that suspects in Police custody are an obligation of Government. For this item, only Shs 344 million was allocated out of the required Shs 955 million.  this may mean underfeeding the suspects.

3.15 Capital Development
The total amount required on this item was Shs 6.15 billion of which Shs 6.5 million will be appropriation-in-aid.  The Committee was told that the Ministry plan is to build on the Uganda Police Force Corporate Strategy Statement which is to provide an enlightened and motivated Police Force that is efficient and accountable to the people; and a five year corporate strategy and development plan has been put in place.

3.16 Core Priorities
(i)  To increase the rate of detection of major crimes of murder,  robbery, burglary, and white collar crime through improved investigation and management of cases,  improved forensic capacity and increased use of criminal intelligence .
(ii) To reduce levels of violent crime and street level crime by  10 per cent by enabling Police to respond to emergency calls to combat terrorism and illegal possession of firearms, and tackling piracy on lake Victoria.  
(iii)	To increase public awareness and participation in policing and    crime  prevention activities.
(iv)		To improve output and quality of processed intelligence.
(v)  	To reduce road accidents by 10 percent by improving traffic  patrols, increasing detection of drunk drivers and reducing the number of defective vehicles on the roads.

Recommendations
To fight over speeding on our roads, the Committee recommends:
(i)  Speed governors to be installed in PSV so as to reduce deaths on our roads.
(ii)  On spot check equipment for drunk drivers should also be given to Police officers on patrols.

3.17 Support Priorities
The Committee was informed that priorities will include the following:
(i)   Increasing the local area network coverage.  Currently areas like Kampala, Entebbe, Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Kasese, Fort portal, Mbale, Gulu and Arua are already covered.  What they mean here is that they can communicate on radio among those station.  Seven districts will be covered in the next phase, in other words, the whole country is not yet covered so it is really a problem in the Force as well.
(ii) 	The Committee was told that 10 blocks of apartments will  be built at Nsambya barracks.
(iii)	Rehabilitation of staff houses, water sanitation and drainage at Nsambya barracks.
(iv) 	To increase the Force's fleet by 30 percent and improve its management and utilisation.
(v) 		To achieve 30 percent refresher training to improve practical skills and competence as well as improving management and care of personnel and career development.

3.18 Developments - Construction and Building
The Committee was informed that 4 blocks of flat-lets will be constructed at Nsambya and a block with 16 flats  would cost Shs 300 million.  Other places considered for construction included Kireka Barracks, Entebbe Police Station, Entebbe Air-wing Hangar, Masaka Police Station and uniports at Butyaba.  All these will cost approximately Shs 1.3 billion.  

The Committee was further informed that the new structures in new districts would cost Shs 280 million and the Police Officers Mess in Bugolobi would cost Shs 50 million.  Also support to self-help projects will take Shs 100 million.

Recommendation
The Committee recommends that this money should be availed in order to alleviate the situation in the Police Force.

3.19 Machinery and Equipment
The Committee was informed that Shs 245 million has been allocated to purchase equipment for anti-terrorism unit.  This was a good development since terrorism in the city has become rampant.  Other machinery include brick making, traffic equipment, anti-riot guns, computers and firearms which together would amount to Shs 690 million.

3.20 Prisons Department  
Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, now I will go to Prisons department.  It was revealed to the Committee that the Recurrent Budget was Shs 32 billion while Development Capital was Shs 13.7 billion.  It was also observed that there was a shortfall of Shs 21.1 billion in the Recurrent and Development Budgets, meaning that the Prison Department will continue experiencing financial problems.

3.12 Salaries and Wages
In this area Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, there was still a short fall.  The amount which was requested for was Shs 3,254,044,000,  but only  Shs 3.123 billion was given for that purpose.  

The Committee was also informed that Local Government, Police and Prisons have been transferred to the Ministry of Internal Affairs for management, overseeing and training. Although this transfer was made, the Ministry of Finance has not provided funds to cater for the transfer and either did the Ministry of Local Government to which they originally belong  budget for these forces.  This leaves the Ministry with 2,000 local administration prison staff, 6,000 local administration Police staff and 5,000 prisoners to look after and yet not a single coin has been provided.  

With this new arrangement, the Prison Department is supposed to cater for and feed the prisoners and staff of the local administration prisons, yet the prison Department is not fully funded.  The Department had requested for Shs 5 billion for feeding 15,000 prisoners, Ministry of finance has approved only Shs 2 billion, leaving a shortfall of Shs 3 billion.  The Committee was informed that by January 1999 prisoners will be going without food.  I do not know whether they have started going without food or whether the Minister has done something about it.levy

Recommendation
The Committee recommends that a supplement funding be released urgently.

3.22 Allowances other than salaries
The Committee was informed that some prisons like Luzira Upper Prison need special allowances.  Included here are disturbance and bicycle allowances.  The Committee was also informed that the staff had not been paid allowances because of lack of funds.  Out of Shs 263,111,000 which was budgeted, only Shs 27,510,000 has been earmarked for the same. 

Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the shortfall should be sought and provided for.

3.23 Travelling and Transport of Persons (Inland)
The  Committee was informed that this heading caters for allowances for staff inspection, staff on guard duties, escorting prisoners on transfer to courts, Prisons gratuity and earning scheme on release, and mileage claims.  Out of Shs 782,740,000, only Shs 521,705,000 has been earmarked for this purpose. Additional amount of money is demanded in order to do an efficient job.

3.24 Telephone, Telefax and Telegrams
The Committee was informed that very little money has always been given for that purpose.  The Prisons service has been faced with several disconnections and currently arrears worth Shs 486 million are still unpaid. This makes communication very difficult.

3.25 Prisoners and Staff Welfare
The Committee learned that the conditions of both the prisoners and the Prisons staff have never improved due to inadequate funding.  In spite of numerous articles in the media regarding the poor state of the prisoners and prisons in connection with feeding, bedding and medical facilities, the situation is still poor.  Due to lack of uniforms, both the prisoners and the staff are dressed in civilian clothes and in some areas they can be easily mistaken to be thugs or rebels.  For the prisoners and prison staff, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members of Parliament,  the amount requested for this item was Shs. 2,200,845,000/= billion but the Ministry released only 306 million, leaving a shortfall of Shs 1,894,845,000.

Recommendation
The Committee recommends a supplementary of Shs 1.9 billion to cater for prisoners' welfare in order to comply with the Human Rights Organisations recommendations.

3.26 Prison Industries
The Committee was told that Prison industries still lack capitalization.  This has been complicated by the fact that the little revenue earned by the industries which should be ploughed back for production is being treated as appropriation-in-aid which is cumbersome for production purposes.  The amount proposed for these industries was Shs 580 million which would enable industries purchase raw materials, spare parts and tools for production purposes.  But only Shs 288 million has been provided for that purpose, leaving a shortfall of Shs 292 million.

Recommendation
The Committee recommends that this money should be released in order to make the industries produce to capacity; at the same time these industries should be self accounting as was recommended in the previous years.
3.27 Prison Farms
The Prison Farms are also very much uncapitalized and need money.  They had requested for Shs 1.4 billion but were allocated Shs 550 million, with a shortfall of Shs 318 million.  The required materials include raw materials for feed mill, livestock feed, drugs, acaricides and equipment and various other farm stores.  Prison industries and farms could play a vital role in reducing costs of feeding the prisoners and also be training institutes for them.

Recommendation 
The Committee recommends that:
(i)  Additional amount of money should be provided to these farms because the amount allocated is too low to sustain production.
(ii) Staff with their families be encouraged to use Prison's land for their additional income.

3.28 Medical Drugs
Mr. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, lack of medicine is a big problem in the Prison industries.  The Committee was informed that there is a serious lack of drugs in all Prison hospitals and dispensaries and yet Government should care for lives of the prisoners and Prison staff, especially when epidemics like cholera and HIV/AIDS have become rampant. This has caused a drastic rise in drug requirements.  The amount requested for was Shs 776,741,000 but only Shs 120 million was availed to the department.

Recommendation
The Committee recommends additional funding in order to alleviate the situation in these hospitals and dispensaries.

3.29 Transport
It was reported that the Prison service has very few vehicles and they are old and the maintenance costs are very high.  The Department has been accused of not producing suspects in courts of law for lack of transport.  Provision of transport for food, firewood and other materials has been difficult too.  The figure estimated for purchase of new vehicles was Shs 834,757,000,  but only Shs 508,408,000 was earmarked for that purpose.  This may not help much in easing the situation.  I will not go in details but this applies to electricity (item number 3.30) and water (item number 3.31); they are in million of shillings in arrears but still the money was cut drastically. 

I will go now to Capital Development - Prison service, which is item number 3.35.  The Committee noted with interest that there is need to invest capital in the development projects of Prisons:  (i)   Farms: Shs. 450 million is required to rehabilitate 30 units of tractors which Prisons acquired from UPDF.  Most of these tractors were already old and need spare parts.
(ii)  It was also revealed that Shs 450 million was required to renovate Luzira Barracks and Shs 450 million to construct the housing units of the Senior and Junior staff of Murchison Bay Reserve.
(iii)  On transport, the Committee was informed that there was a need for Shs 415 million to purchase five lorries, one bus and six pick-ups to help on transport.  

We recommend that money be availed for this department to have transport.  I am sure hon. Members many times you find that even prisoners and staff are on the top of the buses travelling in Kampala to go to court.  So, this is really a very, very, serious issue.

3.36 Government Chemist
The Department of Government chemist is mandated to:
(i) Analyse and determine the alcohol concentration in human blood for toxicity and drunken driving.
(ii) Analyse, detect and quantify poison in various exhibits and samples including human and animal tissues, fluids and organs.
(iii)Analyse and detect semen in rape and defilement cases.
(iv) nalyse and detect narcotics and other drugs of abuse.
(v)  Examine and identify firearms, ammunition and explosives.
(vi) Advise and give consultancy in all aspects of forensic science,  among others.

In order to fulfil the above functions, the department requires highly trained manpower, sophisticated equipment and transport.  The Committee was informed that this department is still underfunded, hence it cannot fulfil its functions. Though officials from the departments are supposed to appear in court as witnesses, funds for inland travel are limited and in most cases, they do not appear in court to give evidence.  Court has in some instances issued summons for arrest of officers due to failure to appear in court.  

Funds provided for training are simply inadequate.  They cannot even train an officer at Makerere University.  By the nature of the work of the department, training is highly specialised and our Universities do not have the courses that the officers need to undergo.  There is need therefore, for training from abroad.  The Department currently has only one vehicle which was purchased in 1993.  

Mobility in the department has been greatly hampered and the officers at times fail to go to scenes of crime.  The department has four upcountry stations which include Mbale, Fort portal and Mbarara.  Due to lack of inadequate transport, exhibits which have to be brought to the headquarters for analysis are not brought and hence vital evidence is lost.  The Committee was informed that the department has plans of turning the upcountry centres into laboratories but with this current under funding at the headquarters, it would not make any sense as they too would get little funding.

3.37 Migration Department
The migration Department is mandated to:
(i)  Control and regulate entry of foreign nationals in the country.
(ii)  Control the stay and taking up of employment by foreign nationals.
(iii) Remove/weed out all undesirable foreign nationals who threaten the security of the country and those who stay in breach of immigration laws.
(iv)  Verify citizenship of Uganda nationals and issue them with necessary travel documents. 

It had been envisaged that the National Citizenship Immigration Board would be in place this financial year to take up the function hitherto carried out by the immigration department,  but this has not been possible.  Basing on the hope of the new board, the Ministry had made budgetary proposals to cater for its function and it is the reason why there appears to be large differences between the proposals made and the allocation given.  However, the Minister of Finance still gave inadequate funding to the department.  A total of Shs 50 million has been provided for construction of three Immigration Posts at Ishaka, Rwakakha, and Soam River, yet Shs 150 million had been earmarked.  This leaves a shortfall of Shs 100 million.  Additional funding should be sought because the posts must be completed.

3.38 Transport
Mr. Speaker, still the problem of transport is the same as in prisons and police, they do not have vehicles.  Also, they have a problem of declaration of cards (item 3.39).  The department spends Shs 2 million per month on arrival and departure cards at its points of entry.  Only Shs 11 million has been provided for the financial year 1998/99, meaning that within five years and a half months of the financial year, arrival/departure cards will be finished and thereafter no cards will be available to people entering or leaving the country.  Hence, the monitoring role of the department will not be achieved effectively this financial year.

3.40 Staff Uniforms
Identification of staff is crucial to avoid impersonation by unscrupulous persons claiming to be staff of the Immigration department.  The Ministry had budgeted for funds to enable department to purchase uniforms for its staff.  Funds availed this financial year cannot even dress the staff of one entry point, thus cases of impersonation will continue to be reported.


Finally, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I go to general recommendations for Ministry of Internal Affairs:

1.  Whereas the services of the Chief Government Chemist are badly needed by the State especially when we are faced with terrorist where sophisticated weapons are used,  the Committee noted with sadness that nothing was done to effect the recommendation of last financial year.  The Committee strongly recommends adequate funding to the Chief Government Chemist especially in areas of transport, training and equipment.  A supplement should be provided to improve the poor situation. 

2.  Last year, it was reported that Prison cells were congested and the situation is Prisons was appalling because of lack of enough judges in courts of law which delayed justice to the culprits.  The Committee recommended non-custodial sentences for minor offenses in order to reduce on prison congestion.   The committee is happy to report that a Bill for this purpose is being worked upon and will soon be tabled before Cabinet.  Here, I am happy to report the Bill is at the Committee stage.  

3.  The Committee was informed that communication is possible between the district and the headquarters but not between district headquarters and sub-county outposts.  The Committee recommends that since insecurity and crime are increasing, there must be proper communication in all aspects, including all deployments in rural Police posts all over the country.  

4.  It was revealed that due to inadequate funding, National Identity cards cannot be issued to the citizens this financial year.  The Committee noted with concern that Uganda is the only country in East Africa where National Identity cards have not been issued and this complicates the security situation in our country.  The Committee strongly recommends a supplementary from the Ministry of Finance to cater for these important documents as a priority.  This is one way of fighting insecurity. 

5.   It was observed that most Police posts in rural areas have no buildings for their offices and premises are being rented at high charges which the Ministry has not been able to pay,  for and the police are threatened with eviction.  The Committee recommends that the Police should work together with the Local Governments to construct buildings where our Police Force can operate from, especially at sub-country levels because people need police services for their security.

6.   The Committee recommends that the Immigration Department should be adequately funded in order to run its services and they should be given transportation, computers; and uniforms to avoid impersonation.

7.   It has been reported that some police officers are corrupt.  The Committee recommends that the Police should come out with periodic reports about curbing corruption in the Police Force,  and the actions taken against the culprits. 

8.   The Committee recommends that Government should borrow money to build for the Police, especially the barracks which have acute housing problems, as recommended two years ago.  

9.   The police and prison staff salaries are very low.  The Committee recommends that they should be given ratio cash allowance of Shs 2,000 per person per day.

10.   The committee recommends a supplementary funding for Police and Prisons to the tune of Shs 4 billion because the Ministry is inadequately funded.  

In conclusion,  Mr. Speaker, the Committee hopes that now that the money was approved, the situation in the country will improve and I take this opportunity to thank the Members for having approved the Recurrent and Development expenditure, as indicated.  I beg to move.  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, you have received a report and as I agreed before, although we are now dealing with the report after you had given your due approval for the budget for that sector, we can discuss the report particularly with regard to those areas where they have made very strong recommendations, for purposes of making improvement in the appropriate sector.  The matter is now open for debate.

MR. AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia):  First of all, I would like to thank my hon. Colleague, the Chairman of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for their belated report, and various observations and concerns they have raised on the matter of managing the Ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs.  Technically, I should be moving a Motion really, to strengthen the position of the report as read to us by the Chairman.  However, Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out the following concerns.  

I start off by expressing serious concern about abuse of public money by the Ministry of Defence.  I have just received silent information from a Colleague that actually they did not just abuse it, but they ate it. I am referring specifically to the matter pertaining to the procurement of faulty aircraft called helicopter gunships.  Mr. Speaker, we are told from the report that US $6 million plus, from consolidated fund was made available to the Ministry to procure equipment for the security of this country.  

I note with great concern and disappointment that actually, the equipment which was procured was not only faulty, but unworthy to be flown by any serious person.  Mr. Speaker, a gunship is an attack aircraft.  To put somebody in the air - even more than just 100 metres above the ground - in a faulty aircraft for transport or otherwise, is criminal.  It is against the law of this country to fly an aircraft which is not airworthy.  I am surprised that the Minister of Defence and the Minister of State for Defence,  the Commander-in-Chief of UPDF, allowed such an aircraft to be procured and given to our people for the defence of this country.  

MR. STEVEN KAVUMA:  I only want to inform hon. Aggrey Awori and hon. Members of this House that the helicopters which were procured, some of which were found to be wanting in terms of the contractual provisions that had been agreed upon, have never been flown in contravention of the law of this country.  We have taken technical measures.  So, I would not be as pessimistic as hon. Aggrey Awori to think that the whole Ministry of Defence is flying non-airworthy aircrafts in contravention of the law.  I will be giving more information to this hon. House, and maybe the Committee on Defence at an appropriate time.  I wanted to remove the impression that was being created by hon. Aggrey Awori.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you,  Mr. Minister,  for continuing to mislead this House.  I would like to thank you for this particular reason because, it shows the kind of people we have running that Ministry.  Mr. Speaker, for an hon. Member who happens to be in charge of our security to stand up here and use euphemism, saying 'the equipment do not conform to the procurement agreement or purchase agreement.'  What does it mean?  He is simply saying, 'we paid money for equipment we could not use, because it was faulty.'  It was not like a fixed wing aircraft with one wing missing,  no!  Mr. Speaker, this aircraft we paid for in full could not take off at all.  Even if you escape a law against flying an aircraft which is not airworthy, the very fact that you used our money to pay for unworthy aircraft is criminal and condemnable.  

MAJ. MAYOMBO:  I would like to give information to the hon. Member holding the Floor that one;  it is not true to say that the aircrafts could not take off, because the Speaker has sat in them and they have flown.  The person called Major Mayombo has sat in those aircrafts and they have ever taken off the ground and flown.  So, it is not correct to state before this House that the aircrafts cannot take off.  They can take off and come back.  

The second point is that, it is not the first time in the history of the law of contract for a contract to be breached.  What is important is what is done after the contract has been breached and I would like to state before this House, Sir, that the Ministry of Defence took corrective measures in terms of:
One; ensuring that the goods which do not conform to the contract's specifications are not used by the Ugandan Air Force.

Two; that what was not made good be made good by the suppliers and I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the lives of the soldiers, officers and men of UPDF and the security of Uganda, would be preserved by the measures that have been taken by the Ministry.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI:  I would like to thank my hon. Colleague who happens to wear another hat,  he is the Deputy Director of Military Intelligence and not only that, he was able to risk his life as a good soldier to climb an aircraft which had not been cleared,  and was able to come back on earth in one piece.  I would like to thank you for your courage.  

I would also like to point out one contradiction, and also to thank the hon. Member for having pointed out this particular contradiction.  If I could follow correctly what the hon. Minister was saying, technically this aircraft never took off and yet, the hon. professional soldier who should know a lot more than the Minister on these matters is saying, he accurately took off but came back. In other words, he actually broke the law!  The aircraft was not airworthy, it had not been certified, which means he is confirming my concern.  That here we are, authorising our senior army officers to get on the aircraft which has not been cleared! That is a serious offense, Mr. Minister and your own colleague, a professional one, has pointed out that indeed he took off in an aircraft which you admitted was not even airworthy, but some how, without your knowledge, he got in and got back.  It is a serious concern,  Mr. Speaker.

It is not only the aircraft that I am talking about, Mr. Speaker. I could go into other areas of concern.  But for the purposes of this report, I will leave those things which were not mentioned in the report.  At one time not long ago, when the war was very intense in the North especially Gulu district, the Commander-in-Chief decided to go and direct war himself and obviously, like any military force, you must make sure that the security of your Commander-in-Chief is 100 per cent.  Among other things,  we once again bought equipment,  called a radar and missiles, for the security of the Commander-in-Chief and the area around him.  Again they were found wanting.  Up to now, we have never been given a report why we risked the life of the Commander-in-Chief with faulty equipment,  why we risked the lives of the people of Gulu with faulty equipment.  Could the hon. Minister tell me whether we have ever been compensated or have revisited that purchase agreement or repaired that equipment or replaced it,  or do we still continue to expose the life of the Commander-in-Chief with faulty equipment?  

One time in this House, I mentioned that we had bought faulty tanks. I was challenged, I sat down.  Before I could sit down, the equipment was stuck on the road. Since then, it has been repaired, but the day before the passing out parade at Kabamba, again one of the tanks broke down.  Again, it was repaired on time for the parade.  Mr. Speaker, - (Interruption).

MR. KAVUMA:  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and my Colleague, hon. Aggrey Awori.  I want to inform hon. Aggrey Awori, the House and indeed the country at large that a lot of misinformation has gone around about the field tanks and the rest of it.  But I want to say that you could buy a motor vehicle, drive it on your way home, and in the process a hose pipe could get faulty and that vehicle could break down on the way.  What I am saying Sir, these things are minor.  

The other time I was coming from my office in Bombo, and this vehicle which looks so good got stuck on the way for some minutes because I had had a puncture.  Would I go and shout at the top of my voice that, 'look, Government gave me a risky vehicle?'  I am saying, there are things which are worth mentioning after thorough research, so that this House and the population is not treated on simplistic approaches to major issues which can affect the security of this country.  Mr. Speaker, the tanks are perfect. I advise hon. Aggrey Awori to advise whoever may want to have these tanks tested to refrain from doing so because they will not like it.  They are perfect and in good condition.  
MRS. MATEMBE:  I am really getting very concerned because matters of security are matters of life and death in this country.  Last time hon. Awori stood in this House and talked about these defective tanks and everybody out there feared about these defective tanks.  Today he seems to have become either the technical officer in defence or I do not know what to call it, but an insider within defence.  He is here telling us that all these aircrafts were faulty!  I do not know even how many they are, Defence knows better.  And he says that everything is faulty.  And these things concern the security of this country.  Did I say clarification?  I do not know I think it should have been order.  

The clarification I wanted to seek is, is it really proper for a Member of Parliament to stand in this House and give alarming information which makes us insecure and unstable, without clearly having to probe into all these things?  Can we get maybe a real report on these matters tabled here from him so that the hon. Minister can either conform or dispute it?  I am seeking that clarification.  I am sitting there very worried as a Minister of Ethics and Integrity, because I am concerned.  To what extent is an hon. Member in this House allowed,  although there is immunity,  to say things which scare the people?  I mean how far does he go without really bringing a real report here so that we can see whether our Government is doing wrong things and then we condemn it?

MR. AWORI:  I would like to give the Floor to my hon. Colleague but first of all I would like to clarify to my hon. Colleague who sits in front of me.  This House authorises and approves a Budget for its national security.  We are not going to allow anybody to steal that money, misuse it, buy wrong equipment,  in the name of national secrecy.  We are not going to allow that where you buy a used pistol, I cannot talk about it even when we gave you the money for a new pistol.  We authorised money here, I do not recall anywhere in the Budget where we authorised anybody to go and buy used equipment.  We gave money here for new and perfect equipment at that.  If you do not know the procurement procedures, I can render you help.  

I would like to tell the hon. Members that on this matter of equipment and hon. Awori's alarming reports, as a representative of people who pay tax, they have authorised me to ask how their money is spent.  They do not say, 'go to the Ministry of Defence in secrecy and find out whether the money was properly used or not.'  This is the only forum in which I am authorised to ask such questions.  You are not going to intimidate me off the Floor under the cloak and pretence of national security.  You misuse the money, I challenge you.  

MAJ. BUTIME:  The clarification I am seeking from you is whether it is true that this is the only venue or place where hon. Aggrey Awori can raise sensitive issues which have not been clarified upon?  Whereas he knows very well there is a Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs where such a matter could be discussed and the public or the press could be left out, so that if there is something of sensitive security nature, it could be discussed in that Committee?  What hon. Matembe is asking is whether hon. Aggrey Awori should raise such issues which in her view are not properly substantiated, which may cause harm, panic to the entire country?  Hon. Awori cannot in fact substantiate what he is raising.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to be clarified on whether this is the only venue and time where hon. Awori can raise such hair raising issues and alarm the public.  I thank you.

MR. AWORI:  I am getting alarmed by responses from the Front Bench.  I am really alarmed that the Front Bench is trying to sit on information under the cloak of national security.  I am debating a report which has just been given to us by the Committee on Defence.  I am not introducing anything new.  I am only following up what they had told us.  

The Chairman of the Committee told us in his report that they expressed concern over US $6 million authorised by this House for the purchase of aircraft which never worked.  Do I not have the right to follow up the matter?  Do I have to call a national security meeting?  Do I have to go to State House to find out?  I was elected to this House,  not to anywhere else.

MR. KAVUMA:  Mr. Speaker, is hon. Aggrey Awori in order to allege he is discussing a report before him when in fact he is straying away from it and talks about tanks which are not part of the report and he thinks he can hoodwink us all to appreciate his good faith in his approach to this matter?  Is he in order to discuss issues like tanks which were not the subject of this report and then go out of his way to mislead this House, Sir, that he is actually discussing the report?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, if the report of the Committee does not relate or does not talk about tanks and things of that nature, then I think it is not appropriate to discuss them as if they form the core of the report while discussing the question as to whether aircrafts which were purchased with money approved by Parliament actually did not work.  If it is true then the hon. Member is merely giving further examples of a similar incident,  but I think the point which we should concern ourselves with is that buying defective equipment for our security is in itself a matter which causes insecurity. But it is also true that discussing the issue in an alarming fashion when it could be taken to the people concerned also causes insecurity.  So, I think when we are approaching the issue we should think both ways.

MR. AWORI:  I note with great concern that my hon. Colleague in front of me is very agitated.  I will continue to allay her fears that I am not causing a state of alarm.  What I am saying is, I do not have to put a report here.  The Minister himself has got a report that the aircraft did not work that is why he went back to the suppliers.  Do I have to come up with that report when Defence has already got the report?  

We read in the papers that there was a Committee set up by the Commander-in-Chief to investigate the matter of procuring this aircraft.  And the Chairman of that Committee is here and he has reported to this Committee.  And the Committee was not happy with this report, that is why I am following it up.  Do I have to produce that report and bring it here when the author is here and the Chairperson is here?  Mr. Speaker, this question of running away from responsibility will not work.  Let us just agree that we made a mistake,  we bought bad equipment and let us see how we can recover the money we lost.  That is all. -(An Hon. Member rose-).  

THE SPEAKER:  Are you prepared to take the information?

MR. AWORI:  No, Mr. Speaker, this time I decline because he has already given that report to the Committee Chairperson and the Committee Chairperson has told us that his report was not adequate.  I do not see anything new he is going to tell me that I do not know.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to continue  -(Interruption).

MAJ. MAYOMBO:  Is it in order for an hon. Member to stand before this House and state that one; I have ever chaired any Committee investigating helicopters, when it is not true?  I have never chaired any Committee.  

And two; I have never presented a report to the Committee of Defence.  For the fact is, the report of the Committee of Defence was not presented by me.  He has also stated that the Committee of Defence found the report I presented wanting.  Is he in order therefore to make those statements, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, if you were not involved in those areas then he was out of order.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your ruling.  But also,  maybe I was not very clear in my language, never at any stage will you find that he was mentioned as a Chairman of that Committee.  I simply said that at some stage, he was quoted.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:   Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank you hon. Awori.  I think I did not say in my report that the report received by the Committee was faulty.  I just said that the Committee was told that the aircrafts were not overhauled.  It does not mean that the report was faulty.  That is what the report found out,  that the aircrafts were not overhauled.

MR. AWORI:  I would like to thank the hon. Member for his correction.  Nevertheless, as far as I know, to purchase equipment the terms of which are clearly spelt out among others that the equipment shall be in working order and then you proceed to take possession when it is not,  Mr. Speaker, it is not correct.  It is camouflage for other things.  

The reason I am raising these questions is that I am getting disturbed with the kind of reasons and logic we get from the Ministry of Defence.  I can mention one or two items that have given me this kind of bad history or bad test with the Ministry.  

Not long ago, we lost a Senior Army Officer in an aircraft.  The Minister responsible for Defence got up and said, that particular officer was alive and well somewhere in Fort Portal.  Only to be told later that the man had died on the spot.  Mr. Speaker, you know information from such a source on such a serious matter, I tend to take it with a grain of salt.

MR. KAVUMA:  Is the hon. Aggrey Awori in order to lie to this House and the world that I said that an officer was alive when he was actually dead?  When what I stated and I have no regrets about it whatsoever, was that at the time of the accident, the officer and other members who were travelling with him came out of the wreckage alive?  And in fact a report compiled after thorough investigation indicates that deaths occurred due to very bad weather, exposure to very cold conditions, five days after the crash.  Is he in order to mislead the House and the country?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Awori if what you attributed to the Minister is in fact what he did not say, then I think you are out of order.  You should withdraw.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your conditional ruling. But we have got evidence.  I can call upon Light House Television to bring their tape, I can call upon a number of FM stations to bring their tapes where the Minister was quoted saying, "I have found them."  But I do not think this afternoon I stood up to come and discuss the credibility of my Colleague the Minister of Defence.  I am only disputing the expenditure and the procurement policy and modalities of that Ministry.  I am only expressing concern that when we make money available in this House during the Budget,  it should be put to  proper use, it should purchase the correct equipment.  I should rightly observe it, Mr. Speaker, purchasing bad equipment in itself creates insecurity.  So by expressing concern about the kind of equipment, I am not causing insecurity.  It is they who are causing insecurity by bringing equipment which cannot secure our territory, our lives and property.  And there is evidence - which they have confirmed themselves - that the equipment was not good.  

I would like to move on to two or three other items mentioned in the report, one is of the C130.  That aircraft I would really recommend we have a Select Committee on how it crashed, on how it was maintained and on how it was repaired.  Mr. Speaker, when you repair an aircraft at US $8 million or US $11 million,  and its face value is US $3 million, I wonder about your arithmetic or your sanity.  What are you trying to do?  These are areas of concern!  Should we use that kind of money to repair an aircraft whose value we know already?  
Currently that aircraft is being used by somebody, that somebody has leased it from the Ministry of Defence or from the Privatisation Unit.  If I were to check on him,  you would call it insecurity.  But that person should not be allowed to be using an aircraft which in my opinion I consider an asset of our national defence.  It is the only aircraft of its own kind in this neighbourhood.   In the great lakes region, it is the only one.  The only person in the neighbourhood with that kind of aircraft is Ethiopia.  And we allow somebody to go and use it?  How do I know that person is not using it to ferry equipment for Mr. Kabila to terrorise our UPDF soldiers in Congo?  Mr. Speaker, I am expressing serious concern about such floppy ways of handling matters.  That aircraft is used for cargo, that aircraft is used for passengers!

MR. KAVUMA:  Information - if hon. Awori is kind enough to take it, Sir?  I thank hon. Aggrey Awori.  I want to use this opportunity to inform hon. Aggrey Awori, Parliament and the country that I recovered the C130 and it is back operating under Ministry of Defence's supervision.  This is the Ministry you have entrusted with caring for the security of this country.  It is a vote of no confidence in Government for somebody to allege that this aircraft may be ferrying equipment to enemy territory.  

I want also to inform this House that the question of repairs and the cost - I will give quite a lot of information but I wanted to give it to the Committee on Defence first, as a matter of management of our public affairs - was a result of accumulated lack of maintenance.  Those who are knowledgeable about aircrafts know that you must maintain it regularly at specific times;  this was not being done.  

For all these years it was in the hands of people other than the current leadership of the Ministry of Defence, under the NRM Government.  Many accidents occurred to that aircraft and many of them were never reported, which is understandable considering the turmoil we have been going through in this country  -political turmoil  - so that at the time of carrying out repairs, it was found that all those had to be repaired if the aircraft was to be safe again.  Mr. Speaker, I want to say Uganda should rest assured,  the C130 is doing a very good job, there is no insecurity about it at all, it is an asset we should be proud of.  I will be giving more information to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs under the chairmanship of our Friend, hon. Col. Mudoola.

MR. AWORI:  I would like to thank the hon. Minister of State for Defence for that information.  But I can assure you, that information is not more than 32 days old.  Mr. Speaker, I know one of the pilots who was once a resident of Upper Prison, Murchison Falls.  Mr. Speaker, -(Interruptions).

MR. WAMBEDE:  Thank you.  Mr. Speaker, I am at a loss.  I do not know who to believe as to what is correct.  The Minister of State for Defence said, 'we recovered the plane.' I do not know where we recovered it from.  And hon. Awori said that somebody is illegally using it.  For me to follow this debate, may you please, allow me know who is using this plane?  That is the clarification I wanted, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wambede, you are seeking clarification so that you can decide who to believe.  From who are you seeking clarification, from hon. Awori or from the Minister?

MR. WAMBEDE: From both, the Minister of State for Defence - as to where they recovered the plane from,  and from hon. Awori - who was this person using this plane?

MR. AWORI: I would like to inform the hon. Member that there is a report of Parliamentary Committee on this aircraft.  That is hon. Mwandha's report on that C130; National Economy has got a report on that aircraft;  Statutory Body has got a report on that aircraft.  We have been discussing that aircraft in this House for the past six months and there is ample information to corroborate what I am saying here.  What I am saying are not allegations - these are facts.  It is a fact, Mr. Speaker.  

We have evidence submitted to the Committee, that the aircraft was repossessed by the people who repaired it; who recovered it from Cairo, took it to Paris for repair and insisted that they must be paid.  If they cannot be paid, they have to use the aircraft until they have got their money's worth back.  They have done that.

MR. OMONGOLE:   I would like to inform this House that the Select Committee on Privatisation is right now handling the question of the Air Cargo and we are discussing it in depth.  We are handling this specific matter because the Air Cargo was listed for privatisation, but again it has reverted back to the Ministry of Defence.  

I would like to request the House, that if the House does not mind, the question of the Air Cargo should not be debated because it will be preempting our investigations, so that we could conclude and present a report to this House on that matter.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI:  If you allow me I will not allow any more interventions so that I can finish.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Awori, I think you have been on the Floor for quite some time and I am sure Members are envying you.  But I think there are others who would like to equally contribute.  If I would kindly request you to now wind up;  I think you have made your point.  But it seems we are now going into other areas which are not in the report.  I would like you to restrict yourself to the point or points that you started with and come to a conclusion.  

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I appreciate your ruling and consideration for giving me the Floor once again.  My problem has been interventions from the Floor.  Half the time I have been on my feet, half the time has been taken away by my Colleagues, which I appreciate.  

I would like to wind up on one more point - the matter of NEC.  Again, I note with concern that NEC has used a lot of money from the Ministry of Defence.    Why do we go on to capitalise certain companies while others are being privatised?  Are we  not contradicting ourselves?  What happened to NEC pharmaceuticals?  What happened to NEC mines?  I am told it is a subject of serious concern again in the Select Committee on Privatisation.  One mine which was owned by NEC was sold in a fashion which was not very good, to Hima and other companies.  This has created us a lot of problems.  I am raising serious concern.  
When you talk about restructuring NEC, what do you mean?  Are you just registering out companies for sale to other favoured people or what?  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity but once again re-emphasize my point that nobody should use the cloak of national security to cover up for embezzlement and usurpation of powers for other Ministries, and nobody should use that cloak for corruption.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MISS. BYANYIMA WINNIE (Mbarara Municipality): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the Floor.  I have just a few questions to ask and I hope that the Ministers concerned will answer them, in their summaries.  

First of all to the Minister of Internal Affairs.  This is a question I would have put to him before passing his Budget.  Unfortunately he is already spending his Budget and I have no means of forcing an answer out of him.  But the question lies close to the hearts of the people of my Constituency,  Mbarara Municipality.   In my Constituency they are asking that, 'where are the Moslems who were arrested and retained in places that were not well understood?'  The wives are demanding for answers, they want to know where their husbands are.  

It is true that sometime back the Minister came and gave an explanation about some of them, but there are still others whose situation is still unexplained - whose whereabouts are still unknown to the families.  I hope the Minister of Internal Affairs can give us that answer.

With regard to the Minister for Defence, I have some questions regarding the helicopter deal.  Sometime back, we were in another forum and it was also reported at a press conference that some senior officer in the Ministry of Defence admitted to having received a bribe for these helicopters.   What I want to know is, what steps have been taken to recover this money from this officer?  Has the money been paid back?  The officer having confessed and having been forgiven, has he returned the money?  

Secondly, I want to know that having done a deal for more than US $12 million to buy four helicopters and discovering later that the figure had been inflated by more than US $7 million, and that when the equipment came, it had not been overhauled and was not ready to fly,  I want to know what steps have been taken to punish those officers who are responsible for that bad contract?  Because, Mr. Speaker, I have been a technician myself.  One thing you learn to love and cherish are your tools.  It is more than 13 years since I last flew, but I still have my flight kit and when I look at my tools, I feel good about them.   I clean them, I brush them, I keep them - they are my mementos.  I find it criminal and very odd that people in Defence who went to buy their own tools went and bought junk for themselves.  It seems to me that they do not like their job; they are not committed to the defence of this country and therefore, the punishment to them should be equal to that crime of not having responsibility to defend this country.  They should be the ones most committed to buy the best tools.  They cannot be the ones to come back with junk.  If it was another department buying for them, I could understand.  But they are buying the equipment for use in their own work.  So, Mr. Speaker, it is not a small matter, it cannot be brushed under the carpet.  This Parliament should see that those officers responsible for that kind of lapse in our security - I think there must have been a lapse - are punished and we should see the punishment.

The other question is, what is the fate of the contract?  Was it cancelled?  Has it continued?  We would like to know, because it was a raw deal and there was a breach of contract; therefore a possibility of cancellation.  Was it cancelled?  I would like an answer.  

What consequences were there for the prosecution of the war?  Because they were being bought to fight a war on three fronts: in Sudan, on our Western border, and in the Congo itself.  Mr. Speaker, we are fighting wars and this equipment, we were told, was coming to help us to resolve this war in a decisive manner.  If the equipment was faulty -(Interruptions).

MAJ. MAYOMBO:   Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to be clarified because apart from being an MP for UPDF, I am in charge of intelligence of the Army.  I have not known whether we are in Sudan.  I do not know whether this - the hon. Member from Mbarara Municipality is saying, we are fighting in the Sudan.  Mr. Speaker, we are not fighting in the Sudan.

MISS. BYANYIMA WINNIE: I thank the hon. Member for the information.  At least I know that we are fighting to protect our border with Sudan - maybe that is what I meant - that we are fighting to defend our border with Sudan because the rebels keep running back into Sudan.  

What I wanted to know are the consequences for the prosecution of the war.  Because if I try to recollect, I see that those helicopters should have been working, fighting the enemies,  more than a year ago.  But I have never heard of them again.   If for one year there has been that delay, what consequences - how many other people have we lost because we got junk, because we could not defend them with those helicopters?  I want that loss to be calculated for us.  Because if they were expected a year and a half ago, and we do not have them, it means it has had an impact on how we can fight the rebels or whoever it is.  I want to know the consequences.  

Is it also true,  Mr. Speaker  - I heard this and I want confirmation from the Minister - that the company from which our Government bought these junk helicopters,  is it true that this company was already blacklisted as an undesirable company, and its owners are undesirable in Belarus?  And that this information was brought to the attention of the Ministry of Defence and in spite of having this information they went ahead to buy helicopters from this undesirable company?  Is it true?  I want confirmation.  Because if it is true, then Ministry of Defence must account.  If the host country tells you that this middleman you have brought is a quack, but you still insist and buy through that middleman, then somebody who took that decision should also account to this Parliament and to the people of this country.

If those questions on the helicopters are answered, Mr. Speaker, I would have the last one regarding again a matter of security.  It did happen that a Senior Officer of this country in the names of Lt. Col. Jet Mwebaze, died in strange circumstances.  Up to now I have been waiting to hear from the Minister of Defence which was employing him or from the Army, let me say, which he served, a full explanation of the circumstances surrounding his death.  Because he cannot just die like a fly.  A Senior officer of this country,  on a plane with gold dealers,  with strange kind of business people, arms dealers, people from all kinds of companies which we have already investigated here;  he dies on a plane which we are told was on a Government mission although on board, some of them have no business with Government as far as we know and there is no explanation from the Ministry of Defence?   I am not even asking on behalf of Lt. Col. Jet's family because I am not his family member,  I am just asking as a Ugandan.  

We have been investigating cases of corruption, we have seen Government officers involved with all kinds of people and we wonder!  This cannot be one of those cases just to disappear like that.  It must be fully explained.  This House must know what an officer was doing on that plane, what mission he had gone on.  Why were there those strange businessmen with him, had he gone to look for gold, was he smuggling?   We need to know because I am beginning to see that there is a thin line between doing Government business and doing shady deals.  People wear two hats at the same time and we are prevented from questioning.  Then you start hearing people jumping up on the Front Benches and saying, 'we are instilling fear.'  What fear?  If you have a weak heart do not come to this Parliament.  Do not come here, and - our people say that if death has no fear, why should the mourner have fear?  If death itself has not been ashamed to take someone away, why should the mourner be shy to mourn?  

If these things happen in Ministry of Defence and are unexplained, why should we be put to task not to ask?  If they did not happen, would we be asking?  If there was a record, an explanation from the Ministry about the loss of an officer, would we be here questioning?  We would not be.  So, Mr. Speaker, I share the concern of hon. Awori that we should know details about Defence expenditure and if it is going to be classified, let it be so defined and put in our law books.  There is no such thing as classified expenditure as yet, we will question everything and we will not allow Ministers to get away with anything under the guise of causing fear and alarm.  If they do not want fear and alarm,  they should perform properly and do not arouse suspicion and disappointment from us the Back Benchers.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me time.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West, Kampala):  Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much for having allowed me to say a few things.  I am not going to delay the House.  I have only one small problem.  

I have a man called Mukiibi the former Chief Account of the Greenland Bank, he was arrested by the security forces in the month of Ramadhan.  Since then this man's relatives do not know where he is,  he is being kept incommunicado in disrespect of the Constitution of Uganda.  I hope that is what the Minister of Internal Affairs will tell me.  Surely we are told that UCB has never sold its shares to the Greenland Bank, we are told that a new manager has been appointed,  but the Chief Account who would have shown the new Manager the affairs of the bank is in a place which we do not know.  And this man, he is a young man with a young family and in respect of our Constitution, he should only be held for 48 hours.  I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to come out to tell us exactly what offence this man committed because now we are now talking in terms of months.

Secondly, I am begging the Minister of Internal Affairs not to look at Moslems as cursed children of Uganda.  A good number of them are languishing in prisons;  for more than two years now they have never seen the walls of the court -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you taking the clarification point?

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I am seeking clarification because I am rather taken unawares.  I am beginning to think that it is a Thursday afternoon, for question time.  Are we in question time or debating the report on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs?  I was wondering.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  That lady is lucky, she has not had a child who was put in prison.  One day if she gets one she will know how painful it is -(Laughter).

MRS. MATEMBE:   Surely in this House we are hon. Members speaking to hon. Colleagues.  Is the hon. Nsubuga Nsambu in order to respond to hon. Babihuga as that lady who has never had a child?  Is he really in order to say, 'that lady who has never had a child?'  And in fact we interrupted him before he said much more.  Is he really in order to proceed in that manner?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, according to our Rules of Procedure and by virtue of being hon. Members we refer to one another courteously, even when are addressing one another we do so courteously.  When we are referring to our leaders we do so courteously though we may disagree among ourselves politically.  But, I think the use of language which tends to cause or arouse acrimonious debate is not proper, and I think in this particular case the reference to an hon. Member as 'that lady who has not had a child' and so on, is out of order.

MISS. BYANYIMA:  I just want to remind the House that whenever we are debating the Budget which is what we are doing now, we always take the opportunity to ask the line Minister concerned to answer questions concerning his sector even if they are not within his budget proposals.  Because, Mr. Speaker, sometimes some things are left behind.  Some things are policy issues that we are also looking at, some things are important matters that have fallen in his hands that he needed to have responded to.  

I am just reminding the House and saying that it is not proper to restrict Members who are debating a Budget proposal to raise concerns to a line Minister -(Interruption).

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  When the Speaker pronounced himself on the point of order and ruled the Member out of order, the Member is supposed to instantly withdraw.  Is it therefore in order for the debate to continue before the Member has responded to the ruling by the Speaker?  Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: It is not in order.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  I was very much misunderstood.  But according to your ruling I want to withdraw the phrase 'that lady',  but the rest remains -(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, my ruling was in respect the reference 'that lady who does not have a child.'

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I see.  I withdraw that word but I am telling the hon. Member of the House that if she had a grown up child who can face the strange thing of entering a prison, she would be sympathetic to the people who are languishing in prison. (Interjection)- Can he excuse me?  I was intending to contribute for very few minutes and now they are prolonging.  

THE SPEAKER: Are you prepared to take information?

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  From her?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Okay.

MISS. BABIHUGA:   Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Member that he does not need to use abusive words regarding my family.  I have got many children who are grown up and who are law abiding.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU:  I congratulate the hon. Member upon having many children -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, will you please resume your seat?

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I beg your pardon.

THEE SPEAKER: Will you please resume your seat?  I am still talking to you. When I am talking you sit down. I think you know it very well.  I am telling you that I made a ruling and you continued persistently to refer to the hon. Babihuga as 'that lady.'  That is inappropriate.  Are you listening,  hon. Nsubuga Nsambu or you are talking to your Colleague there?

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I am listening to you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: When I was talking, I was addressing you on this matter,  instead you were talking to your neighbour. It is in your interest that you listen to my ruling so that you exercise your right to speak.  I think that is the procedure.  Will you proceed and try to come to the point and wind up?

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  All I am saying is that a lot of young men are in Luzira;  they have been there for more than two years. They have never seen the walls of the court and yet our Constitution states that a man must be in prison for only,  or must be taken to court within, 48 hours.  

These people are suffering terribly, some are getting diarrhoea and others are dying in prison.  I am calling upon the Minister of Internal Affairs to assist in getting these people heard by the Magistrate,  whether he takes the Magistrates to the cells or if they appoint a group of Magistrates to go and finish off these cases;  after all they are an expense to the State to feed them and to look after them.  I am not applying for this in bad spirit.  The only little bad spirit that comes in is that the majority of them are Moslems.  

Thirdly, the Clock Tower here has become a very difficult place to pass through at around 5.00 a.m  up to 6.00 a.m.  The security officers around that area arrest people,  where they take them we do not know.  But people in my constituency have been coming to me and reporting to me that their people are missing.  I am praying that the Minister of Internal Affairs looks into this matter in order to restrain his men from taking our children.  Some of them come with their green vegetables on bicycles, they take them with their bicycles, but the men never come back.  We do not know where they are taken.
  
Fourthly, as a result of this retrenchment which is going on in the country, a number of people are loitering around the city looking for new jobs.  These are the people who are arrested as idle and disorderly people and when they are asked where they work they say we are looking for jobs.  Those are arrested and taken.  Surely I cannot imagine a man who was born in Katwe,  he has never been to any other village,  the only place he knows is Katwe and Kampala.  He comes to Kampala to look for a job and he is taken to prison for being idle and disorderly!   I am praying that hon. Minister of Internal Affairs investigates this matter thoroughly well to avoid all these things which are committed to the people who are in Kampala looking for jobs.  

The other matter which I had in mind would have gone to the Minister of Local Government but since we are not discussing the Local Government affairs,  I will excuse him.  I will deal with him when he comes to this House.  But I do not know whether he will ever come because we are now dealing with postmortems.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to make a few observations about the report on  Defence and Internal Affairs.  The first I would like to make is a small one of recognising and appreciating the job that is being done by Members of the Police who are manning our security in this House, at the entrance to Parliament and everywhere -(Applause)- I think they do a very, very good job.  Even if you leave these premises late at night they are on duty doing their job and I think it is worth recognising the very good job these people are doing.  
The second thing I want to say is that some time back -(Interjection)- yes, I am reminded that they are doing this job for no pay and you know in my language you speak to the lower people so that those above can hear.  I am saying that if these people are doing such a good job what do they get in return?   Mr. Speaker, the other thing I want to say is that some time back there was a report in the mass media about the plight of the policemen and officers of this country with regard to their housing.  We are told that there were several - Mr. Speaker, can I be protected?  -(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: You are fully protected.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Sir.  We are told that there were several families using the same room and sleeping in shifts.  These are family people with children, with wives and husbands and you know what I am talking about.  

We were advised again by the press that a number of housing units in the city of Kampala were going to be closed because they were unhealthy and they were likely to lead to epidemics of cholera.  I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I think the housing units of the Police and possibly the Army are likely to be the first victims of these cholera epidemics if what I saw on television is true.  

We talk about corruption and there is corruption in the Police Force.  But I would like to theorise that if a man or a woman has depressing surroundings in which they live, they wear depressing clothes, and they cannot wash their bodies, these people are likely to be subverted.  I know at least that for those of us who used to love civil service and we are proud of it and we worked there for little or no pay, we were comforted by the fact that we always went back home to reasonably good premises to live in.  Therefore, I would like to appeal to the  Government - and I know we are always reminded and it is probably true that we do not have the money - but I think we should have a deliberate policy to make sure that the people we deploy in charge of our security must have reasonable, I am not saying luxurious housing,  but even if it is one room for a Policeman, it should be a habitable room.  Not something that I saw on television, Mr. Speaker.  (Interruption).

MR. AWORI:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker,  and Prof. Kagonyera. I would like to inform the hon. Member that not long ago, actually last week,  I was sympathetic to one Police family. I said, 'look, you are congested;  three families in one little uniport sub-divided by bed sheets.  Why do you not move your family to my place,  I have extra so-called boy's quarters?'  He politely declined.  He said that, 'if I took accommodation from you, I will be accused of corruption.'  I said, 'no, it is only your children that I am worried about, at least they should have light, water and so forth.'  But he said, 'our regulations do not permit us to take accommodation in private non-gazetted areas.'  
I would like to take this opportunity with your permission, Prof. Kagonyera to appeal to the hon. Minister,  can you allow us to help the Police whenever we can?

PROF. KAGONYERA:  I thank hon. Awori for once being philanthropic,  because I do not know of any other time;  it is the only evidence I have.  But in management,  you must have a carrot in order to have the moral authority to use the stick.  We are talking about a corrupt Police and they are really are many of them.  Unfortunately, those who are not corrupt are the ones who suffer most because they do not have the money to do anything,  yet our system is such that these people are not recognised and rewarded for what they do.   

And even their colleagues, I am afraid to say, Mr. Speaker, abuse them, telling them that they are fools, they do not know what is good for them, because the corrupt have houses, they have vehicles, you name it.  But the good and decent are living in abject poverty, with no accommodation.  Therefore, if we are going to deal with corruption in these organisations like the Police Force, we should do something about it.  

I remember I was in the Cabinet when the then Minister of Justice came and appealed to Government to pay the lawyers, advocates, magistrates and the like, higher salaries than the rest of the civil servants; so that we could see whether it could help mitigate their corrupt methods of work.  Whether it helped or not, I do not know, but at least, we would have the moral right to criticise these people and deal with them.

I want to talk about the traffic regulations.  I have not revised the Traffic Act, but I find it ridiculous for a person to be incarcerated for a minor traffic offense like a third party licence that expired the day before.  And of course if he bribes his way out, he would never go to court.  But if this man says, 'no, I want to pay the fine.'  They say, 'okay, if you are going to pay the fine, wewe ka hapa.'  Therefore, I am appealing to the Ministers concerned that the traffic law should be simplified so that anybody who is charged with a minor traffic offense and admits it, gets a chit and goes and pays his fine without further ado.  Because, Mr. Speaker, the more complicated we make our laws, the more chances we are giving to people to be corrupt.  
There is no question, tough laws are not helping.  They are only encouraging people to be vulnerable, they fear going to jail and therefore they must be corrupt.  We are not encouraging our people to lead a straight life, especially with regard to traffic offenses.  I was told by a bus operator, Mr. Speaker, that every morning before his bus leaves the bus park, the man must have money in his pocket.  If he is going to Kabale, he has to spend so much at every stage.  One of the interesting things is that his bus was arrested for over speeding on humps.  The bus was going over humps and the policeman put up his hand and said, 'you are over speeding.'  

Sometimes these drivers actually over speed over these humps, probably you could arrest him for reckless driving, I do not know.  But obviously, you can see how far this thing can go and therefore, if we can simplify these rules, I think people can be willing to pay their fines and also not to suffer the indignity of going to jail for a simple traffic offense, Mr. Speaker.  

I thank the Committee for recommending non-custodial sentences.  All over the world, this is the way forward.  Prisons are overcrowded, people have committed minor offenses, there is no reason why we cannot ask them to do community service instead of being in custody, which in itself is a burden on a tax payer.

I want to talk about the plane of Air - (Interruption).

MR. NSAMBU:  It came to my knowledge that during the last strike, one of the drivers who were suspected to be participating in that strike was taken to Luzira on a charge of treason.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  I do not know what comment to make on that piece of information.  But obviously, the Police might have not had the idea of what treason means.  

Anyway, I was talking about Uganda Air Cargo.  I had a chance to sit in hon. Col. Mudoola's Committee hearings when they were getting reports on this Uganda Air Cargo.  It left me with the impression, Mr. Speaker, that I think there was extreme abuse of - shall I call it power?  Because we have a Member of this House who is an experienced man in aircraft business and the Committee was told, I was just listening, that it was not remotely possible that their aircraft should have been repaired for the amount of money that they claimed they used.  This is what a Member said and hon. Mudoola and his group, they remember who it is that told them this information, I am not dreaming.  So, obviously, something went wrong and therefore it is not correct, with due respect Mr. Minister of Defence,  to just pass over this issue.  

When the people, and especially some of those I have just been talking about who have nowhere to sleep, hear that several millions of dollars, which means billions of Uganda shillings that can build a whole barracks has been lost through sloppy behaviour, it is a shame!  You know, the story was very interesting, I think an elementary minded fellow could have detected some misbehaviour on the part of the people who were involved.  At least, I did. So, I think it is not correct, Mr. Speaker, for the Minister to just dismiss it and not find out what exactly happened.  We think something definitely went wrong and some people ought to answer for this sloppy behaviour.  

By the way, sometimes these people do not steal any money.  They are just so sloppy.  Someone comes and hoodwinks them, he makes a big kill and poor fellows we blame them for nothing.

MR. KAVUMA: I thank hon. Kagonyera.  I do not want the impression to go that I am just glossing over the matter of Uganda Air Cargo.  I did say,  Sir, and I repeat that I intend to give full information about Uganda Air Cargo. First to the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee at an appropriate time,  and then everybody will be free to access this information.  

I can only say, I am carrying out very extensive investigations concerning the plane,  from the day when it came to Uganda up now.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: I thank the Minister for that reassuring information he has given the House.  The impression I had is that hardly anything was happening.  

The last point I want to talk about, Mr. Speaker, is the veterans.  Some time back,  although I am not speaking with a lot of information about this,  but the reason why I am raising this is that I ran into a veteran about a month ago and this man almost assaulted me.  He was angry that even the little that was due to them was not getting to them.  The only reason why I am raising this is that the Ministers or whoever is concerned with the veterans does something about what is due to them or what they were promised.  You know, Mr. Speaker, it is wrong to promise a person something and you do not give it to him.  It is better you do not promise it at all.  So, if this man was right, that they have been mistreated, then I would like to plead with the Minister concerned that he looks into the issue of veterans.  

By the way, some of the security problems we have in this country may even remotely be related to some people who feel they have had a very raw deal and especially those who are familiar with the use of firearms.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much.

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac):  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairman and members of this Committee for a very comprehensive report.  

However, I hope the Chairman will not mind if I started off with a critical remark.  Under the mandate of the Ministry, the last paragraph on page 2, the Committee commended our gallant soldiers who have lost their lives defending this country.   Mr. Speaker, as representatives of the people, I find it very difficult to appreciate that this Committee while commending our gallant soldiers, which I would like to join them in doing, can overlook and forget to mention the suffering of the civilian population in the war zones.  

I think as representatives of the people, we must appear to be understanding,  and appreciate their plight as much as we appear to appreciate the gallantry of our men and women on the battle front.  I do hope that in future, this Committee will recognise that there are people there who have been suffering for many years. I look through section 2.3 on security and nothing serious was actually mentioned with regard to the plight of the civilians in that area.   

My second comment is, the Committee's report mentions that roads were constructed and this facilitated the movement of our soldiers and improved on their security and watch over the borders of Uganda.  I am also aware, and I think I heard that even the border between Uganda and Sudan was sealed at that time and these roads were constructed - according to my information  - not only on the Ugandan border side, but even on the Sudan border side.  In this regard, I am rather disappointed that the head of the Military Intelligence does not seem to be aware of this activity on our part of the military across the border with the Sudan.  

The most important comment I want to make with regard to these two issues, the construction of roads and sealing of the border are number one;  my information is that the big officers who are in charge of the northern war situation formed a construction company and awarded themselves the contract for constructing these roads.  I would like the Committee to investigate this further, because this is really an abuse of office of a character which we cannot tolerate.  My information seems to be reasonably accurate, but I think the Committee should have the opportunity to find out how these roads were constructed.  

My second concern on this matter, - (Interruption).

MAJ. MAYOMBO:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker and Dr. Okulo Epak for giving way.  Let me re-state my position that as per 2 0'clock this afternoon when we entered Parliament, Uganda did not have a single soldier inside the Sudan.  I thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  As per 2 0'clock, this hour when we meet to discuss the budget of the Ministry of Defence, I should be able to confirm to our erstwhile boss of the Military Intelligence what the situation was actually  -(Interruption)-   Mr. Speaker, I further... 

MR. WERIKHE:  I would like to thank my hon. Colleague for giving way.  I would like to inform hon. Okulo Epak that it is not true that members of UPDF formed themselves into companies that have contracted the construction of the roads in the North.  In fact, as a Ministry, we normally receive all these reports at TMT meetings and indeed, I can confirm that the firm that won the contract does not contain any of those people he has referred to.  Thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I am glad the hon. Minister has said -(Interruption).

MR. AWORI:  I would like to inform my hon. Colleague, the Director of Military Intelligence that indeed, his information was either incomplete or not accurate.  We do not want to go into details,  but he knows the unit which is protecting the construction unit was doing so along the border.  From time to time, they are found fetching water on the other side of the border.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank the hon. Minister for letting me know that it was constructed by a firm and it is that firm whose ownership has the interest of some of the top guys who are in the North.  I think one of them is already sufficiently afflicted, I do not want to add to his ordeals.  

My second concern is that despite all this investment in the roads and in the sealing of the borders, we still have very serious problems with Kony incursions into Uganda.  I would therefore,  -(Interruption).

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  I think hon. Okulo Epak is making a very grave allegation.  That people charged with the responsibility of defending Uganda especially from the known threat from the Sudanese regime, have turned their duty into a business.  That instead of engaging in this duty, they have engaged in forming companies to do construction work on security roads.  This, if true, is a very grave matter.  May I therefore, on a point of order, Mr. Speaker, request that the hon. Okulo Epak substantiates this allegation?  Failure of which he could face the consequences of failing to substantiate.

THE SPEAKER:  I do not, hon. Minister -(Interruption).

MR. AMAMA MBABAZI:  I am sorry I am raising a point of order.  Can hon. Okulo Epak substantiate that statement and if he does not, is he in order to make such a grave allegation?

THE SPEAKER:  I am in great difficulty in appreciating the point of order.  But if we can - I do not know whether I should construct it.  You see the point is that the hon. Okulo Epak was making a reference to people who are supposed to do a certain duty, but who were not doing so.  Instead they were doing other things of personnel gain.  I think that is what he is trying to say.  But as to whether it is in order, I think on this Floor it has already been raised, this issue of the military personnel in the Northern part of the country engaging in other matters which they are supposed to engage in.  It is not a new story.  I think Members of Parliament here have been saying some Members of Parliament are prolonging the war, because they are doing business out of it.  And this is a subject which has been discussed both in terms of general debate on this Floor and also in terms of the debate which arose out of a Report of the Sessional Committee on Defence.   I think there is nothing out of the ordinary, talking the way he has.  

And if that is the point of order you are talking about,  I think I will find it difficult to rule that it is out of order.  But I still say I did not quite appreciate what the point of order was. 

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker,  for your wise advice to the hon. Member from Kinkizi who is overflowing with power for intimidation.  I do hope that it can stop in Parliament here and it does not go outside,  that degree of aura of intimidation which he is 'wearing' on this very small matter.  

I did say and requested the Committee to investigate this matter and if the Committee wants to do so, I am prepared to go with information to that Committee.  I shall have done sufficient research to warrant an information to the Committee.  It is up to the Committee to accept to investigate this matter.  The matter of the soldiers and the officers in the UPDF,  despite their performance,  using the wars for financial and economic gains is no news.  We have timber, we have simsim, we have beans, we even have maize in Loro barracks.  The barracks in Loro is being farmed by the army for their own purposes.  The wives of the soldiers who are on front line have been put in the Loro barracks and the army has put there tractors and they are farming.  For whom are they farming?  Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister who was a Minister of State for Defence failed to defend the situation and probably that is why he is now somewhere in Foreign Affairs.  

I would like to mention,  and I was continuing that despite all this investment, the improvement in the security situation does not seem to be there.  I would wish the hon. Minister of State for Defence to tell us by what percentage did the security in the North improve by virtue of the construction of these roads and the sealing off of the border?  As far as I and the people I represent are concerned, there has been no improvement whatsoever.  Which therefore means some of these activities really do not go for the objective for which they are meant.  
The Committee recommended the continuation of NEC or any other parastatal in the Defence.  I am surprised!  Mr. Speaker, NEC - I think the President of this country is the Chairman of the Board of Directors of NEC - and it is the worst performing parastatal in this country.  The Committee has reported that these parastatals do not produce audited accounts.  I see no earthly reason why a parastatal which has been performing so badly should be given a lease of life.  And I do not see why this,  of all parastatals,  should be the one to be recommended to continue while all the other parastatals are being dissolved or sold off.  I do not agree with the Committee.  

My own view,  and I think a lot of people share this view, is that the army as it is, is the least suited - particularly our kind of army - is the least suited to run a business.  And the NEC and all other parastatals within the Ministry of Defence should be disbanded and we stop the haemorrhage of treasury finances.  

I want to handle another issue; this is the use of LDUs and home guards on the battlefront.  Mr. Speaker, I am aware that LDUs are being used on the battlefront.  I would want to know from the hon. Minister on what terms and conditions are these people used on the battle-front?   On what terms and conditions are these people used on the battle-front fighting side by side with the regular soldiers?  

I also want to know from the Minister,  when is the law governing the operations of the LDUs and home guards going to be presented to Parliament?  Failing which it might be possible for us to ask for the activities of the LDUs and the home guards to be discontinued.  

I want also to mention one important factor.  This is, you see we are talking here about the allocation of resources, but on the other hand we have the Public Accounts Committee which monitors how these resources are used.  I want to mention here at this time and I will repeat it when we discuss the Public Accounts Committee report on the Defence Budget on expenditure,  Mr. Speaker, I do not recall and there is no way in which this Parliament has ever approved any Budget called 'classified expenditure.'  But after we labour here to allocate resources to be properly spent and subjected to auditing according to the laws of this country, the Ministry of Defence refuses to give to the Auditor General some of the expenditure under the guise of classified expenditure.   There is no such expenditure in our Constitution, nor in our Statutes or Financial Regulations.  So, the Minister of Defence might wish to tell us now whether in this Budget which we were approving there was also something called classified expenditure?  And where he got the mandate from to have that kind of expenditure.  

Finally, I have a list - which includes myself - of people who have wantonly been refused to be paid their rent by the Ministry of Defence since 1994.  The Ministry of Defence seems to arrogate to itself whether or not it should pay people whose properties they occupy.  And they can wantonly even withdraw the payment and question the right of ownership of the landlord instead of walking away from the property.  
I also have the impression from this list and this action that the Ministry of Defence seems to be paying people whose properties they occupy on sectarian basis.  Otherwise, I see no reason why since 1994 people cannot be paid their rent.  People who have rendered services to the Ministry of Defence and assisted in providing accommodation to the officers of the Ministry of Defence of this country, the only reward they can get is an insult, for they are not being paid.  This is unwarranted and it is not good.  I think it does not augur well for the Ministry which will constantly require the goodwill of the citizens of this country in their operations and activities.  

I would therefore like the hon. Minister to assure me and I would want to go and assure the people who made representation to me, that all those who have been owed rent since 1994 will be paid their rent within this financial year.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okumu; and that will be followed by hon. Lukyamuzi and we see how we proceed from there.  But I am only giving you seven minutes each.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to comment briefly on some of the points raised,  and recommendations made by the Committee.  

One of the recommendations made by the Committee touched on the recognition and payment of compensation or some kind of a reward to former soldiers.  People who have served this country in various armies.  You know the history of this country has been that those who served under Mr. Amin are called Amin's Army, those who served under Obote are called Mr. Obote's Army and so on.  But under the NRM Government, there has been a proposal that all those people who served in the various armies be recognised because they served a nation.  Particularly with regard to soldiers from my area, Nebbi district or the southwest Nile sub-region, each time there is election there is enumeration of soldiers.  Each time there is something happening in the area, there is counting of soldiers.

MR. KAVUMA:  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to give hon. Okumu and Members of this House and the country at large information that we have been working on documenting all members of the former armies with a view to discharging them properly so that they can get their terminal benefits.  I am glad to report that we have gone a long way in that exercise and within the next weeks some of the first beneficiaries will be getting their dues paid and many of these come from hon. Okumu-Ringa's region.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I would like to thank the hon. Minister for that information.  If I did not have that information I was going to give a small advice and maybe the Minister could still take the advice that since the numbers of soldiers are known, they have been documented, if there is no immediate cash to reward them I would like to propose that the Ministry of Defence comes up with a certificate or whatever form that could be designed to issue to these people as the first step to recognise that they are there.  Some are elderly.  So that when, God forbid, they do not live long enough to receive the money, that certificate could now act as a means to claim that benefit.  This could be an innovation which in the long run could work very well.  Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose to the Minister to consider this in their various fora.

Two;  the issue of procurement for the army was raised, particularly for equipment.  I would like to raise the issue of procurement for uniforms.  It is true the UPDF has done a good job in protecting the territorial integrity of this country and also protecting the people on the roads.  Between Karuma and Pakwach we have had a lot of insecurity problems, but I am glad that the UPDF has done its best to reduce that insecurity.  But what some of us note with a lot sympathy is that those soldiers are badly dressed, some are in slippers.  Sometimes one gets scared about whether or not this is a national army or it is the guerilla's, the Kony people who are on the street.   In times of procurement,  could those concerned dress these patriotic soldiers who are taking care of the lives of the people on the road?  So that at least they are in gumboots, and wear attire which are not rags?  That is an appeal I would like to make to the Army. 

With regard to proposals in the Ministry of Internal Affair's recommendation by the Committee, I heard the Chairman talking about proposals to construct a Police Station in Masaka, Butyaba and a few other places particularly the new districts.  However, I note with a lot of concern that Nebbi district which has been a district since 1974 does not have a structure for the Police Headquarters.  The current Minister of Internal Affairs hon. Major Tom Butime was the first Special District Administrator in Nebbi 13 years ago.  He did a good job.  But up to now he has not done the needful to remember that he left a police station whose wall is made of iron sheets of gauge 32, the roof is also made of iron sheets of gauge 32, the doors of the police station are made of iron sheets of gauge 34.  I would like to remind him that the structure he left is still there.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I hope you will give me another chance later.  But I just wanted to inform the hon. Member of Parliament for Padyere that I actually remembered Nebbi and that I approved money for the building of Nebbi Police Station;  and this money is there.  Work was supposed to begin in December last year, but they delayed because they have to complete Arua Police Station.  That team which is constructing Arua Police Station will not come back to Kampala.  After Arua, they will construct Nebbi Police Station.  So I have not forgotten and I take pride in having been the first SDA there.  I thank you.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I would like to thank Maj. Tom Butime for that information.  As a matter of fact on a self help basis,  we the leaders of the district had started some work.  I am happy to note that hon. Muruli Mukasa is here whom we requested to lay the foundation stone of a Police Headquarters on our own initiative.  But now if the Minister of Internal Affairs is doing something, we do appreciate that very much.

Lastly,  Mr. Speaker, a lot of cry has been made by the citizens of this country with regard to the new terminology which is called 'safe houses.'  I do remember that His Excellency the President and even the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs, Maj. Tom Butime in one of his addresses to the nation, he stated that safe houses will be gazetted and that everyone will have access to that gazette.  The question I am posing now is whether or not safe houses have been gazetted.  If they have, are the gazettes available?  

Sometimes we do not have access to these gazettes.  If they are gazetted, would the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs give priority to Members of Parliament so that they have access to the gazette, so that we do not raise these questions time and again?   Because out there, in terms of our national security, the people have complained and have continued to complain that safe houses, as a matter of fact, should not exist.  If they do, they must be legal.  With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker,  -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Order!  I hear telephones ringing and I am not very comfortable with that.  Can the person who has a telephone ringing in his or her pocket do something about it, especially by withdrawing and switching it off, then come back?  Proceed!

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I was on the point of safe houses and I made a passionate appeal to the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs that when the safe houses are gazetted, we Members of Parliament should be given priority to have access to the gazette so that we are able to explain to the population on issues relating to the complaints which have come from time to time, especially with regard to people who may be held  incommunicado.  

With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for having given me an opportunity.  Thank you.

MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Before I proceed, the issue raised by hon. Okumu regarding the gazetting of safe houses is very important.  Because I remember after we had made some noise over these safe houses, the President of Uganda came out to agree with the proposer that the houses be gazetted.  
I want to add that before they are gazetted, they should qualify to look like prisons so that you do not simply talk about gazetting of houses or structures which do not qualify to be prisons.  

The report being discussed this afternoon is very important because my impression is that no State, anywhere in the world, can survive as a nation state without a security order.  So, the constituency I represent - Rubaga South - requested me to say something about this report.  

First and foremost, I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs, with regard to the Police.  I would like to know whether the present uniform used by the Police has been gazetted as expected of the State, by law.  Mr. Speaker, any State which does not have a proper image of the Police does not deserve to be called a nation state, because the Police Officers are supposed to be people of integrity, people of dignity.  They must be attended to by the State in a manner which is deserving. 
I have been in Kenya and I spent some six months in Machakos and I admired the structures of housing for the Police in Kenya.  

Right now in Lubaga South, we have about 15 Police Posts and the people I represent, not only Police Officers, have been visiting me day after day, that we should do something, we in Parliament, about the state of their housing - it is alarming! A lot has been said and I would like to admire Prof. Kagonyera's remarks. Since we all know that the state in which the Police Officers live is alarming - three families staying in one room!  We believe Government has taken note of that and we have done sufficient talk to warn Government to assist the Police.   

As a crusader, I would like to come out in the open that if nothing is done to improve the state of the affairs I am discussing, regarding the Police, within six months, I will lead a demonstration in support of the Police - a demonstration to support the Police Officers so that the housing welfare is improved, and I know I will get the support of people all over the country.  

MR. KINTU MUSOKE:  I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that because of our history, we cannot have Police structures as the ones he is admiring in Kenya.  This is because Kenya has not had the 25 years of breakdown of the State and I am sure, as a result of this breakdown of the State and the economy, that is why hon. Lukyamuzi stays in Kisenyi.  I think we would have been able to do better if we had lived in better circumstances.  Thank you very much.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: In any case I lovingly stay in Kisenyi so that I identify myself with the people I represent.  

Time has come for me and others to propose to the Government that it is time you reduced the Police Force so that you can afford to give them facilities.  One of the reasons why the Police Force cannot be facilitated is because you have over-concentrated on the Army which is eating up all the taxpayers money and you well know that without a Police, as a State, you may not go very far.  

MR. KAVUMA:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for hon. Lukyamuzi to state that the cause for the problems we have in the Police is because we have over-concentrated on the Army and by that implying that the Army is so huge, when in actual fact this House and the country knows that we have just gone through a very rigorous exercise of reducing the size of the Army in accordance with the policy agreed upon by this Government?  Is he in order to try and create this artificial antagonism between organs of security of this country by making such false allegations?  Especially as he knows that even after our reductions of the Army, we still - as many Members have rightly pointed out - have a long way to go to make sure that our soldiers enjoy facilities that befit people who are patriotic and are defending their country?  Is he in order to create this kind of antagonism, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if hon. Lukyamuzi is aware that this Government has had an exercise of down-sizing the Army from a certain point in an effort to have an Army which can be easily facilitated and which can be easily trained to become a professional Army,  and he still makes a statement to the effect that the Army is too large and there is too much concentration on the Army, then he would be out of order.  But if he was not aware of this fact, then probably he would be in order out of the fact that he is ignorant about this particular development.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I was certainly not aware about that development; now I am aware.

MAJ. MAYOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Lukyamuzi.  It is barely two years since the Army withdrew from Lubiri, which is very close to,  if not part of,  hon. Lukyamuzi's constituency.  I am also aware that the Army has a Unit in hon. Lukyamuzi's constituency on a hill called Mutundwe and I know that the accommodation of the Army there is in houses we call, Mama ingia pole,  meaning that they are made of grass.  And because the army is mainly male dominated,  if an Officer or man brought in his wife who did not know about the weakness of the structures, it is very easy for that structure to collapse.  
I would like to clarify that the army does not live above society.  It recognises that our economy cannot provide everything at the same time.  It has accepted that it is better to be trained first and equipped and thereafter,  after being combat ready,  go into the shelter and other welfare requirements.  Those priorities have been accepted by this august Assembly and the Ministry of Defence is busy implementing those priorities.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI:   I would like to inform this House, much more so Representatives of UPDF, that their Commander-in-Chief has on two different occasions publicly admitted that the Army had been losing an average of Shs 200 million a month in what we call misappropriation.  As a result certain people are in jail.  Mr. Speaker, Shs 200 million a month for one year can provide some accommodation for Police.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  I was not happy with the observations made by the Committee in regard to how accidents can be reduced on the roads.  It is very funny and this is a challenge to the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  While the Police can afford to train its drivers, and while the Police can afford to terrorise drivers for bad driving whether they make mistakes on the road or not, they have up to now not afforded to put in place a national driving institution which can be emulated by all the private school managers.  The country is now depending on the private people manning the schools, sometimes affording to take bribes because they have to survive.  But the State has never afforded to put up an institute which could be emulated.  I propose very seriously that in the next budgetary order, such a school should be catered for and I will be on the forefront to support it.   

I was also not happy as a representative of the people, because we have to address this Report realistically.  When hon. Ssendawula came up with his Budget last June, he never mentioned anything in regard to what UPDF is spending in Congo.  But we know very well that Uganda is spending some money in the Congo.  I would like the Minister of Defence to clarify to this House on behalf of the people we represent, where this money comes from that is facilitating the UPDF in the Congo.  We should be accountable; we cannot expect that money to come from heaven, it must be coming from somewhere.  If it is coming from donors, as representatives of the people, we have a right to know.  

I have a small office around Najjanankumbi and on three consecutive occasions in the evenings, I have physically seen two trailers ferrying soldiers - young soldiers - in new uniforms with fresh arms, towards the direction of Entebbe.  On several occasions,  I have seen them physically.  Where do they go?  They are well dressed, they have new arms, where do they go?  

MAJ. MAYOMBO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way.  Mr. Speaker, our duty as provided for in the Constitution, is to guard the territorial integrity of Uganda.  I am sure hon. Lukyamuzi knows that Entebbe has very strategic installations which are still being guarded by the UPDF including the waters, the State House, the Air base, the Airport, the Islands and the people living in Entebbe.   So, it is our constitutional duty to guard and protect the lives and properties of those people in Entebbe.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I will be surprised to see that kind of arrangement going on every week, every week, every week!  

MR. KARUHANGA:  I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that it is normal for soldiers to alternate with one another.  When others have performed their duty up to some time, they withdraw and others continue with the same duty.  So, it is normal for soldiers to keep on going to Entebbe all the time and coming back.  Thank you.
 
MR. LUKYAMUZI: In new uniforms with new arms every day, every week?  

In conclusion, for the good of the people I represent in this august Assembly, I have been alarmed by the degree of inconsistency in regard to how our Defence Office and the Foreign Office occasionally comment on matters regarding our security  and insecurity.  We get ashamed in foreign affairs when we have two conflicting reports coming from the same Government officials.  Recently, it was reported that as many as 120 UPDF and Rwandese soldiers were captured by Chadian Forces in the Congo and a kind of interaction which came up to explain looked so insufficient, so misinformed, so shaky, so obnoxious, so questionable that I got ashamed.  I said, 'my God, where are we going?'   I would like to warn my Government which I dearly love that this is the time - the time is now for us to get more organised.  

Recently, when an accident occurred over the Jet plane, some people termed me the killer of certain people.  I was in hiding for several days.  During the requiem mass, someone came out with pronouncements which almost scared me, and yet I came out simply to inquire on behalf of the people I represent in this House, that so and so has told me, this is like this and that.   Can I seek to know what is happening?  When several people came up to answer, they gave conflicting reports, and in the end I merged as the winner because I told the people the reality.  

Finally I would like to say that it is unfortunate also that hon. Col. Mudoola's Report did not seriously comment on the efforts which Ugandans have made about the rebels fighting us for the last 13 years.  When hon. Muruli Mukasa who is seated in front of us visited my constituency in Ndeeba, he admitted that Uganda is being fought by as many as ten fighting groups.  That is too big a figure for us not to be worried and scared!  I would like to request the Committee,  when it next meets,  to address the issue of dialogue very seriously because we cannot continue dying like rats when we have mouthpieces to address the matter. (Interruption)- (Mr. Muruli Mukasa rose).

THE SPEAKER: Is it information or clarification?

MR. MURULI MUKASA: It is information, Mr. Speaker.  Thank you hon. Lukyamuzi.  It is true I visited Ndeeba.  I had gone to talk to participants in a seminar and indeed I mentioned a number of fighting groups that are operating in the north and northwest,  but the number did not go up to ten and actually those groups are not ten.  

Unfortunately, the hon. Member was not in that seminar and I do not know whether he had put anybody to write notes for him or not, but if it is true that he had somebody there,  it is unfortunate he informed him wrongly about the number of fighting groups that I talked about.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think I would like us to conclude this subject.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:   In conclusion, I am  absolutely surprised because I was invited to Eva Hall in Ndeeba, the participants included hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso, hon. Muruli  Mukasa but because of the amount of fear I caused in the place when I came,  he is forgetting that I was there in person and I interacted in the discussion.  I excuse him, but if you are a God abiding citizen you should apologize because I physically welcomed you to Eva Hall in Ndeeba.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have made your contributions.  I think the Ministers who are affected by this report should have an opportunity to respond.  But I do not think that I would be fair to them and also to you if I asked them to start now and then we go to the Chairperson and then pronounce ourselves on this matter.  

I would therefore adjourn the House until tomorrow when the Ministers will respond and the Chairperson will also respond.  But before we leave the Chamber, I would like to make this announcement.  Hon. Musumba Isaac requests Members of the Committee on the National Economy and Natural Resources and Energy to meet tomorrow at 10.00 a.m  venue is not indicated but I am sure it must be around the premises of Parliament,  to consider and discuss matters relating to UEB.   The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m tomorrow.

(The House rose and adjourned until Wednesday 10th February, 1999 at 2.00 pm).
