Tuesday, 1 February 2005

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am very happy to welcome you from Christmas, end of year concluded recess.  I hope you had a peaceful and enjoyable Christmas, New Year’s Day, Idd Aduha and January 26th celebrations.

I congratulate you individually and collectively for what you were able to achieve last year and since the beginning of this year. It is appropriate to thank the former Ex-Officio Members of Parliament who have been deployed elsewhere.  For this I want to mention hon. Gerald Ssendawula, who was formerly the Minister of Finance, and has been with Parliament since 1980 to-date.  I want to mention hon. Edward Rugumayo, who has been Minister of Trade and at one time was the Chairman of the Legislature here in early 1980s, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja and hon. Dr Fabius Byaruhanga.  On your behalf, I wish them success in their new roles.  

The new appointments of ministers whose appointments we shall consider tomorrow. I want to congratulate our colleagues who have officially retired from UPDF, and I wish to thank them for the great contributions they have made -(Applause)

Our Public Relations Manager, Mr Expedito Kagole Kivumbi, who has served Parliament for 18 years, was recently appointed in Public Service as Director, Information.  We shall miss him, but all the same wish him success in that role. (Applause)

Honourable Members, the recent recess attracted a lot of debate and many questions were raised why Parliament went on recess when it had a lot of work to do, especially the review of the Constitution that will lead to political transition in the country.  Yes, hon. Members, you went for a recess because it had been planned for, it was part of our calendar.  You needed it and I believe it has helped you carry out your Parliamentary work, which is not only done in Kampala, but it is also done in your constituencies.

As for the Constitutional review, I want to assure the general public that Parliament will duly carry out its mandate and view the Constitution when the necessary instrument, or call it the tool, for doing that is ready.  This instrument is the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, which has not yet been presented.  As soon as it is presented, we shall adjust our programmes to fit in the Constitutional Review.  I have no doubt of your resolve, of your competence to handle this matter- (Applause)- Our interest will be to do a good job, which we shall do.  The public should also know that the other Constitutional programmes we shall concurrently handle with the Constitutional Review.  So, I hope nobody will ask us in April, when we start the Budget process, why we are handling Budget process when the Constitution has not been completed.

The important request to make to you is that we should be diligent in handling our work; with diligence we shall be able to effectively handle the business before us.  Diligence will be exhibited by all of you being here, so adjust your private engagements to do what is expected of you.  The Constitutional Review will be handled in accordance with the Constitutional provisions and our Rules without a minus or a plus.  We shall aim at producing the best for our country; national interest will float over personal interest.  I thank you- (Applause)

2.34
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Recently in the newspapers it was reported that the remains of the Late Shaban Nkutu were exhumed.  Again yesterday and today in “The New Vision” the Government employed forensic experts to exhume the remains of the foreign NRA fighters.  

In view of this, we the family of the Late Kiwanuka have been doing our best to exhume the remains of the Late but with a little success. We have approached several people who are willing to help.  It is fact now, which you have stated; he was buried in Luzira in a cemetery, which is facing Muyenga.  There are several people, some have died, but some are still living like Mr Mulemezi, who was a CID Officer.  He is there, we approached him, but he is fearful that Government may do something; but we tried to allay his fears, but he refused; he is a very old man. So, I am appealing to Government to assist us in exhuming the remains of the Late Kiwanuka- (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, I am appealing to Government because we would like this thing to be done before the people who can help us to identify are all dead because they are very old; many have died.  We have evidence, as I have said Amin himself is the one who shot him in the head twice, that one we are sure, at least according to the reliable information we have.  Dr Aliker is still there, who was his dentist; he can help us to identify the teeth.  So, I am appealing to Government to assist us in this exercise.  Thank you very much.

2.36
MR MOSES KIZIGE  (Bugabula County North, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I raise in response to your communication to the Chair in as far as Rules of Procedure and the process of constitutional amendment is concerned.  
As you may recall before the end of the last sitting, a motion was moved by hon. Nyombi Thembo and seconded by myself concerning the amendment of the Rules of Procedure related to the constitutional amendment process and also to increase the number of the official Parliamentary sitting days to make the constitutional amendment process expeditious.

Under our Rules of Procedure, the committee which is supposed to handle this motion can take as long as it considers it necessary to consider this motion.  But given the importance of the matter before this House, I would urge the Committee to come up with a position on this motion expeditiously and in not later than 14 days.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, we note the – the record is that the matter was sent to the committee, but I think soon after we went for a recess, Christmas and other things, now that we are back the committee will be able to report on the progress.

2.38
MRS MARGRET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise to congratulate you and the Rt. hon. Deputy Speaker upon hosting the East African Legislative Assembly and the Inter-Parliamentary Committee in Uganda which event took place last week.  It is very important that we have this in our Hansard. (Applause)

The Committees on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, Committees on Trade, Works, Finance, all Members attended and we were honoured by the presence of His Excellency, the Vice President, who gracefully opened the Workshop.  Most importantly, Rt. hon. Speaker, I wanted to report that there has been observations that the process of integration should be taken seriously by this august House and the respective Parliaments because they are very, very important in this process of integration.

Justice Wako’s Fast Track Committee and others have set the date for the Political Federation by the year 2013, and we look towards that date and before that date, a lot of things should be put in place. 

I just want to add that it was observed that in many of our Parliaments, there is very little discussion undertaken on this process of Federation and also sensitisation of the public is very inadequate.  I want to say that the Rt. hon. Deputy Speaker undertook to request and we should re-echo this that as His Excellency the President makes the State of the Nation Address to Parliament, he should also report on the process of the integration to this House so that in the process, we are able to be updated and be able to follow up on the events and the issues of the integration.

Finally, I want also to re-echo on the fact that the summit, that is the Heads of States, they undertook among others also to appoint a Minister solely responsible for the East African Community Affairs.  Particularly in our case Uganda, we have not done so and was even equally frustrating because for the whole three days we were in Entebbe there was no Minister responsible for the community present and I think Members of the East African Legislative Assembly have also expressed their disappointment because many times they sit and there is no frontbench.  I think that is an issue which we need to call upon the frontbench, the very Leader of Government Business, to remind His Excellency the President to take very seriously.  We, otherwise, appreciate His Excellency, the President, who was able to host our delegates for a dinner and we look forward to him taking up many of the issues, which remain hanging.  I thank you.

2.42
MAJ. BASHAIJA KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  May I take this opportunity also, Sir, to congratulate you on having successfully completed 2004 together with the Deputy Speaker, the Clerk to Parliament and the entire staff of Parliament and to wish you well and good health as you prepare for very serious Business to come in consideration of our nation.  May I put on record my thanks to you for recognising some of us who served diligently in NRA, later UPDF and have now retired- (Applause) Thank you for recognising us.

Mr Speaker, I applied to retire from UPDF in 2001 and I have said it before in this House.  It has taken this long unfortunately, nonetheless better late than never.  But since last night, I have been bombarded with a lot of telephone calls, people, and journalists, wanting to get my comments as to why I was not for instance promoted.  I have said this before, as a young man from Makerere there was a national cause that some of us had to answer.  It was never my intention, it is not my intention to pursue a military career, but those were circumstances that were imposed on us and we could not do much.  

Now what I am putting on record, Sir, I have no ill feeling whatsoever, I am a happy gentleman as you see me, very smart and no question –(Laughter)- about that and I will continue living good life and I have no ill feeling.  That is the work of a Commissions Board and their Commander in Chief, and I wish my colleagues well, those who were promoted and retired, but more so those who have remained in the force to make sure that they do a diligent job and work for this country so that never again should this country slide back to the turmoil days.  Thank you.

2.45
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I also join the colleague to wish you a very happy and successful year and also look forward to balance the deliberations as we propose to amend various articles of the Constitution.

Mr Speaker, also permit me to congratulate the President on appointing or reshuffling his Cabinet.  I would like to congratulate those who climbed the ladder and are about to leave us on the back bench to go to the front bench, and I simultaneously commiserate with those colleagues who were looking forward to moving to the front bench, but somehow, at the same time I congratulate them on missing the net because if they had been caught in the net, obviously they would have been in a more difficult position.

I also add my voice to those who have congratulated Members of the Armed Forces who have been promoted and those who have been permitted to resume civilian life, especially my honourable colleague here, Maj. Kazoora, and many others.

Mr Speaker, having congratulated them, may I also express concern on the matter of professionalisation of the Army.  At an appropriate time, I will raise in this august House the matter of promotions in the Army.  Professionalisation of the Army does not mean politicisation of the Army –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I will not allow a fully-fledged debate on issues, these are matters of one or two minutes.  So, since you intend to move a motion on that, let us wait for it.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Finally, I would like to request the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, at an appropriate time today or later, to make a statement on a matter which is disturbing the districts of Kasese and Bundibugyo on a matter again pertaining to my good Friend, Charles Mumbere, the King in that particular area.  

I bring up this matter with a personal interest.  I was responsible partly for the education of this young man, Charles Mumbere.  When we took him to the United States for further education, I understood at the material time that he was a King, now he is no longer a King according to this Government.  Could the hon. Prime Minister tell us why a man can be a King today and no longer a King, and then come back to Parliament to reinstate him?  I would like to know from the Government what the position on the matter is.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were a Member of the Constituent Assembly.  You know I introduced a chapter on traditional leaders, you read it.

2.49
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bigiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I also wish to join my colleagues in wishing you, the Deputy Speaker and the House a prosperous fruitful New Year.  This is a very important year to the life of this House and I hope we shall live to the expectations.  But I wanted to raise a supplementary matter in regard to what the hon. Margaret Zziwa has just said.  

We are in the know of the launch of the Customs Union, and by the launch of the Customs Union, the word “smuggling” moved out of our vocabulary.  But I am surprised up to this day, people on the common border with Kenya are still being harassed in the name of smuggling.  The Anti-smuggling Unit is still as heavily deployed as it was before the Customs Union and the people are wondering, what is the meaning of the Customs Union?  

Can Government make a deliberate effort to explain to the people what actually is expected of them in their day-to-day activities at the border?  We would have expected that the Anti-smuggling Unit would now deploy on borders like Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo and Sudan.  But here we are, business as usual with the Anti-smuggling Unit; even two kilograms of sugar can be a big burden at the border.  Our people are very anxious.  Thank you.

2.51
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I equally add my voice to those who have welcomed you back and wish you the best. 

I am concerned with this constitutional amendment.  Some of us have never received the report from the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs –(Interjections)- it is a fact, they got finished; they were not there, and here we are - I know some people received, but some of us missed out on these papers, and yet this is one of the most crucial factors and aspects we are going to consider. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, as you make efforts to make sure that all of us get this report, in your communication –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, since it is an item on the Order Paper, why don’t you raise it at the appropriate time?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Okay, that one will come.  Then secondly, Mr Speaker, in your communication I thought you would touch on the issue of the road map because at least most of our constituents and the Ugandans in particular, they want to know exactly where we are, the steps we have taken to come out with a tangible road map for this country as we go through this transition.  These are some of the concerns I wanted to raise and I would wish we could get tangible answers in this one also.

2.51
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would also like to congratulate you upon completing the year.  But most importantly, Mr Speaker, I would like to register and put it on record the able way you guided the nation when the issue of our recess had been turned into a political issue along all the Radio Stations.  You did come out clearly to put the record straight in terms of the working calendar of Parliament. (Applause) 

I wish our Public Relations Office really comes out to advise and tell the public how Parliaments function because that issue was being played around as if Members of Parliament are not doing their work and yet there is a lot of work to be done and they are just spending Government money, and yet this calendar is clearly known; it is the one that we have been following since the Sixth Parliament came into being.  

So, I am registering my appreciation for your concern as our Leader and Chief Executive of this organization, the way you came out and guided the Nation properly about that issue.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.58
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would also like on behalf of the people of Pallisa District, and in particular Butebo Constituency, to thank God for having kept you healthy and you went through the last year.  

I think we are going to a very difficult period and we all look forward to your guidance of the House through that difficult period. You have the background and you have the ammunition so in a way I am not really worried. 

But, Mr Speaker, there have been reports in the press, which have made me get concerned and I hope the Leader of Government Business in the House will take it seriously. It has been reported several times in the media that the Resident District Commissioner of Kumi has threatened to arrest a Member of Parliament and also a Member of the East African Legislative Assembly in his previous Army Commander.  

I really do not see how a civil servant can assume the powers of preventing Ugandans from moving around in their own country. If I feel that I do not need any particular protection to go to Arua, it is my right to do so. And I think if the Member of Parliament felt that he had to invite this particular Ugandan citizen, it is his right to do so.  Every one of us is entitled to the protection of the Government wherever we go.  If I go to Nakapiripirit, it is the duty of the Government to protect me. I do not need to ask for special permission from anybody before I go there.  

Secondly, there have been provocative statements misleading by some of the Ministers.  I do not have to assume that any of them is lacking in civic education because there are respectable people, they have been through higher institutions of learning but I was surprised the other day that the hon. Member, Woman Member of Parliament for Kumi, stated that there were Members of Parliament who were sabotaging Government programmes.  She is not here, but I would have begged her to really say what she means by “sabotaging Government programmes”. Nobody sabotages Government programmes especially when we are the beneficiaries in our own constituencies.  

Last night I was surprised to watch on TV the hon. Member for Ayivu state that the money, which goes to the people is money from the Movement.  The money, which goes for development in this country, comes from revenue, from taxation and from donors.  The Movement as an organization or party has never put money into the Budget of this country. So when these people go out, some of them have problems in their own ministries –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, Dr Mallinga, I do not really want to interrupt you but what I really I expected at this first meeting is just few important matters of emergency rather than fully fledged debates on issues.  I think for your matter, the proper thing should be to ask a question whether this is true that the RDC has done rather than engaging in a fully-fledged debate; but you can conclude please.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will conclude but this country has experienced a very violent past and when people go out into the countryside and tell lies about what is happening in the country, that is provocative.  I am glad to see the hon. Member of Parliament from Ayivu coming and I hope in future, she will be careful when she make statements like the Movement Government has given the women of this area money. This is from the Budget and the Movement does not finance the Budget.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But, please, whatever you say, let it be a matter of emergency rather than – because, it is not on Order Paper.

3.00
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I have critically looked at the Order Paper and especially notice of business to follow.  I have noticed that one very important thing is missing and this is the issue of the students in the northern Uganda.  You remember, Mr Speaker, before we went for recess, hon. Dr Okot had put a question to the Minister of Education to find out how far the Ministry was organizing to pay off the missing monies and up to now we are re-informed there is a shortfall of Ugshs3.6 billion that is supposed to cover the fees of the students in northern Uganda.  The schools have opened and nobody is explaining anything yet to help the head teachers and the parents of those areas to open the schools. 

I should think that on this Order Paper, the Minister of Education should be asked to come and explain to us what is going on especially on this IDP students, the recruitment of teachers, the grant aiding of schools and the provision of instructional materials in these areas which were divested by Lord’s Resistance Army. 

Finally, while we were on recess, I happened to be in Soroti hospital. I found three officers from the Ministry of Lands who were badly cut by an angry mob of people. I understand they had gone on Government programme called Systematic Land Demarcation.  I was shocked that our people were taken by surprise and because they did not understand the programme, they picked pangas to defend their land.  Could we know from the Minister of Lands and Surveys what is going on so that we shall help him to explain what is going on so that our officers shall not be cut else where.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Honourable members, may I start by wishing all of you a very happy new year and a prosperous one but at the same time, let me just reflect on this Parliament, Mr Speaker, it is the last lap.  We are in the last lap and this Parliament up to now has performed so well incrementally as compared to all the Parliaments we have had since 1989.  The reason I have said this and I am happy you can hear the kind of noise that is coming out of some members.  We have a job to do and that job I am quite sure this Parliament has the capacity, the capacity to be able to produce, to be able to amend the Constitution to the satisfaction of everyone. 

The incremental change that has taken place has been noticed by everybody. There have been people who have tried to run this Parliament down, but in my sincere opinion the performance has been well recognised. A lot of things have been achieved and, therefore, Mr Speaker, we must congratulate you and your deputy and all the Members of Parliament for a job well done.

It is important that every now and then we should stop and see what we have achieved. We should also try and see how far we can go with the kind of capacity that we have –(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Point of clarification –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But if we move into clarifications, we are really going to have a fully-fledged debate.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, as you know, I am a Commissioner of Parliament and hon. Babu has made a very serious statement that there are some people who have tried to run down this Parliament but we have persisted. I would like to understand him clearly. For instance, when Parliament approves a budget for parliamentary activities and the Minister for Finance does not release the funds, is he referring to him as one of those trying to run down this Parliament?

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, the good thing is that hon. Kazoora has just answered his own question. But among those who stand out, I refer to an article I read a few days ago in the papers, which said that our Appointments Committee is a mere rubberstamp. I refer to information that is sometimes given to the media that this Parliament cannot do certain things. And some of us also call press conferences; after a committee of this House has decided on something, a member of the same committee calls a press conference and runs down the very committee to which he is a member. There are several people; there are people who are puppet masters. Their job is to play around one against the other and they use our media to do so.  

We are going into a very important period of our life, for our nation, for ourselves, for our children and posterity. Therefore, we must take a cue from some of these things that have occurred. I do not think that when Parliament has had an estimate and the estimate cannot be realised, it is just a mere estimate. If it cannot be realised, that is not sabotage, that is standard, that is normal operation. An estimate can be made but if you cannot realise it, it is nobody’s fault. Therefore, hon. Kazoora’s point, which he has made - he knows it very well that it does not only happen in this country. It happens in a lot of countries. When unfortunately a forecast is not realised, therefore that is not something that can be termed sabotage.

I would like to end by congratulating the ministers who have been elevated; and congratulating those who have been appointed. I wish them the best of luck. 

May I also congratulate the honourable members of this House who have retired from the Army, and those that have been promoted, including hon. Kazoora. I am very happy that he has got what he has longed for for a long time; but he must agree that everything has got its time and place.

I would like to thank all of you and I hope that the coming year is going to be easy for us. My only prayer, and I am pray quite a bit, is that we can do exactly what all Ugandans are expecting of us and that we will rise above our trivial differences and ensure that Uganda gets the best out of the amendment of this Constitution. Mr Speaker, thank you.

3.10
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much. Like my colleagues I would like to wish you all honourable members and Mr Speaker, the best of luck in this new, challenging year.  

However, I have got two points over which I would like to express concern. One is about this Order Paper. When we left this place at adjournment, we had reached a stage where the Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee had just presented his report. What was about to come next was a discussion of the report. When I first looked at this Order Paper I was saddened because the issue of the constitutional amendment Bill does not feature anywhere, not even at the end of the Order Paper. That means that it is not expected anywhere in the near future. So, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Lubaga South, we are not here for shows. I want to tell you there are people who have plenty of time and very little work for that time. The Parliament of Uganda has very little time and plenty of work. I have told you the Bill has not been presented, so there is no way we would reflect it here. Maybe it will never come. Let us not talk for purposes of showing off. There must be a reason and we should not waste time.

MR LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I am appealing to the Leader of Government Business to endeavor to let us know when the constitutional amendment Bill is to come.  

Lastly, I have taken trouble to go to the library of Parliament. The former Justice Minister assured this House that the second volume of the Ssempebwa Report could be accessed in the Parliamentary library. I would like to report with dismay and with a lot of humility that I have searched in that library, bothered the librarians, and the second volume is not anywhere to be found. When shall we get it? Thank you very much.

3.13
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know you have been working hard and I thank you for welcoming us back from the recess. I have stood up on behalf of the Bugisu Parliamentary Group because there have been a lot of reports in the press, negative reports, Bagisu Members of Parliament are confused and they do not know what they are doing. 

It is also said that they do not appreciate the good things that the Government gives to them and, therefore, they have ganged up to stop one of their own from taking up a ministerial post.

I have to say - as the chairman first and as a Mugisu second - I have to tell members of this august House that we have not at any one time sat to gang up to de-campaign the approval or the appointment of one us as a minister. I know, Sir, that you are the Chairman of that Committee of Appointments. You are a capable lawyer, you know what you are supposed to do and all Members of the Appointments Committee were on recess so there was no way we could have moved to peoples’ villages to try to de-campaign one of us. 

I want to clear the record that we appreciate the cake and we have not done so. And if we had, you would be one of those who would have approached us. But we have not, and none of the Bagisu Members of Parliament here has done that. If somebody has done it in the village in individual their capacity, he should not lump us together as Bagisu Parliamentary group trying to stop a certain appointment. I thought I should clear the record. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Let us agree on this. Since we started it is about an hour; let us utilize the 15 minutes and finish so that we go to actual business.

3.15
MR DANIEL OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for welcoming us from recess and for wishing us a happy and prosperous new year. I am happy that all the Members of Parliament have survived and come back for this 2005. I wish you, Mr Speaker and all of us a happy and prosperous new year. But I would like this happy and prosperous new year to be for all Ugandans and as you said rightly, the recess was used by some of us as a period to live with our people in our different constituencies. 

I come from a constituency, which is totally displaced and dilapidated by war. I do hope that the issue of peace in the North will be on top of the agenda of the Government and of this Parliament. I do believe that the signing of peace agreement in southern Sudan between the SPLA and the Khartoum regime of Bashir will make it easy for peace to return to Northern Uganda. Therefore, I think it is an important event for this Parliament to recognize this signing of the peace agreement and to see how it can contribute to the realization of permanent peace in Northern Uganda. 

The fact that Kony has found it easy to have a base in Southern Sudan; I have said that I do hope that the issue of peace in Northern Uganda is going to be an issue because with one year remaining for the life of this Parliament, election politics may actually complicate the return of peace, which we all long for in Northern Uganda. I say election politics because that may compound and tie the issue of peace to certain matters, which have to be integrated into the politics. However, I hope that this Parliament and the Government will rise above that. 

My colleague, hon. Mallinga, has talked about certain basic things like humanitarian assistance to schools and so on. I do believe that this will continue to be a priority. I believe that the issue of peace is going to be top on the agenda. The issue of humanitarian assistance is a critical one. I know the Prime Minister’s office is working very hard on the recovery programme, the emergency one, and I think the paper work has been done. NUSAF is trying its best – but of course in certain areas like Otuke you cannot take NUSAF there at this time because you hardly can implement simple things like re-stocking, agriculture, reconstruction of schools and all this sort of thing. 

Mr Speaker, I thank all of us for being back and I do believe that as you say, let us rise above simplicities of politics and be real nationalists and patriots. I thank you. 

3.19
MS TIPERU NUSURA (Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking you for steering this House very well. I would like to congratulate all of us for coming back safely and I pray that God guides us during this new year. 

Mr speaker, I want to give special thanks to you for caring for us whenever we are sick. Honourable colleagues, if you have never known the hospitality of Speaker Ssekandi, fall sick then you will prove. (Applause)

I come from the famous Yumbe District as you know it. I spent my time during this recess mobilizing for kisanja, as a promoter of NRM/O. As you all know Yumbe is an area that has just recovered from insecurity and we were hopeful. We were really wishing that the peace talks in Gulu would succeed because many of our people have been robbed of their lives on the way by Kony - on the Karuma Pakwach road.  

On that note the people of my area congratulate the President for the good political will he showed when he showed eagerness to negotiate with Kony. But the most interesting concept in my area during this recess was the issue of ceasefire. They wondered how somebody would try not to take advantage of a ceasefire, because it is the time when everybody rejoices since it is the period when hostilities between rebels and government end and then peace talks start. All in all, we are happy for the sign that the President showed and we hope that Kony takes advantage of this. 

The people of Yumbe are also grateful for the good relations now between Sudan and Uganda. We think it is going to lead to an end of the insurgency in Northern Uganda. They are happy that Col Garang has been recognised by the Government of Khartoum and the people of West Nile are solely behind government’s initiative in combating insecurity and creating peace. It is our wish that we are peaceful in this country, Mr Speaker.

Allow me join my colleagues to congratulate those who have been promoted. I am speaking as a daughter of a former soldier in this country and as we used to live in the barracks, promotions were the wish of every soldier. It is the time when those who are promoted rejoice, and it is also the time when those who are not promoted are very angry. They keep wondering, “why not me, why him”? 

Let me start by congratulating the President for promoting Lt Kinobe, the people were tired of calling him Lt Kinobe - a whole former Chairman of the Movement Caucus! But now he has even jumped steps. He is a Major, honourable colleagues. We feel so good and I am more proud because I am just next to hon. Birimumaaso here. I was used to calling him Lt Birimumaaso, sometimes I make fun and call him Birimukaga, but now I have to get used to the concept of calling him Captain. That is really very good. 

I would like to congratulate hon. Brig. Jim Muhwezi for promotion to the rank of Major General. You know, for us in West Nile we are used to General Moses Ali, now that we have more Generals I think that will be very good. I hope his rank can help him fight the war of DDT because for me I am a supporter of DDT. I believe it is the only way to combat malaria. (Applause)

I do not want to forget the person I am used to calling Col Kahinda Otafiire, one of the most humorous ministers. According to me Col. Otafiire is very humorous but the public sometimes thinks he is very rude, sometimes the face he puts on, but he is very humorous. Colleagues, I must tell you, I am very happy that he has been promoted. I am also happy about the promotions of Maj. Butime and Maj. Mushega - and these are all colleagues here, so surely, we must be proud of them.  

I want to congratulate the President for accepting to retire some of our colleagues who have been really asking for this retirement for so long. I would like to congratulate the UPDF officers who have served –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MS TIPERU: Who have served in this House. It is true that they have been exemplary. It is true that most of them have been asking for retirement because of the law that we put in place saying that one should not be in the Army if one wants to be in active politics. But it is a fact that the UPDF members in this House have been exemplary. Colleagues, when I joined this Parliament I thought I would be boxed by some of the soldiers like Mugisha Muntu, people like Kinobe, but in my interaction with them I found that actually they showed the dignity of the UPDF that is admired by everybody in the country. I thank you very much and I wish you the best. (Mr Katuntu rose__

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, bear with me so that we cover hon. Baba Diri then you come in. 

3.26
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. First of all I would like to welcome you all to 2005 and thank you, Mr Speaker, in particular, with the Deputy Speaker, for a very good job done in 2004.

I would like to congratulate all the ministers who have been appointed and those who were promoted to their new offices. I would like in particular to congratulate hon. Mrs Bitamazire for becoming a full Minister of Education. (Applause). She has been working very hard, she was called “Maama UPE”, I think this time she is going to be called “Maama USE”. USE stand for Universal Secondary Education, which is due to come. Congratulations upon your promotion. 

I would also like to thank the President for elevating our two ministers of state to full Cabinet ministers. Now we have got four women Cabinet ministers. Thank you very much. (Applause). They would like to know who the others are.  We have hon. Bakoko Bakoru, who has retained her Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; then we have hon. Janat Mukwaya, who has been shifted to Ministry of Agriculture; now we have hon. Syda Bbumba, who has maintained her position. They are five by the way, then we have hon. Betty Akech, who is now a full Minister of Security –(Interjections)- how many? People are telling me they are six –(Laughter)- you can see there is a cause –(Interjections)- give me time now. I think there is cause now to rejoice. Thank you very much.  

Mr Speaker, I know this is not in your power but I have no opportunity; this is the only time I can express myself.  People of the North have seen the cake being shared and people of the East got a lion’s share –(Interjections)- yes, Eastern region got four ministers.  But people of the North are wondering whether there are no people who are capable of being promoted to ministers. So, people of the North are saying that the cake has not been equally shared so we also need to be promoted to that level. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me extend the time I had given this so that we end at 4.00 p.m.
 
3.29
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us be brief, hon. Members so that others can –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Yes, I will try to be very brief. As you might have read in the press recently, His Excellency the President of Uganda was conducting a Poverty alleviation tour in the Busoga region. At that time I was away in South Africa attending to duties, which this House sent me to do. When I reached in South Africa the Pan African Parliament gave me further responsibilities, which make it very difficult for me to be in Uganda all the time. So, I could not attend the President’s visit to Busoga. 

However, when the President reached my constituency, he did say two issues that affected me personally. One, he did say that I was anti-development. That would not have been a big problem because it was a lie. However, he went ahead and insulted my person; that I am like a poisonous mushroom. (Laughter) The word he used, Mr Speaker, was a Kinyankole word –(Interruption) However, apparently some Banyankole do not agree with him, that particular mushroom which he thought was poisonous is a delicacy in Ankole.

Mr Speaker, I want to go on record, one, that I am not anti-development and there is not a single occasion, either in this House or in my constituency, where I have been anti-development.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Through you, Mr Speaker, the hon. Member himself addressed me as a poisonous python.  You remember? So –(Interjection)- Here in the House. (Laughter). So, maybe he is a poisonous mushroom.  

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I do not think that is worth a reply; I will proceed. 

Mr Speaker, some of us joined politics in order to give it a decent face. That is the only reason why we joined politics. Name-calling, insults do not assist this country at all. We do not have to be provoked, moreover from His Excellency, the President, because if I were also to go native, I would be insulting the Office of the President. I have resisted to do so and this incident is behind me.  

However, I would like to call upon colleagues, politicians that we should move away from the politics of name-calling, the politics of sycophants, and political thuggery such that the career we have taken, the profession we have chosen, is worth it. Why should somebody abuse somebody unprovoked? 

I would not mind if President Museveni had come to my constituency when he is campaigning and de-campaigns me. This is not campaigning. He had been invited to Busoga region by the Busoga Parliamentary Group and I was one of the people who attended that meeting that invited President Museveni, only for him to come and insult me amongst my people. And what message has he brought, Mr Speaker, to the Basoga? He has now told us that in order to increase our household income, we should be growing mangoes, among other things.  I want to say one thing that I am talking on behalf of the people of Bugweri –(Interruption) 

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, the President came to Busoga to launch the Busoga Peoples Forum Five Year Agricultural and Livestock Production Plan, which was drawn by the people of Busoga, the leadership of the Busoga Peoples Forum and given to the President. What the President launched was generated by the technical Operation Committee of the Busoga Peoples Forum not by his Excellency the President. Is it in order for the hon. Member of Bugweri County to say that the President came and told the people of Busoga to grow mangoes when it is people of Busoga who said we want to grow mangoes?

THE SPEAKER: What I can say, hon. Member, is that we have a problem, because when you have to bring an attack on the President in the House, it has to be a substantive motion. While I am not dismissing what happened, because I was not there, I think we have a complication here. If you want seriously to canvass our grievance here, then there is a procedure to use and then – but I think you have said whatever you have said, I think we move.

MR KATUNTU: I will have to conclude, Mr Speaker. I was making a statement to explain myself not to attack President Museveni, because he had made an allegation, which I am explaining.  Mr Speaker, I will conclude by saying that ‘miyembelisation’ of the Busoga economy is not acceptable.  

3.36
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I avail myself – (Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, order, but please, I do not intend to extend beyond the time I gave you. So, whoever is making a comment –(Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, thank you. I avail myself this opportunity to congratulate you, Mr Speaker and all Members upon completion of the year of the Lord 2004 and for the successful entry into the new 2005. This year 2005 will be a tough year; it will be full of challenges, but I trust, Mr Speaker, with your wise guidance and with the help of God, we shall be able to manage and to bring shame to the scepticisms.

Mr Speaker, I beg to confine myself to your Communication from the Chair and there are only two issues. Looking at the programme on our Order Paper, I must say I deeply worried when it comes to the question of the role of this Parliament in empowering women in this country. A few minutes ago, we heard that a good number of our sisters have been retained in the Cabinet and new ones have also been appointed. We are very happy about this.  But when I look at the Order Paper, I can see the Domestic Relations Bill somewhere very far. This is one of the oldest Bills in this country. I think it was initiated long before I was born.  

Mr Speaker, you are very much aware that many of our sisters have been complaining of our inability to handle or to dispose of this Bill for many years; I think since I joined this Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I am not a member of the Business Committee, therefore I will not have an opportunity to influence the ordering of business, but I am requesting you, if it is possible to use your power, to ensure that at least we can handle the Domestic Relations Bill immediately after we have disposed of the UPDF Bill. That is my humble request, Mr Speaker.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, transition. In your communication you mentioned many things including the transition. Also I understand my colleague, hon. Kizige, raised an issue relating to the transition.  This issue relates to the motion moved by hon. Nyombi Thembo before we went away for recess. Judging by the manner in which you ruled on this subject, I must confess I need more guidance and I beg you to guide me further.

This is a very important motion because it will make it possible for us to handle the transition process more effectively by being able to ensure that more time is committed to debates on matters related to the transition. 

I was thinking that since this committee is with the Rules Committee, we as a plenary can dictate or can be able to guide the Rules Committee in regard to when it can bring the reports to this House.  I was thinking about a scenario whereby this committee could indefinitely sit on the motion.  Now, Mr Speaker, what happens in case we have a feeling that the committee is not reporting on this motion at an appropriate time? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.42
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It was my turn, then you gave it to hon. Ndeezi; but I will go straight to the point. Mr Speaker, I want to talk about a matter of national importance; I will not talk about Ibanda today and you stop heckling me.  

Mr Speaker, it has been widely published in the newspapers of today and also in the electronic media that more than 350 headmasters of the secondary schools have not returned the forms the placement of students senior five yet, Mr Speaker, the parents paid the money for returning these forms and more than 10,000 students’ future is hanging in balance. 

Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter whereby these citizens, the peasants who are behind this Government, are being robbed during broad daylight.  It is my humble request that this Parliament should act quickly to prevail upon the Government to apprehend those head teachers, whoever they are, and at least retrieve the money for these peasants.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.44
MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have to congratulate every Member of Parliament who has been able to go through this recess with a lot of happiness. We had three important days: Christmas, Iddi Aduha and the first day of this year. All were decorated with a lot of amusements here and there, and for that reason I feel I must thank you very much for having enjoyed wisely and be able to come back alive.

I also congratulate the people of my area, but they have asked me to tell your Worship that they have been unexpectedly forced to welcome about 40,000 people from Sudan. We do not know whether they came to celebrate the end of the war in Nsambya area, but they have paused a threat to them because they have never welcomed a composition of so many people and who speak languages, which they do not understand. If these people are refugees, they say, they should be taken to the camps where refugees are kept and they will feel some happiness.  Otherwise, they feel that I should deliver their messages of good wishes to the New Year.

They also say that they are not very happy with the way the schools have handled the affairs of their children. A lot of them have not been able to receive back their results, assuming that they did not pay for the exams, and yet there are very many people who have paid. For that reason, they call upon the Minister of Education to get up and try to find out what is causing all these embarrassments.  Thank you very much indeed.

3.47
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to highlight what my chairperson on Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee stated earlier on with respect to the East African Community proposals that we made when we had a meeting in Entebbe.  

Members of this Parliament would find it beneficial also to realize that in that meeting, in support to enhancing co-operation of the three East African states, the emphasis has been put on free movement of labour. It would therefore be important that we take this matter seriously so that we amend and harmonize our labour laws in East Africa, so that labour can freely move between Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania, and to those other states that will join the community.  

Also the reporting by the East African Legislative Assembly Members currently is done through our Rules of Procedure by reporting to the Committee of Parliament on Presidential and Foreign Affairs. It has also been proposed that we consider in our House a change of Rules of Procedure so that Members of the East African Legislative Assembly report directly to the Committee of the whole House.  

But more importantly, Mr Speaker, the meeting also proposed and recommended in the strongest terms, that to enhance Community activities and to make the Community strong in the interim and in the long run, possibly, the budget of the East African Community and the funds applied thereof should be given a budget line in the individual national budgets, so that remittance to the Secretariat is direct from the Ministry of Finance rather than through other channels; so that these budgets are considered, in our case, by our Parliament and it is directly charged on the Consolidated Fund. 

These were some of the resolutions that were made and I think it is important, Mr Speaker, that for the Community to exist and enhance itself and for our cooperation to have a meaningful progress, this matter has to be considered by this Parliament as a matter of urgency. I thank you.

3.51
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join you in welcoming back all dear colleagues from the long recess and in congratulating those who have recently been retired from the Forces. Mr Speaker, I was so delighted to learn through the Press that their retirement package is also being processed expeditiously, that about Uganda Shs 600 million has been budgeted for their retirement.  

But, Mr Speaker, I note with great concern that early last year we received communication –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean you want us to flood their houses for assistance? (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: I think there are smiling because the Tsunami is soon coming.  

Mr Speaker, early last year we received communication from the Minister of State for Defence in regard to payment of benefits to the ex-service men and veterans. She said that once the ministry is ready with financing modalities then the ex-service men and veterans would certainly get their package. But honestly the ex service men in this country have suffered enough. Many of them at one time were told to report to Bombo to update their records. They sold pigs, bicycles some of them even to the extent of selling land. I hope the Ministry of Defence will really try its best in trying to mitigate the suffering of these ex-service men and veterans.

Point number two, I note with great concern that the rehabilitation of the Jinja-Bugiri highway has suddenly come to a stop and given that the Minister in charge of Works is here, I hope he will find time to update this House and the nation on what exactly is the impediment on that rehabilitation works. As of now, traffic flow between Jinja and Bugiri is really very problematic.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I have also been getting scary reports through the press about the re-insurgence of anthrax in the game department. Particular concern is about the death of a number of people especially in the Kazinga channel. I remember last year there was a report again here by hon. Jovino Akaki Ayumu, which somehow was denying that anthrax was the cause of death among the hippo population.  

I hope the Ministry of Tourism will take - I am really feeling a lot of bitterness because I know the tourism sector earns a lot of foreign currency to this country and if something is not expeditiously done to check the spread of this anthrax, alas, I think we shall be headed for doom. I hope we shall get a statement.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE TOURISM (Mr Jovino Ayumu Akaki): I thank you Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague for his concern. I am happy that at long last this Parliament can express concern on wild life. One time nobody would be concerned whether wildlife was dying but now I see Ugandans being very concerned because this is a source of tourism.  

Mr Speaker, when I stood before this House to give information about the death of hippos in our national parks, I did not deny the fact that the hippos were dying. What I denied was that human beings had died as a result of eating the dead hippos. What I stated then was that indeed, the hippos had died in huge numbers up to 200 hippos died and at one point it appeared the death had completely disappeared when Government intervened.  But all of a sudden, some three weeks ago, we have experienced some more deaths of hippos from anthrax and a team is already in the field trying to investigate to find what is it that has happened.  It is only when I get that report that I will be able to come to this House and make a statement. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.54
DR YEKKO ARAPKISSA (Kween County, Kapchwora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is on insecurity. Over the weekend two nasty incidents happened in my constituency. Two Uganda Peoples Defence Forces soldiers were killed, who belong to Katabala Battalion in Sironko district. They were killed while doing some patrol within my constituency. Another civilian was also killed by people from Nakapiripirit district. The soldiers were on patrol while the civilian was just on his other duties.

For the last one month, there have been a lot of insecurity pending attacks from Pokot Kenya on the side of Kongasis county of hon. Dr Kapkwomu. People imagine that because there has been a lot of mobilization on security on the Kongasis side, these Pokot of Kenya could have found away to by pass the other ones and now come and attack Kween County through Nakapiripirit County; that is a possibility. But it is also true that the ordinary Nakapiripirit people would similarly attack us. So since the Minister of Defence is here, I really urge her to intensify the security on the side of Kween like the one she has done on the side of Kongasis. Otherwise the people are in very bad shape.

Then there has also been a lot of mobilization by the MP from Kenya for Pokot side called hon. Moroto. He mobilizes his people to attack the part of Tranzoia district in Kenya, even during Christmas he was arrested. He has now been saying that it is the Sabiny, who want to attack the Pokot of Kenya more or less trying to cover his own weakness as a mobiliser for insecurity. I urge the Minister of Defence to curb the security situation in Kapchworwa district especially in Kween County.  Thank you.

3.57
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, mine is a brief comment about what I read in the papers last week concerning the demonstration, which was organized by the Member of Parliament for Lubaga South in the names of hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. When he was addressing a handful of demonstrators against the use of DDT he was quoted as having said that you had stopped him from debating his motion on the Floor of this House. To the best of my knowledge, you gave an explanation to hon. Lukyamuzi that you were waiting for a report from the Ministry of Health concerning the application of DDT and you assured him that when that report comes to the House, then his motion would be debated. 

I would like to hear from hon. Lukyamuzi whether he was misquoted because the Chair of a Speaker must be highly respected. (Applause). If it is not respected, it will erode the respect, which we are enjoying in this House as Members of Parliament.

With your permission, he may have to tell the House whether sincerely he was misquoted or he said it, and if he said it this is adding almost an insult to injury. 

You remember, Mr Speaker, how it was revealed on the Floor of this House that hon. Lukyamuzi wrote to World Bank to advise them not to give a loan to construct Bujagali Dam. You know very well, Mr Speaker, how we are suffering now with load shedding in this country. I do not know whether he is apologetic.  

In yesterday’s paper, Mr Speaker, if you read under this Ministry of Health analysis, which they give every week, you can see how rampant or how serious malaria has affected our people; and if you read carefully you see those figures, which are in brackets, refer to the people who die every week in these areas. Bushenyi alone, if I remember that figure, for one week 13,000 cases of malaria were reported. 

I do not understand what campaigns hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is carrying out to see our people dying. He is de-campagning the use of DDT when some of us, who visited South Africa, were told by the Minister of Health of the South African Government that she has now received three certificates for the work she is doing to eliminate malaria from South Africa by application of DDT.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We have to conclude this matter, but what I can say is that what you have said about the hon. Member for Lubaga’s motion is what is in the Hansard. That he brought a motion, which would have been an academic motion - You see, you cannot bring a motion for a policy, which is not in existence. I think it was agreed, we asked the Minister and the Minister said there is no policy, we are thinking about the policy. We said, okay, you bring the policy and if it is not satisfactory in detail, then the motion would come and that was what happened. Otherwise, the motion would have looked to be academic. You were discussing something, which does not exist in the sense that there is no policy.

As I said at the beginning, many people have plenty of time with little work to do and that makes them redundant, and I have said Parliament does not have that plenty of time. We have a lot of work to do; once the policy is in existence we shall deal with it. I think his motion should have come by way of a question, he should have asked the Minister, is there a plan to do this and the other? Then depending on the answer, something – but because of plenty of time, that is what happened. Let us conclude –(Interjection)- You can go and demonstrate, you will have a bigger audience because you will be talking in a House of 304; it is better to talk to millions.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg that you protect me from Lukyamuzi’s demonstration in the House. 

Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to make a clarification on this issue of the Jinja-Bugiri Road project. Apart from what was raised by my hon. colleague, I have had so many chits from other Members, including a Member from West Nile who is doing business along that road.

But let me also take this opportunity first to congratulate you, Mr Speaker and your Deputy, and all colleagues in the House for surviving 2004. I also to add my voice that we are looking forward to this third meeting of the fourth session, which in my own opinion is going to be historic in our democratic and constitutional development in the country. So, we are looking to a busy third meeting.

Now, this road had started well but the contractor had a few arguments. As you remember, we came here and amended the VAT law to remove VAT from road and bridge contracts. While now there is no VAT, he was trying to claim for the VAT that had been paid.  There were also a few amendments in the design of the road, having learnt our lesson on the first section between Jinja and Malaba where we had some failures. 

But instead, the contractor, deciding to follow the normal contractual process of arguing his claims and changing his rates and extension of time, when he sent his people for Christmas recess on the 18th December he decided to stop work until these issues he was raising were resolved. Under normal contractual procedure we do not accept that procedure, but nevertheless he is not working and we have had marathon negotiations with the contractor, and as you realize that road is funded with the support of our friends, the European Union, so even the European Union is involved in the negotiations.  

As I talk now the team is in the Ministry of Finance and we are hoping to resolve the matter amicably so that the contractor can resume.  But if he does not, if he chooses that option, we will apply the clauses of the contract and find an alternative solution. But I want assure Members that, that project will continue.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister has made a statement but in passing he left out a very important aspect of the contract. One, you will recall not long ago I put in a question on the matter of Bugiri-Malaba-Busia Road; that road was done poorly in the first instance, it had to be repeated. The question is, when you repeated it, was it the contractor who repaired it at his own cost or did we as a Government pay for the repair?  

One side of the road was damaged irreplaceably almost all the way from the junction of Busia-Malaba road to Bugiri. In other words the vehicles, which were bringing in imports from Mombasa to Uganda and beyond had more than the allowed weight per axle, that is why one side of the road was damaged. The question is, did you give him the proper specifications; did he follow specifications for making that road?

Two, who paid for the repairs? Did he pay for the repairs for failing to keep to the original specifications or did we have to pay and then we were later on negotiating with him?

Three, hon. Minister, this matter of H. Young doing that road, having stopped on December 18th to go for Christmas holiday is not the fact of the matter.  The wrangle had been going on since September. By the time he left on December 18th, it was a serious debate between your office and him. Tell us, what is the exact truth?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can we say we formulate a formal question on this subject? I prefer that there is a formal question then more details will be given.

MR NASASIRA: Yes, I go with your ruling, Mr Speaker. What hon. Awori is talking about his question, he circulated a paper here, I also got a copy but he has never asked a formal question through the Clerk and to my office. As soon as that formal question comes, as you advised, Mr Speaker, I will come and answer it formerly.

4.07
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to inform the Minister of Works that Kapchorwa Swam road is inaccessible now despite the fact that it is a dry season, and this is an area where it is prone to cattle rustling. Doctors are threatening to run away because there is no road. So, I wanted to hear from him whether he can make it accessible for the time being, because the rains are about to come. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.08
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It has been reported in our media a number of times that the Dairy Corporation is under the process of privatisation. I wonder whether the Rt hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business or the substantive minister for privatisation, would be in position to comment as to whether enough safeguards have been taken so that we may not repeat what happened with the Masese Fish Factory in Jinja. 

Mr Speaker, during the privatisation of the fish factory in Jinja at Masese, the investor was required to pay a 10 per cent deposit and the land title was handed to him, which he used as security to secure a loan after which he ran away and the whole privatisation process was bungled. This one we do not know whether enough safeguards have been put and secondly, whether the terminal benefits of the workers are going to be considered.

THE SPEAKER: So what you are saying, could the minister in charge make a comprehensive statement?

MR DOMBO:  Or the Leader of Government Business.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay. These are related questions to the road or, because we had concluded, really we had concluded.  But just two minutes for you.

4.12
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Mr Speaker, sometime towards the end of last year, there was a spotlight on this Parliament indicating the performance of Members of Parliament ranging from top to bottom. I do realize that certain Members were categorized as giving dignity to Parliament and down it went to, “Where are these Members of Parliament?”  

Mr Speaker, it is very good to have such exercise because it tells the public what goes on in this House. But, I have a question and very serious and honest too. How do these people get to that judgment? Because if we are going to use a fact of judgment, it must be known to us as well because we are the people focused on and indeed, this kind of report is not simple because already it has put some Members of Parliament in problems, especially those whose names do not appear. So, I want to ask the authority concerned to explain to the House as to how such exercise is carried out. Two; the public does not know what -(Interruption)

MRS MUNYIRA: Thank you very much, my honourable colleague for giving way. The honourable colleague has just said that, this kind of reporting, Mr Speaker, puts us honourable members in a difficult position. I would like to give information that when I went home, I had to explain whether I had never spoken in the House. I would also like really to know what procedure was used to categorize us as Members who speak a lot and some who do not speak.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no official programme for doing that type of work. I think these are people from outside, they are journalists they are the ones doing this. So, there is no way I think Parliament can make an explanation as to what really happened because we have nothing to do with this. So, maybe sometime we may have to find out, but Parliament cannot make any official explanation of what really happened.

MR OMODI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Private as they are, I would request that what they do should not damage some of us or the Parliament as such. I want to tell this House that what Parliament does in this House is not fairly known outside the House.  There should be a means of making the public know what Parliament does because on many occasions, especially on talk shows on FM radios, you find a caller expressing an issue that shows total ignorance of what goes on in this House. I want to suggest, if these private organizations have interest in projecting Parliament outside, they should do a little more than whatever they are doing now.

Mr speaker, how can a piece of machine focus on only one person in the House at this time when I am talking as if there are no people in that environment. I would imagine I should be talking to a public. Tonight on UTV you will see me focused on alone as if it is an LC meeting in the village where you address very few people. I think we should do a little more to project what Parliament does to the outside. Thank you very much.

4.15
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to thank you and your Deputy for having chaired this Parliament professionally and diligently! (Applause) 

I wish also to pay tribute to all Members of Parliament for having enhanced good governance. Sometimes some people have made judgments concerning Members of Parliament in a manner, which has not been fair. I know of a number of you who come to Parliament, you have the power of speaking effectively and staying in Parliament, because some people are controversial, for 10 minutes then you disappear and we lack quorum.  But I know of other people who have the power, the capacity to stay, and that would be extremely important as we tackle the problems ahead of us.  

Now, you have raised many questions and I expect the sector ministers to answer them in due course of time. May I, however, make it abundantly clear that the Constitutional Amendment Bill will be presented to Parliament by 15th of this month according to the Minister of Justice, who is also the Attorney General. (Interruption) 

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, many people have been saying that we are facing a difficult time ahead and let us be strong. The Prime Minister is saying, solving problems “ahead of us”; what problems do we have in the country and what difficult times do you see ahead? The country is stable, the tail end of Kony is about to be brought here, and the economy is growing at a supersonic GDP rate of six per cent. Rt hon. Prime Minister, can you tell us the problems the country is facing?  (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: That is a very good question. I think we have a very large agenda, which must be accomplished within a short time, and we have to deal with many issues including changing from a Movement to a multiparty system, some people would like to have federalism and so on and so forth.  So, these are very intricate matters. People must understand them well and make professional recommendations as we debate the Bill, which you are about to present. It may be necessary, for example, to meet more frequently, but that is a matter, which the Speaker will address. So, may I take this opportunity once again to assure you that we are going to perform diligently together and ensure that good governance is institutionalised. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much for these very long un-programmed contributions. We have heard a lot, and I think those concerned will take action to address the problems stated. I want to conclude this by responding to the coverage issue. We must thank the WBS, which started covering us; it has done a good job and it will continue. (Applause)

But also as you remember, two years ago, I went to Rome and sought financial support from the Italian Government, which support was given. Among other things that we have been able to procure is that, as from tomorrow, there will be other people covering us. We have already got the gadgets, which will be commissioned tomorrow, so that you will be covered by Radio Uganda, UTV and WBS so that whatever is going on here will now be known by our electorate. (Applause) This will also help us to get your attendance –(Applause)- especially as people have developed a habit of having permanent seats; people will know where so and so sits and they do not see him, and that will therefore make our work easy so that we shall never lack a quorum when we start that programme.

Well, I think I understand when you say, “a difficult time ahead” because there are different conflicting interests in this process, which we have to reconcile. We have to work together and that is a difficult time. But otherwise, I have no doubt we shall manage the process. I thank you very much, for the contributions.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE WHITE PAPER

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Rt hon. Prime Minister has informed us that by the 15th of this month, the Constitutional Amendment Bill will be with us or will be read for a first time here. I am now wondering why we should proceed to debate the report on the White Paper. My understanding of a White Paper is that a White Paper is about the thoughts –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, when you raise a point of procedure, I think it will help us to know the Rule of Procedure you are invoking to address us on why we cannot debate a report of our committee. The question of whether there is a Bill coming - there are many stages through which we are going to pass.  There was a Sempebwa Commission, he made a report.  Government sat on it, published a White Paper, it submitted it here, we sent it to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and the report was made and tendered to us. Now, what rule prevents us, apart from saying that we have many things which we can do together, from debating a report of our committee?

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a tendency of thinking like a builder; usually I try to lay a foundation. But Rule 23 of our Rules of Procedure does provide for presentation of papers; it states who can present papers and when they can be presented. Rule 24 (2) says: “As soon as the clerk announces ‘Papers for presentations’ the papers shall be laid on the Table without a question being put.” My understanding of this rule, Mr Speaker, is that such papers are presented just for our information.  

I am aware that under Rule 124(d), a committee of Parliament may conduct relevant research in its field and under Rule 124(e), it may report to Parliament about its functions. Now, a White Paper in my understanding is one of those papers referred to under Rules 23 and 24. Government, by laying this paper here, informed us of its intention and the committee did carry out research and they have informed us. Now, I am wondering for what purpose we are going to debate this? Are we going to come out with any –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We are going to comment on the White Paper. Let us proceed. Is there a Chairperson?

Mr Speaker, I am a bit constrained to add my voice to what hon. Martin Wandera is saying, because more often than not we find ourselves duplicating our efforts. Let me give you an example. During the year the President delivers a State of the Nation Address and you find that that State of the Nation Address is very much related to the Budget process.  We come to Parliament, we debate the State of the Nation Address, then after that we debate the Budget, then after that we are in estimates and hardly at that point, do we normally see the Finance Bill. The Finance Bill comes at the end and then you find Members also wanting to debate the provisions of that Bill. 

Now, the problem I see here, Mr Speaker, I agree with you that maybe in the Rules of Procedure it may not be clear, but really prudence and good judgment under the circumstance because we are actually talking about bridging our time and using it very well. A person, for instance, who is in his possession or her possession has got the report of the committee on the White Paper and the relevant Bill is likely to make useful contribution in the House because the content of the report on the White Paper will greatly impact on the substance of the Bill and, therefore, there will be no duplication at all. Could I actually say that, let us look at this issue that has been raised by hon. Martin Wandera, we see how best we can utilize our time.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, the Government presented the White paper. Those were the views of the White Paper before the Bill is drafted and if nothing is said about that paper, that White Paper will influence the Bill that will be presented. The purpose why Government presented it was to enable us to express our views and by expressing our views, we could help the Government to narrow down what is in the Bill, which has not been presented and we agreed on this and we went in the villages to explain the White Paper and now we are back.  

For me, I see nothing wrong but what we can do is to revisit our Rules of Procedure. This is the time I think to revisit our Rules of Procedure and remove all things, which we think will duplicate our work. As you have said, when we debate State of the Nation Address, we debate the Speech of the Minister and the Budget, we are duplicating. It may be right; we may be duplicating. So, it is high time the Rules Committee revisited the rules and then improved on them. Anyway, the committee presented this report but you may have limited debate and then wait for the Bill.  

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give some information. I must say at one time I also had a view similar to that put forward by hon. Wandera.  But when we were considering the White Paper, we came to the conclusion that more than 50 per cent of the contents of the White Paper do not relate to constitutional amendments. Therefore, if we are to adopt the position that we have to wait for the Constitutional Amendment Bill to be brought in this Parliament, it means that we are going to be very unfair to the people of Uganda who contributed to this report. 

What I am saying is that, Ugandans participated in the constitutional process by putting forward their views to the Constitutional Review Commission and these views are contained in the White Paper. Therefore, we, as representative of the people, are also expected to pronounce ourselves on the 50 per cent of the contents of this white Paper, which do not relate to the constitutional amendments. 
 
Therefore, Mr Speaker, I am of the opinion that the procedure we have adopted is the right procedure.  Let us first consider the report on the Constitutional Amendment Bill and later on a report on the White Paper first, then later on we shall handle the Bill separately. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But what are you really debating? (Laughter).  Let us debate the White Paper. If you do not have debate, then we wait for the Bill.  Those who want can make their contributions.  

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I was seeking your guidance on the matter on how to deal with this Bill and especially the White Paper. Is it possible for the committee to be directed that we do some prioritisation, what aspects of the Bill or the White Paper must be dealt with instead of just going 1,2,3,4?  I am seeking your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: No, at one point of time, the Bill will be presented because at the moment the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee which is the proper committee to look at this matter has not seen the Bill, what it has seen is the White Paper.  But I do not know; people do not want to debate. What is the problem?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, can we be very frank with you, we are not ready this afternoon. (Interjection) No, we do not have the report. Let us be frank with you, let us come back tomorrow and we start.  

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, when you were in the recess there was accusation that we have become trivial, we waste a lot of time and this and the other, when important things like the White Paper, the report – these are issues that came out in the papers! Now we came today and you say, “No, let us start this one tomorrow.” We should really utilize the time meaningfully.

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, I think the Members do not want to be frank with you. The fact of the matter is that, they did not know what today’s programme would be. The Members were caught off guard, they did not come with the report, they did not know that it would be an item on the agenda so they are not prepared for it. Let them be frank with you and we ask for an adjournment to tomorrow when they will come with the report and then we debate it. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is perfectly okay. I really do not know, but this is a report of our committee, it submitted it and we have to comment on it. (Interjections) Yes, and this will not prejudice our arguments when the Bill comes. In fact, it may assist the Executive in drafting the Bill.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that you exercise your powers to adjourn the House this afternoon.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it seems the inability is that maybe Members did not come with the report because this is the first day you have reported, and the Order Paper was given to you today and you want to prepare to go and look for the report and then be able to meaningfully make a contribution. We shall definitely have very limited debate on this, it may take this week, so that next week we can handle other business. So, tomorrow we shall start the debate.

MR AHABWE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing here to make a clarification on the role I am going to play in this debate today, tomorrow and some few more days. Mr Speaker and honourable members, my Chairman, hon. Oulanyah, is out of the country; he is in the United States. Our Vice Chairman has been proposed to be a minister, and it was agreed as our working method in the committee by consensus, that I could stand in for both of them. Therefore, I call upon honourable colleagues to cooperate with me as we proceed with the debate on the White Paper. I thank you.

MR AWORI: There was a motion on the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, my assessment was that people were not ready because they were not prepared for this debate today, and I think they need time to go and peruse through the report to come and make some comments, if any and then we end it. Since it was us wasting time on this debate, which we was really trying to postpone simply because we wanted to start tomorrow, I decided that this matter will come up tomorrow and I think that is as far as everybody is concerned. But it is our report, which we have to consider.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I remember at the beginning of today’s sitting, hon. Mutumba raised a pertinent question that not all Members of Parliament have really accessed the report from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, and I thought the Clerk’s Office should do everything possible to ensure that every Member has a copy of such a report so that we argue at the same position. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is noted. I think then this brings us to the end of today’s business.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I was requesting you earnestly, together with the Clerk’s Office today, to photocopy more copies because there are a number of us who do not have this report, kindly please.

But please, my appeal to you, let us be really serious with our time because we really have little time and there is no programme we are going to suspend; we are going to concurrently deal with other programmes that are before us. But I thank you for the attendance and I thank the front bench, they came in big numbers; please you should continue.  

But my appeal again to you as we are entering this period is that, let us work together, let us listen to each other before we discard this and the other.  That is the only way we shall be able to handle this matter so that the country and ourselves will be proud. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

(The House rose at 4.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

