Thursday, 3 February 2005 
Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you and to thank you for the manner in which we started the debate on this important subject of constitutional reform. We will need that kind of attitude of listening to each other and of being courteous to be able to sail through and do a good job for which we shall be proud, and we will be appreciated by the entire country. We may have different views but listen to each other, assess, adjust and then we move forward. I really commend you for that. Thank you.  

2.33
MR YERI OFWONO (Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, this is a matter of importance –(Laughter)- It is an important issue. The important event is what the Minister of Education and Sports issued yesterday; that is, how he has intervened in the administration of the Federation of Uganda Football Association (FUFA). He has suspended FUFA and he has almost banned it. So, I want to express my appreciation to the hon. Minister of Education and Sports for his timely intervention in the mal-administration of FUFA.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, permit me to express before this House my appreciation to the Minister of Education and Sports for the timely and appropriate intervention to bring about sanity, professional conduct, and hence cleansing the anarchy in FUFA.

Mr Speaker, over the years, total anarchy, poor management, bankrupt leadership have marred FUFA. These negative vices have led to the terrible decline in the standard of football and have been worsened by the following poor attributes that are synonymous with the leadership of the federation.

There was lack of respect for constitutionalism, transparency and accountability in conducting football matters; lack of capacity to plan and conduct business in a professional manner; failure to institute and execute systematic strategic planning and development programme; and failure to appreciate the role of the private sector in football development.

Mr Speaker, I wish to assure the minister that the sports fraternity and particularly all the football loving Ugandans are strongly behind you. (Interruption). The positive steps you have taken have cleaned up the FUFA house once and for all. We are all prepared –(Interruption)

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I have particularly tried to be patient with my colleague. I have realized that he is reading a document and procedurally, if he really wanted to read a document, he could have laid it on the Table. As far as I am concerned and know, there has not been any formal investigation report laid on the Table.  Is it in order for the hon. Member, one, to read a document without laying it on the Table, and two, for the hon. Member to read a document which we are not having an access and cannot substantiate the allegation he is presenting to the House?
 
THE SPEAKER: Well, normally one should not be expected to read his contribution, but sometimes one takes into account the importance one attaches –(Laughter) It can be permitted. Let him complete his statement.

MR YERI OFWONO: Thank you very much for your wise ruling. I am saying we are all prepared to face the ban as long as it is going a long way to bring about sanity in the management of football in this country. After all precedents have also been set in Tanzania and Kenya where they were also banned but they brought a terrible change for the betterment of Soccer. So, we should all stand to be counted and rise to the occasion and support the noble cause.

Mr Speaker, Ugandans are impatiently waiting for massive change in the running of football in this country, and this is the opportune time to change.  I urge you all honourable members and the entire sports fraternity to strongly support our minister in the struggle in this institution and bring sanity in the management and administration of sports in the country.  For God and my country.

MS ALICE ALASO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to ask that we follow up on the recommendations of the Select Committee and specifically through you to request the hon. Prime Minister. One of the recommendations in that report was that the Office of the Prime Minister continuously updates this House on the progress of implementation of that report. Mr Speaker, I have waited for quite some time and I have not seen any report on the follow up on the committee’s recommendations. I would like to ask that the Prime Minister gives us a report on the progress in implementation.

Secondly, in 2003 or thereabout, a Refugee Bill was presented to this House. I find it disturbing that we have gone through two whole years without debating the report on that Bill and yet matters to do with refugees are really burning issues in this country. Wouldn’t it be prudent, Mr Speaker, that we find out from the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee how far they have gone in handling this Bill and probably at an appropriate time we have this Bill debated and passed? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is there any Member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee?  

2.40
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In response to my hon. colleague’s concern about the Bill on Refugees, indeed we considered it just before we left for recess. We had planned to go and see a number of refugee centres before we could make a report to this august House. So, the matter is being handled by the committee.  

Mr Speaker, permit me while I am still on the Floor also to express a matter of personal concern. I would like to alert the Government that there is a matter of public health concern in my district. In the neighbouring country, the Kenya Republic, Busia district, there has been an outbreak of cholera and a number of people have died. 

In the past two days, two or three people have died in my hon. colleague’s constituency, Samia-Bugwe South, and we suspect these could be cholera cases. In the light of the fact that in that area there has been a problem of water, which is a main carrier of cholera or cause of cholera, and probably lack of adequate medical facilities, I call upon the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, if he is aware of that concern, to tell this august House what measures the Government has taken to forestall this particular problem.

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, I did not get a chance to contribute towards my hon. colleague’s compliments to the Government for banning FUFA.  My concern is that there has been too much focus by the Ministry of Sports and Education on FUFA to the neglect of other forms of sports. Take for instance, Mr Speaker, in the last ten days, a Ugandan, Kassim Ouma, won the IBF Junior Middleweight World Championship Belt; nobody took recognition on the part of the Government for this accolade that we have received in this country.

To my amazement and disappointment, a spokesperson of the Government, Maj. Shaban Bantariza, who speaks generally for Ministry of Defence, made a public statement that should Kassim Ouma come back to this country, he would be arrested immediately for deserting the Army. Is that how we treat people who are holding our flags high internationally?  

2.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, hon. colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the person that hon. Aggrey Awori is talking about deserted the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), and that is the status; he is a deserter, that is a fact and there are rules and regulations in UPDF dealing with deserters. What Maj. Shaban Bantariza stated is what will happen unless there are other interventions, which are under the prerogative of the Commander-in-Chief, but that is the status.  We acknowledge whatever he has achieved as a Ugandan, but the status quo is exactly that.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker; thank you, my hon. colleague.  You can see - I do not want to use this difficult word, “callous” - If it was not for a matter of Parliamentary decorum, I would have said the Minister is being very callous. Somebody wins you a medal, an honour, and all you do is look back!

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, this Government is determined to have a disciplined Force, which is capable of defending and protecting the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of this country plus the people’s rights. We are not likely to compromise the standard and the discipline of the UPDF. Is the hon. colleague in order –(Interjections)- Please, I am giving order. Mr Speaker, is hon. Aggrey Awori in order really not to understand the obvious information I gave about the standing rules of UPDF? Is the veteran Member of Parliament in order not to understand the simple information I gave?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should be conscious of the current time constraint.  I think both of you recognized Mr Kassim Ouma for what he achieved; there is no doubt about that. But the problem was to attack Maj. Shaban Bantariza for the statement he made in as far as his ministry is concerned. I think you have to separate the two.  We recognize, but if he is a deserter, that remains a fact.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, it is not my nature to comment once you have made a ruling on a matter.  However, Mr Speaker, my concern here is, first and foremost, this Ministry of Defence cannot even produce a record for that matter to prove –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That one we do not know.

MR AWORI: We do not know, exactly. So, why do they jump to the conclusions? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you cannot say that because somebody buys him amnesty, because he has won; I mean this is the problem. Let us leave the two things in their own homes, one for desertion to the Ministry of Defence, and one to praise him for us who are praising people who have achieved medals.  But we should not waste time on this; we should abandon it.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a matter of fact, I was simply saying that our Government often does not focus on the most relevant issues. They tend to focus on miniscule issues. A matter such as this one, there is no way you can welcome a person by threatening him with a warrant of arrest. You could conveniently, through the Ambassador, remind him that there are certain military details, which he has not fulfilled, which we need to look into.  But you do not recognize him by saying, “Come home, we will look after you in a quarter guard.”  

2.50
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This morning I read in the mass media about an issue concerning one of our colleagues, hon. Wasieba. It was reported that his –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me please, I have heard about it, yes. I am the chairman of the Appointments committee. There is no official communication from the committee on this issue. I think we should not discuss it.  

2.51
MR ODIT JOHN (Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, last weekend I was in my constituency in Erute South, but I had an opportunity to visit the Agricultural Research Development Centre, which is an outreach of National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) in Ngetta. I learnt that there was an outbreak of sleeping sickness in Dokolo and part of Moroto. Moroto constituency is entirely displaced and if we get the community living together and there is an outbreak of that nature, I think we are going to get very serious mortality among our people. I would therefore like to know from the ministry concerned whether they are aware of this problem.

Number two, Mr Speaker, we are aware that the President is promoting massive production of mangoes, but at the same time we have also been told by scientists that there is an outbreak of mango disease in this country, and it is already reported in the eastern part of this country. I hope the Ministry of Agriculture is aware and they are taking action to that effect. I do not see any Minister responsible for this sector in the House. So, I want to draw the attention of the Prime Minister to this very important matter and if possible, we need a quick response to the outbreak of the two diseases. Thank you.

2.55
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point I want to bring out here is a problem, which could have spread to other districts apart from Kampala, but emanating particularly from my constituency. It is good the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Defence are around. 

It seems Government policy on timber and forestry is not yet clear to the people, because whenever the people dealing in carpentry go into the workshops to buy timber from wherever they are buying it, military people come in and confiscate the timber and some of their things, and even there are shootouts. One time it happened in my constituency in September, last year, where there was a shootout for almost 30 minutes.  

Recently what was happening around Mile Two is that people clad in army uniform, the LDUs and the veterans go around Confiscating timber and selling it to other people within just about 100 metres. So, I would like Government to come out, especially the Minister of Defence, to clarify on this issue.

On Christmas day, a lorry full of these people came, took timber, coffins, chairs, everything and said they were taking it somewhere, but along the way they stopped and sold it. Similarly, on 1st January 2005 they did the same. I would like Government to come out very clearly on this issue to give the people clear guidelines on where to buy timber and how to deal with the timber.  Otherwise, I have heard it in Luweero, I am hearing it again in other areas, but it is very rampant in my area.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we cannot dispute what you have said, but I think if a Member gets such incidents in his constituency, there is no harm for you to take a pen and immediately write to the Minister or ministers concerned, to draw their attention so that when they come here, they are able to answer or even to answer you by letter so that immediate action is taken. If this happened some time back, they should have even communicated this in writing. But the point has been taken. I think the ministers should look into this and give us an explanation.  

2.57
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take the Floor to raise two urgent matters of public importance. One is that in the budget of 2004/2005, we approved Shs 9 billion for recruitment of secondary school teachers. There are only remaining about four months for this financial year to end and no teacher has been recruited yet there is an army of unemployed young men and women who are qualified to teach and there are also vacancies. I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business why his government is not interested in giving people jobs?

The second matter, Mr Speaker, is that workers of the National Agricultural Research Organization have gone on for two months without their salaries.  Can the Leader of Government Business explain why this is so and why they want to kill workers, because without salaries they cannot buy food and survive, for that matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.58
MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, supplementary to the presentations of hon. Wandera. We also passed money to grant-aid 72 secondary schools. As we speak now, there is no information whatsoever going to the public as to whether those schools would be grant-aided this year or not. We would wish to see that the schools start; the financial year is coming to its end.  Thank you.

2.59
MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am standing up for a cause that was brought to this House yesterday, where it was alleged that I said, ”Leadership, once in western Uganda, will never leave”.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, don’t you think you want to make a personal statement? You prepare one and then I will consider that.

3.00
MR ISIKO MPONGO (Busiki County, Iganga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on an issue of urgent public importance. Sometime last year, Iganga-Jinja Road was commissioned for construction. Somehow we got media reports that the companies that were constructing the roads had been discontinued. (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this matter surfaced two days ago and we said you have to put a formal question to the Minister of Works; he will be prepared to answer it.

3.01
MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to make just two observations. One is regarding the way we transact business in this House, which I think is misunderstood by the general public going by some of the discussions we have heard on some of the radio stations and some of them even involving some of our own, to the effect that the way we are doing business, like discussing the White Paper as was ably proposed yesterday, is wastage of time. 

I think it would be in the interest of this House if Members of the public are made to appreciate the way Parliament operates and the structures that we have in this House determine the business that comes to the House. This will help the public to appreciate that although we have important issues to deal with like the transition, this Parliament has a mandate to deal with very many other things, which are equally important for the execution of business in this land.  

The discussion that was on radio this morning was to the effect that Members of Parliament are confused, they do not know what they are doing. A lot of insults were hurled, which I believe is something that can be put right when the public is made to appreciate that we have a Business Committee that determines what we have to do. Besides, there are so many other Bills that have to be dealt with.

Mr Speaker, you have time and again helped out on this matter, but I thought I should raise it so that maybe members of the media can come over in a structured session where they can be helped to appreciate how we are supposed to conduct business because there is an impression –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, the gates of Parliament are open, and anybody who wants to get information is free to come. I agree with you that the procedure is not clearly known and everybody thinks that because we have a transition, some narrow or wide transition, everything has to come to a standstill.  I have told these people - in fact even in my communication when you came in, I said that we have many other programmes that will be concurrently running with the other processes.  

So, the country is not going to be stopped so that we only deal with the Constitution process.  But I would advise that those who go on radio to discuss should get the information so that they discuss this thing from an informed position rather than guesswork.  

MR SEBALU: Lastly, Mr Speaker, I just want to correct a statement made by my neighbour here, hon. Aggrey Awori, regarding the Ministry of Education.  At least I have had a chance to work closely in informal capacity in the sports sector. The reason that the FUFA or the football administration keeps appearing in the media is simply because it has been behaving like the bad boy; not playing by the rules and handling matters in a manner that forces the ministry to intervene time and again. Otherwise, all other sports associations are attended to, but they have kept their houses in order so they do not come out to be heard for the wrong things. I hope that the new comprehensive sports policy will come in to help the matters.  Otherwise, the decision of the Minister was timely and very useful; and it is a clear indication that it wants all sports to be given good feasibility.  Thank you.

3.05
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief. This a follow up of what hon. Sebuliba is talking about, particularly in regard to the way newspapers are portraying us. But I have a slightly different opinion. I am wondering whether some of our colleagues here could be traitors. For instance, Mr Speaker, if you look at Rule 144, we have proceedings of the Committee on Appointments. These proceedings are supposed to be confidential and therefore secret; nobody is supposed to give information to the press in regard to what goes on there. But we are now disappointed for everything is in the papers. Who leaked this information? Are we still to blame the press or we must also blame ourselves? Mr Speaker, could you guide us?

THE SPEAKER: I considered this matter when the Member for Workers was raising the matter, which he has read in the papers. I said as far as I know, no statement has been passed; but these are speculations. People are free - this is freedom of the press. Whether there are leakages - because if I say there are leakages, it will be conceding to the truth of what transpired.  At an appropriate time this will be known.  

But you should know that when the President makes appointments, he writes a letter to the Speaker informing him about these appointments, and any action taken on these appointments by the Appointments Committee, we do not communicate to the press. I write back to the President informing him of what has happened. It is the President to inform or to act on this, and then the press will know.  So, we do not talk to the press, but these could be speculations; it could also be leakages as you say, I do not know. I think we should not discuss this issue. We have just completed the exercise, so in due course I will be writing to the President informing him what has happened and maybe later you will know.

3.08
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Tuesday on this Floor we raised a lot of issues, and when the Leader of Government Business stood up he answered some and promised that the rest of the issues will be answered by the ministers heading those sectors. 

Mr Speaker, I particularly raised an issue of about 360 Headmasters, who did not return the forms for senior 4s for placement to senior 5. By that time the Minister was not around and I am happy to see her here, and I know that she is an able Minister.  I am talking because of the fate of 10,000 –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we started business on Tuesday and this is Thursday.  You gave a figure and you say the Minister was not here.  Do you think the Minister has verified these allegations to be in position to give you a meaningful answer?  I think it is not fair, let us give her time, maybe next week, when she has verified what you stated to be able – it should not be a token answer; I do not think you will be interested in a token answer, you want a real answer with facts having been verified.  So, let us give her some time next week then we shall get an answer.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, tomorrow is selection day, 10,000 students’ lives are at stake –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you want her to answer when she is not prepared, because she may say, “Yes, of course we are investigating.”  I think we really need an answer, which is a real answer.

MR LOUIS OPANGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, last week there was an advert from the Ministry of Education, which stated the names of the schools and the reason why they appeared in the papers.  For me I feel the Minister is capable; since tomorrow is selection day, we should take this thing serious because of our 10,000 students, who are at stake. We should know because we are the parents who are affected. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You will answer the question on Tuesday.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 14/05 TO THE PRIME MINISTER

3.10
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Hon Captain Byaruhanga is out of the country on parliamentary work and he requested me to stand in for him when this question is on the Order Paper.  Question 14/05 -(Interruption)

3.11
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, allow me to preface my remarks by saying that all those questions which have been raised will be answered by the relevant ministers within seven days from today because they have to carry out research and give you proper answers.  

May I also take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to point out that yesterday hon Kazoora portrayed me as an irresponsible, technocratic Premier, who does not attend the meetings of the Parliamentary Commission. Whenever I am angry I keep quiet because I do not want to quarrel in Parliament.  But you all know how diligent I am and I want to point out that the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs represents me to this Commission and she keeps me fully briefed on what goes on and when necessary you ask me to appear before this Commission. I cannot attend every meeting; I have got a million assignments and where I am unable to do so I ask a colleague to stand in for me. As you know, I attach so much importance to Parliament. I am probably the first Premier to be here from 2.00 p.m. until Parliament adjourns (Applause)  I thank you.

Mr Speaker, I have circulated enough copies of my answer to the question to all honourable members of Parliament.  What is public policy because you cannot answer this question unless you know what is public policy.  

According to Professor Nsibambi and Professor Byarugaba, -(Laughter)- Sir, I am reminded that I must read the question before I answer. 

“Could the Prime Minister who is also Leader of Government Business inform the House the major policies that are currently being implemented in all government ministries?  

What is government’s policy on making policy and how are the major stakeholders involved?  

Does government have a policy analysis and monitoring and evaluation specialists in all ministries who advise Government before, during and after policy formulation and implementation, and what policy review mechanism is in place to ensure success of policy decisions?”

So what is a public policy?  According to professor Nsibambi and Professor Byarugaba, a public policy is a purposive or conscious choice of action selected from alternatives in order to realize a chosen objective. As you know, there are many demands; there are many choices to be made, but when a purposive, a deliberate choice is made to deal with a matter to realize a chosen objective, that is a policy. There are other people like Dror who thinks that even absence of a policy to handle a problem is a policy. But we think this is negative; we do not think that this is a good definition of policy and I have given some references to those who would like to read more about definitions of policy and instruments for fulfilling policies.  

Now, I now deal with the second leg of the questions. “What are the major policies that are currently being implemented in all government ministries?”

They include the following: 

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Macro-economic stability; Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries - Modernization of Agriculture and proper utilization of fishery resources; Ministry of Public - there are others; I am bringing the major ones. Ministry of Public Service -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean you intend to read all these 17 policies?   

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am entirely in your hands. I could skip “What are the major…” but it is a question, which was addressed. The question was pregnant with a lot of meaning and I have to answer it comprehensively, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Find a way of saying what you want to say in respect of the 17 policies.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Okay, so you find that there are different policies and each ministry is assigned a policy but over all the Prime Minister’s is in charge of coordination and monitoring. We also deal with disaster management and refugees.

Finally, the office of His Excellency the President which includes the office of the Vice President has over all policy direction, public management, media regulation ethics and integrity.

The overall policy programme is the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), 2004 on page 4.  The mentioned policies fit in the PEAP, which has the following five pillars: 

1. Economic management e.g macro-economic stabilization; 

2. Enhancing production, competitiveness and incomes;

3. Security, conflict resolution and disaster management;

4. Good governance e.g democratisation, ethics and integrity, observance of human rights;

5. Human development through Universal Primary Education so that you address the question of poverty of knowledge.  

“What is the Government policy-making process?”  Government or other stakeholders may identify a problem, which needs the attention of Government. For example, illiteracy, poor performance in public service and poverty. Government may respond by setting up a Commission of Inquiry to investigate the problems. For example, I was on the Kajubi Education Sector Review Commission and we were dealing with many educational issues including the issue of illiteracy. There was also the Public Service Review and Reorganization Commission chaired by Clarke; and recently we have had the Sempebwa Constitutional Review Commission, which dealt with many issues. 

When the problems have been identified, they come on the policy agenda; that is the second stage. They have now entered the policy agenda of Government. Government discusses the problem and a policy decision is taken. Political and financial costs are weighed. For example, we agreed to reduce the size of Public Service; we call that process right sizing. Sometimes we may increase some aspects of the Public Service, sometimes you reduce, so the process is known as right sizing, you may reduce or increase. 

The next stage is the implementation of this Government policy, which may include allocating resources, personnel recruitment and building of requisite infrastructure such as schools. These actions leads to outputs, impact and results. 

The last stage is the evaluation process. It is always very important to evaluate what you are doing, and we normally evaluate a policy after two to three years or five years. When you evaluate you may, for example, give up the policy, that is abandonment of the policy or improve it. For example, when we evaluated the UPE, initially we were only paying for four children per family, but we now pay for all the children. We have the resources and the demand for education was very high as indicated by the evaluation process.  

“How are the major stakeholders involved?” 
First of all, major stakeholders include honourable Members of Parliament, civil society, which includes religious leaders, local governments, development partners, universities and other tertiary institutions, mass media, private sector, special interest groups, which include women, youth and people with disability. 

The stakeholders are involved in all stages of policy formulation through seminars, workshops and special meetings; this is all a form of involvement. 

“Does Government have policy analysts and monitoring and evaluation specialists in all Ministries?” 
Yes, every Ministry has a Policy Analysis Unit. 

“Do the policy analysts and monitoring and evaluation specialists advise Government before, during and after policy formulation and implementation?” 
Yes, every ministry monitors its activities in the field and takes corrective measures when necessary. Additionally, the Office of the Prime Minister, which is the apex body for coordination and monitoring of Government policies and programmes also monitors the implementation of Government policies and programmes and takes corrective measures, if necessary. The Prime Minster’s Office reports to Cabinet the implementation status of Government policies twice a year. Through this arrangement, His Excellency, the President and the Vice President are fully informed of the status of policy implementation. 

“What policy review mechanism is in place to ensure success of policy decisions?” 
Cabinet approves policy monitoring review arrangement whereby there are Sector Working Groups, which analyse sector performance and any other cross-cutting issues. The sector working groups converge under the Policy Implementation Technical Committee under the chair of the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister. This committee reports to the Committee of Permanent Secretaries headed by the Head of Public Service, Secretary to Cabinet.  The proposals, recommendations on policies from the Committee of Permanent Secretaries are submitted to Cabinet Sub-committee chaired by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister for review and onward submission to Cabinet for ratification/approval.  

I wish also to add here that there are specific comprehensive sector policy reviews, for example, the Annual Education, Health, Water and Sanitation Sectors Policy Reviews in which the sector progress towards sector targets and goals is accessed. 

These reviews are complemented by service delivery surveys conducted by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics in collaboration with the sector ministries once every two years. 

Government has been producing Poverty Status Reports every two years since 1999 based on findings and recommendations from the monitoring system described above.  The Office of the Prime Minister produces a National Policy and Programme Performance Status Report every six months.  

Mr Speaker, every Minister submits a Policy Statement to Parliament every year, an arrangement which inter-alia enables Parliament to assess policy implementation and to recommend to the Executive areas for improvement. I thank you.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Supplementary question, hon. Sabiiti?  The procedure is that the person who puts the question starts the process.

MR SABIITI: I thank the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister for this detailed answer for the question raised by hon. Capt. Byaruhanga. But I would like the Prime Minister to throw more light, particularly on 3.1 on page 6.  The question was, “What policy review mechanisms are in place to ensure success of policy decisions?” If you look at the policies sited by the Prime Minister particularly if you look at NAADS, PMA, the right sizing of Public Service and Poverty Eradication Policy, these are policies which are to a larger degree have not been successful and this in my view it is as a result of our failure as Government to look at the most important intervening valuables to make sure that the policies identified do succeed.  

So, may I know from the hon. Prime Minister what measures have been put in place to make sure that, for example, poverty eradication programme or policy does succeed because as you can see poverty has engulfed the whole country; and the right sizing of Public service whereby the civil servants salaries have not really increased as was envisaged by that policy as you are aware.  So, may I know what measures you are putting in place to make sure that these policies which you identify and you want to implement become effective.

3.11
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Those are very significant questions raised by a former student of mine and I am proud of him. (Laughter) Let me deal with question of public servants.  They can testify that their salaries have been increased, but not as much as we intended because there have been other factors which have intervened.  For example, we are fighting the war of terrorists and that war has had a number of consequences.  Even those members of UPDF who had been retired some have had to be recalled.  But also production in those areas cannot take place really because people are in camps and they have to be fed and additionally, we have to pay school fees for them.  So, that has affected our planning and, therefore, the resources available have been reduced.  

Actually, we are performing miracles because given the fact that we have a war of terrorists and we can still have resources to increase salaries, not only for public servants but also to handle the requirements of Members of Parliament, because under Article 85 determines emoluments subject to Article 93 and there are other arms of the State which have to be given resources, we have done extremely well.  But I wish we could do better. 

 I am also aware that we should do better with regard to the salaries of public servants.  That is why we have recommended one body to determine salaries, because I know you will say, no, but we have a rationale for having one body because sometimes when you determine your emolument, you may give yourself inadequate resources.  But when you have got another body, it may give you more resources –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business is very familiar with our Constitution.  He is very familiar with mechanism of the Government and how it determines who gets what and how.  Is it in order for the hon. Rt. Prime Minister to stand up in this august House in the course of answering a question regarding policy, to mislead us that they have a single body to determine salaries or they are contemplating such a measure totally in disregard of the constitutional amendment procedure.  Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER:  You see, what I advise is that matters that are related to White Paper and Constitutional Review should be addressed at the appropriate time.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  May you continue to flourish –(Laughter)- With regard to the policy of PMA and NAADS, you see, when a policy has been put in place, you must give it a chance to work and then evaluate it.  In fact, recently I was very pleased when hon. Odit, who is a very knowledgeable person, was reported to have said that NAADS was doing well.  I hope you were not misreported.  So, there are areas where these policies may not be working well and I am delighted because hon. Odit who is a Christian has nodded approvingly –(Laughter).

MR ODIT:  I need to clarify one thing, Mr Speaker. It is true that we visited some areas where political leadership at district level is problematic, you will never see the presence of NAADS, you will never see even PMA where the chairpersons of the districts and the RDCs are busy scrambling for money which comes from the centre and it is a glaring case in Tororo.  Success stories have been registered in Soroti and Lira.  We are also made to know that Luwero is a problem area in the centre and Mukono is a success story.  So, we are still continuing and then we shall perhaps give a full report after we have covered the entire country.  Thank you.

CAPT. GUMA:  Mr Speaker, I want the Rt. hon. Prime Minister really to assist me understand the intention of Government.  They continue harping on this issue of Parliament determining its emoluments every year.  They portray a picture in the region –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Capt. Guma, I think I have said leave constitutional amendment; we go with the constitution as it is.  Matters of constitutional amendment we shall discuss at an appropriate time.  Let him finish his questions so that we go and debate the report and you issue may come up. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: With regard to poverty eradication, again there are many forms of poverty.  For example, there is poverty of knowledge, an epistemological poverty.  That one is being addressed by Universal Primary Education (UPE) and on the whole UPE is doing well.  

There are problems, there was a review and automatic promotion of students from primary one to primary seven may be readdressed, but that aspect of eradicating poverty is being addressed.  

There is spiritual poverty.  There we are not performing so well, may the Almighty irrigate us with mercy on that scope.  When it comes to material poverty, we have had again some problems, but they are largely attributable to the war we are fighting, but also there is the issue of water for production -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I want to advise that according to our rules, a question is taking not more than an hour.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Water for production: I am a farmer as you know and my view is that, that matter has to be addressed as is being addressed because we cannot depend on the whims of nature when we are producing food as hon. Odit knows.  So, since the Speaker was gently reminding me, I could spend a whole afternoon answering this question, let me stop here and wait for other questions.

THE SPEAKER: But let questions be supplementary so that we do not generate debates and just be briefly answered.

3.40
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, in fact my supplementary is supposed to help the Prime Minister because, Mr Prime Minister, I appreciate your effort to answer our questions, but we should also look at the question whether it is worthy answering. Because in my view these questions should have been more specific, and therefore you should tell your Ministers to ask for specifics so that they can give more specific answers because these questions were so general that you would spend the whole week answering. 

I would also urge my colleagues if they want ask questions to be more specific.  Otherwise, we waste taxpayers’ money answering general questions where the answers are already known.  For instance, does Government have a policy analyst and all that?  Of course we know they have.  So, what is new there?  Colleagues, sorry but I think we should –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So what you are advising, honourable. Member, is that we go and study the paper written and see what to do with it?

DR NKUUHE: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think that ends the session on this question.

3.41
MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I went through the consultations throughout my constituency and this is all that I heard from the consultations.  The issues of giving power to the people, many people in my constituency strongly believe that they should and they must have these powers all the time if we are to move well in this country.  

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, if I recall correctly, in your opening remarks of this session, you said we are going to analyse the report of the Committee, not a report of our consultations.  So, when we stand up here and we start repeating what we were told by our constituents, when shall we start discussing the report –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, can you protect me from the frontbench?  They do not seem to understand or like what I am saying, especially the hon. Minister of General Duties, Prof. Kagonyera, seems to be interfering.  But, Mr Speaker, really can you give us a final ruling on this matter, whether we should discuss, debate this Paper from the Legal and Parliamentary Committee or continue to present the views of our constituents?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the item was to consider the report and then in debating it you may refer to what your people told you.  But the item is adopting the report.  But you see, we have different ways of expressing ourselves on issues; but the item is to consider and adopt the report, but with reference of course to your views and the views of your constituents.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, I knew hon. Aggrey Awori wanted basically to take part of my ten minutes.  But I am very grateful for the –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, it is an established procedure in this august House that we accord each other respect.  Is it in order for my honourable colleague to imply in his thinking and his presentation that I have bad motives against him?

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that his observation is infectious?  

MR AWORI: Yes, Mr Speaker.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Mr speaker.  I am basically talking about the report; and these are the views of the people I represent.  I am a Member of Parliament for that area and allow me give verbatim what they sent me here to do.  

Point number 2, which is in the report, was the point of changing from the Movement System to a Multiparty System of Government.  The people of Bukooli South welcomed this suggestion and they said it is high time they agree and fully agree with the proposal of Government that we now change and accept to go through the Multiparty System of governance.

Mr Speaker, there was the issue of Regional Government and a situation, which appeared a little bit very complicated to my constituents, but they said this is all that they want.  They have seen, they have moved for a long period of time since 1997 in the decentralization system of Government and they do not want much interference into that; they prefer decentralization and they do not want either Federal Government or regional tier that the Government was trying to introduce.

Mr Speaker, sanctions on traditional leaders and regularisation of how things are supposed to move as per the recommendation of Government.  My people believe that if we are to have a strong Uganda, a clear democracy, they would prefer not to see what happened in this country before; and they said, let there be sanctions to enable people know that they are supposed to move this way and not other way.

Mr Speaker, removal of Presidential term limits.  My people of Bukooli South throughout the five Sub-counties were consulted and we moved with them from area one to area two on the good and the bad of this arrangement, and they all come and concurred with me that when I come back here, I should inform this Parliament and request it to allow them exercise their power by determining this issue and they say nobody should remove these powers from them; they would like to exercise this power and give whoever wants to become a President provided he is still good to continue in office. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue was the issues of Presidential, Parliamentary and LC elections on the same day.  My people welcomed this recommendation and said it will save not only Government of colossal amount of money, but also the untidy system and manoeuvres that we go through when a President is elected on the first day then after sometime, you elect the Members of Parliament, after sometime you again elect LC Chairmen and lower Councils.  They say it would be very good and they welcomed the issue of elections on the same day.

There was another proposal of dissolving Parliament on issues of confidence.  My people were a little bit hesitant to allow the President dissolve Parliament on issues of confidence.  But they said, since there are the ones who elect the President and Members of Parliament, just in case there is any problem between the two organs of the State; if it is an issue which cannot be completely resolved they should give them a chance again to refer back to them and allow them talk on this matter and if they fail, let Parliament and the President all set themselves aside and allow the Chief Justice to come in. 

These people can be referred back to the people and whoever comes back should be allowed to come back but not the President dissolving the Parliament that was elected by the people and himself organises an election. In many cases, if he is organizing an election where he is there, there is a tendency and possibility of him trying to do what is okay for him than what is good for the people. 

There was another issue of the national language.  Mr Speaker, my people who live along the borders of Uganda and Kenya and also the borders of Uganda and Tanzania, welcomed the Government proposal of accepting Swahili language to become a national language for this country because this language traverses the region and almost everybody in my area wherever we went to do the consultation and what I can also accept and thank the committee is that they preferred Swahili language to be a national language.  

There was the issue of the Chief Administrative Officers.  I went throughout my constituency, and also I thank the Committee because they tried their best and they brought what my people basically wished to see from this committee.  They say for along period of time, they have been suffering, things are not moving in many areas.  

In a situation where the Chief Administrative Officer and the Chairman LCV are not in correct terms – Mr Speaker, they requested and they strongly urged and said they recommend the Government recommendation of appointing the CAOs from the centre and not only appointing the Chief Administrative Officer from the centre but also have somebody to monitor Government money in form of an Accounting Officer.  

Mr Speaker, they talked about the size of Parliament and said that much as they know that the size of Parliament is big but they would like to see that the reduction into the size of Parliament should not be done at the constituency level. They are saying, they are special interest sits, women at the district level and others those are the areas that they would like to see in case there is any reduction in Parliament to be begun with.  

They even went ahead and said, they have one sub county which is called Sigulu sub-country which is a hard-to-reach area and they were requesting to come and talk to my Friends and Colleagues in Parliament and in Government that if there is a possibility they allow them have a constituency for the smooth running of the section of that society.  

I finally end by raising one other issue that they talked about and this was the issue of death penalty and more especially death penalty for defilement cases.  They said, they would not have a problem with that, but much as death penalty is not a punishment, you are killing somebody and he is gone, he will not suffer for anything. 

They said there is a problem in this defilement issue: In many cases boys and more especially young boys are the ones who suffer.  One girl who was already married somewhere else comes and a boy finds her and he gets married to that boy or possibly she has got somewhere, when they take the boy for punishment, before even the issues of the judgment is begun this very same girl has got married to another person.  I have a number of examples that I can give but they said in case of death penalty, something has to be seen.  

They also said, in many cases there are elderly women who go for young boys. If there is a possibility let this Parliament look into that and see away of punishing elderly women who also go for young boys.  Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity and honourable members, I thank you very much and wish you a prosperous new year. 

3.54
MS JALIA BINTU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the rest of the Members in thanking the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the good work done.  

In recess, I consulted widely throughout my district at sub county level and during my consultations we arrive at consensus and at times we could vote at issues. But I want to observe that there are certain issues that were cross cutting in all the meetings that we had and one of the issues was Constitution awareness.  There is lack of Constitutional awareness in my district and the people raised this issue and the Government is tasked to make sure that people are well informed on the Constitution. Since the promulgation of the Constitution in 1995, it is well known that the Constitution has never been translated in other languages and this deprives those people who cannot read.  

We, therefore recommend that, we the people of Masindi district, that the Government makes sure that the Constitution is translated in Runyoro-Runyakitara language and that it should be made accessible and that the awareness programme be made available to the people. So are the related laws like the electoral laws.  

Mr Speaker, the people were greatly concerned about the electoral laws. It is well known that at times these laws are passed towards the electioneering time and people are not well sensitised on what is entailed in these laws.  So my people are saying the Government should make sure that these laws are passed when there is a lot of time remaining and that they should be made available to the public.

On the change of the political system on page 18 of the report, my people reluctantly agreed on the change of political system from Movement to parties, and the reluctant acceptance is subject to the election to the referendum; and if this question is put to them to decide, then there is a likelihood that people will not vote for parties and this is because they express their concern that the Government goes ahead to decide on certain pertinent issues that affect them without consulting them.  These are the people of Masindi and I am talking –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, can I be protected from hon. Cecilia Ogwal?  I am talking on behalf of the people of Masindi District and she has a farm in my district, and she must accept that I represent her when she is in Masindi District.  

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On the issue of compulsory acquisition of land, Article 26, my people agree with the report of the Committee that the status quo remain, and we well know that people in Masindi District and Bunyoro we still have problems.  The land has become an issue where they do not think that as per now they can leave authoritative acquisition of land to entirely the Presidency; they think the status quo should remain.

On Affirmative Action, Article 32, I have read the Report of the Committee on page 14.  The people of Masindi District thank the Movement Government for having recognised the women.  But they add, although a third of the representation of women in the Councils are in Parliament, this has not been wholly achieved.  They add that, although this provision is there, it should be specifically outlined in the Constitution that a third should also apply in the Cabinet, in the District Local Government Executive, in Judiciary and in other private sectors; because when we leave it at that then women are left out.  The case raised was of Masindi District Local Government Executive; we only have one woman out of the six Councillors.  So, this was an issue that came out during the consultation.

On the dissolution of Parliament, Mr Speaker, on a matter of confidence, the people refused the powers to be given to the President to dissolve Parliament.  But they concurred with the Sempebwa Committee Report that this issue should be referred to them to decide on what to do.

There was a case in point raised on the issue of citizenship, and I have looked at the report on page 11.  Masindi District borders the Democratic Republic of Congo and when the issue of dual citizenship arose in the reports, in the White Paper, they supported the dual citizenship.  But again there was an issue that came up and they are proposing that the Government of Uganda should make sure that they produce the National identity cards.  This will help the country in sorting out problems, especially those affecting the border areas.

Composition of Parliament, the people of Masindi District concurred with all the recommendations.  However, they noted that in case we go multiparty and under multiparty the public servants and civil servants are not supposed to participate in politics, they are supposed to be apolitical, how would the UPDF participate in the Parliament?  So, they proposed that the UPDF should not be in Parliament, but the rest of the interest groups should remain.

On the appointment of a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), Article 188(2), whereas they concur with the White Paper and our report, they had this in mind, and they proposed that whereas the CAO should be brought back to the centre, there are other Directors or Heads of Departments who also handle such a lump sum of money and at times they collide with even the district authorities and accountability is not achieved.  So, they are recommending that these Directors or Heads of Departments at the district level should also be brought back to the centre and also be subjected to being transferred all over the country.

On the election of the President and the Members of Parliament and LC5 Chairperson, the people of Masindi District as we heard yesterday my Colleague, hon. Kabakumba Masiko, saying, they proposed that the election of the President and Members of Parliament should be on the same day, this should not leave out the Woman Member of Parliament.  But the election of the LC5 Chairperson should be held on another day with his or her Councillors at the LCV level. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, on the issue of the term limit, the people of Masindi District are saying that the term limit should be lifted; and if we fail to lift the term limit here, then the issue should be referred back to them to decide.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.03
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to appreciate the work of the Committee and its report.  I in particular want to point out the two aspects, which they brought out that, one, while we are discussing this report and making the Constitution, national interest should be above self and party; and two, prejudices should be abandoned.  

I want to commend the Committee for these two fundamental statements, and I do hope that these two fundamental statements are not flowery speeches being made at a wedding.  You know at a wedding, people do make flowery speeches only for the wedding to end up in terrible quarrels and divorce.  But I do hope that the advice of the Committee, that we should take our national interest above self and party, will be a fundamental guiding principle for us.

I come from Otuke County, which is a totally displaced constituency; 50 per cent of the people in Otuke are still living within camps, and there are a total of six camps within Otuke in which they live.  The rest are hosted by hon. Cecilia Ogwal within Lira Municipality, and they live in a total of about 10 camps.  I have been able to visit all these camps within Lira Municipality and where possible I have slept there and since I have not completed by consultation, I will be completing it in due course; security permitting I will be going back to Otuke in near future. Over the weekend I will be able to cover one or two camps without interfering with my Parliamentary work.  

I am sure that by the time we are debating the actual bill I will be able to use those opinions, those views I have collected to tackle each clause which will be proposed and I do believe that this is the style which would be better to adopt.  That if the Clause on Article 105 comes up I will be able to say that the people of Otuke have said this and, therefore, I will be able to vote like this.  Otherwise at this stage I do not feel it is proper for me to come here and do the parroting under clause by Clause and say that this is what the people have said.

It is important for me to expand on the principles, which have been expounded by the committee.  Those two principles of national interest and prejudices, I want to add six of them, six important guiding basic and principles which should assist us in debating and amending the Constitution.  

One of them, Mr Speaker, is that really out of this debate we should be able to retain and consolidate Uganda’s sovereignty and integrity.  It will be sad if the Constitution making process disrupts or undermines the sovereignty and territorial integrity of this country.  The second one, which should be maintained, is the issue of unity, peace and stability.  This amendment we should bear in mind that whatever amendment we are making the unity, peace and stability of Uganda should be foremost.

The third one is that whatever we are doing in this constitution, amending it should enhance and build democracy.  In this amendment which we are making do we undermine basic principles of democracy or are we building and enhancing democracy?  The fourth guiding principle is to protect promote and defend fundamental human rights and freedoms and the fifth is to encourage and promote national integration and reconciliation. 

Finally in this amendment are we making efforts to correct historical imbalances and inequities or the purpose of amending this Constitution is to entrench the leadership, a clique of people who would like to continue in power indefinitely and that for few who are unfortunate, they are condemned. 

Let me bring a very sad situation in Kampala today.  If you walk around the Post Office or around Speke Hotel and Standard Bank you will find a lot of children from Karamoja and their mothers.  The solution which City Council has adopted is to force these unfortunate Ugandans back to their homes.  These people are making the city dirty, these people are beggars; they are shaming to the tourists.  

Mr Speaker, unless Ugandans start to care and think of each other, the amendment of this Constitution is simply going to undermine our sense of nationalism, our sense of integration and our sense of togetherness.  How can we make a Constitution that stands the test of time and create a lasting document that is accepted and respected by all Ugandans?  To me, it is an issue of consensus; it is not the issue of majority. In this Parliament today, the 1995 Constitution was made under the movement system; the majority of the parties hardly participated.  

This amendment, ten years from today, there are those who say, “Do they have the majority, movement has two thirds majority, they have the majority”.  But let me warn them that if you are making this amendment as a Movement because you have the majority, you are going to make this Constitution a Movement Constitution made by the Movement for the Movement and by the Movement system and totally unworkable.

Let us listen to each other and know that even if I am in the minority, I am still part of this country.  If this Constitution is being made when the Movement is still the majority, but not able to involve other politic interests, then this Constitution will not stand a test of time. What is the purpose of these amendments?  

We have over about 100 or so proposals for the amendments ranging from what I call fundamental to minor.  I think that the fundamental issue here are basically two. One is to free parties, I do not know whether they are going to be freed by this Parliament or they are going to be freed by the peasants who are going to be asked in the referendum, the peasants whose minds have already been poisoned -(Interjections)- yes, yes.  

The second issue, which  I am very serious, is the issue of Article 105 (2), which I believe to me, is meant to benefit General Museveni.  This Clause has not been tested, it has not been tested 10 years; we have not even finished ten years.  I would have been happy if two to five years term was tested and then it was found to be unworkable and then in 20 years time, we come and amend it.  But to put a Clause in a Constitution, which has even not worked and tested yet and say, “Let us amend before we even use it”.  It means that it is intended to benefit particular interest group and, therefore, we are likely to create a constitutional Presidential dictatorship.  

Why?  You are going to have a limitless period for the Office of the President, you want the President to have legislative powers; the President possibly has total control over everything in the country.  He has total control over the Army, he has the total control over the finance, he can say you have UgShs2.5 million to go and study, you have Ugshs20 million, Basajjabalaba, you have this Dairy Corporation, you are free to have it. You are creating a very dangerous institution of the presidency, and I want to warn you that if you do this –(Laughter)- yes, I want to warn you and I have a right to warn you that experience – 

Mr Speaker, let me conclude my remarks like this.  In 1994/1995, I participated in making the 1995 Constitution.  Without mentioning names, some of us who were there tried our best to oppose certain provisions, to bring in good provisions, but the champions of those who were against the provisions proposed by Omara Atubo, Nabudere, Cecilia Ogwal and all these others, today the same people who were champions of those provisions in 1995 are now running away from the Movement.  They are running away because they have found that they have created such a powerful monster they cannot control.  

What are we having today?  As those people run away they are being replaced by younger people who are so excited –(Laughter)- the Nabetas, the Nyombi’s and all these; they are being replaced by them.  20 years from now this same cycle of people are going to be used and we cannot accept this sort of recycling. If these people had listened to us - let me mention their names today, the Bidanda Ssalis, the Kategayas, the Lt Gen. Muntu - had listened to us in 1995, they would not be crying the way they are now crying. I want to you to listen to us now so that you do not make the same mistake in this Amendment.  

Finally, tribalism should be out, personal issues of the stomach should be out; the issue of militarism should be addressed in our politics and completely wiped once and for all. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, my hon. Colleague, for yielding the Floor at the end of your presentation.  However, I would like to inform the august House that, given our previous experience in matters of managing the State we had a similar situation about 30 years ago where one of our Ministers, a very distinguished person, introduced a bill in the House to put it in the Constitution restraining members of the opposition from operating.  No sooner had we finished the bill, making it a law, he was the first victim of the law.  So, I wish to inform my hononourable colleagues that do not create a beast, which you cannot sustain; you can feed for a time, but eventually it will eat you up.  

Having said that also my honourable Colleague, those of us who think by promoting certain views, which will entrench or remove certain aspects of the Constitutions that restrain people from becoming dictators and perpetual Life Presidents, do not forget the same august House, some of you may not be returned; and when you are not returned other Members of Parliament, who do not belong to the same organisation, will be in this august House when a President you have put in place for life or permanently will not be able to pass any bill in this august House when we are in control of the House.  That will be a statement.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I want to end by saying this has been a very happy day for me because I have spoken something, which will be on record to be read and known, and the future will prove me right.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.20
MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I would like to add my voice to my colleagues, who have thanked the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the good report produced.  I want also to thank you, Mr Speaker, particularly for your advice when you were sending this House to consult.  You did advise that as we consult we read the Constitution and we consult with the knowledge of the articles of this Constitution.  I took this piece of advise and as I was consulting, and as I also read this report, I was looking at our Constitution, and what I am going to contribute on this matter is in that regard. 

I must say also that I want to acknowledge the process that the Government put in place in revisiting this Constitution.  Apart from the Commissions that were set, I was privileged to participate in the talks with the political parties, so some of these issues that we are contributing will help us.  

Particularly, I want add that voice to the people who say the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs came out with specific principles, which are very important, like the issue of the national interest; and whoever has stood up is talking about the national interest.  The problem of who measures these national interests is a very big one.  So, as we prepare the Constitutional Amendment Bill we could be able to think about these national interests because as we even were consulting with the political parties, people were saying, “Which are these national interests that we are talking about?  Which common good do we have for this country?”  

The issues of national interest can be seen on what spectacles you are putting on.  If somebody came here and said, “I am talking for the interest of this nation,” you look at his spectacles and say, “Which spectacles are talking about the national interest?”  So, as we prepare to talk about national interest, we would be able to understand what the common good for this country is such that when we go to amend this Constitution, the national interest does not address individual interest in the context of pretence of saying national interest.  So, this is very important and should be put in consideration as we prepare for this amendment bill. 

But also importantly, the consultation of our people has been a very important exercise to us as representatives of the people, whoever is here says, “I talk for my constituency.”  I am here on behalf of the people of Bbaale –[Hon Members: We know.] - yes you know, thank you, but I want only to remind you.  

So, when you look at a number of issues here that have been suggested, these are important issues and I want to commend the Committee, for example, there is the issue of independent candidates.  This is a very important issue, that as we come to political parties we put a provision for independent candidates.  But it is very important also to take precautions on how to guard this independence because it is likely to have political manipulation. Somebody can study a constituency X and decided to say here, when you stand as an independent candidate you are likely to succeed.  

The political parties can also use that opportunity to pretend that this one will be an independent candidate. What is wrong with what I am explaining? If you bear with me and listen, that is what I am coming to. You come down here and say you are an independent candidate but at the end of the day you are making coalitions to put this country in trouble. 

You remember that we have said that when we put political parties in place, a fellow who comes to this Parliament on a DP ticket and he crosses to another party, he is asked to go back and he consults his constituency about the reasons he is crossing to another party. But what precaution do we put in place for a candidate who has come as an independent if he goes and makes alliances with other parties? So, that is a serious matter we need to look at and consider seriously.

On the matter of federal regional governments, this was a very big debate in my constituency. My constituency is part of Kayunga District but it is one of the united nations of Uganda. So, it has some uniqueness in terms of the population there. I must say that the issue was hotly debated and there are those who think they should not go for federal. And I must express that view. And they have reasons for it. Then there are those who say we should go for federal. But what I noted out of this debate is that the issue of federal has been linked with the issue of the traditional leaders. And I think as leaders we have a lot of explaining to do because even at higher levels people link the issue of federal to monarchies or to federalism and this type of confusion has killed the substance within the federal governments. 

So as leaders we should not manipulate the ignorance of the people and use the matter of federal and link it to the issue of monarchism. When you talk about national interest and then link these matters to your way of getting exploitation of the ignorance of people, I think that will be very dangerous. People would like to think that we should go with regional governments, as they do not cause any difference as long as we define what is in regional governance. The issue is about what you have in the bag. Is it the bag that you want or the contents of the bag? So, we should be able to help our population on explaining these issues.

Another important issue –(Interjection)-(Mr Dombo rose_)-I would not like to allow any information at this particular moment. Forgive me I would like to continue with my contribution. Another important matter of course is that in the White Paper in the committee’s report that we have talked about is the compulsory acquisition of land for investment. But my people do not take this one as a very important subject. They would like to look at this Parliament as we are talking about the review of the Constitution, re-address the issue of land tenure management in this country and be constitutional. It should not be in subsidiary laws because for example we saw there are four classes of ownership of land in Uganda but the majority of Ugandans are on bibanja. This is a category, which is not recognised in this Constitution, but we say under Article 237 that land belongs to the people Uganda. Which people of Uganda? A few rich ones; the landlords? 

Can we, as we revisit this Constitution, address the issue of land? If we do not address the issue of land even the issue of poverty cannot be answered. The biggest asset in this country is land and when you are talking about land, you are talking about production, you are talking about government plans of action against poverty, and you should address the matter of land. So, the people of Bbale think that as we talk about land; let us not look at government acquisition of land on compulsory matters but at how land is managed and how it is owned in this country. It should be in the Constitution, not in a subsidiary law.  

The other point is about legislature, Parliament. On this the people of Bbale said, “Fine, we could remain with the status quo as government and committee proposes, but there are certain things to consider”. They said that in this Constitution of 1995 certain Articles are too detailed and we need to eliminate some of these details in the Constitution. If one got chance to look at the Constitution of America, you look at that big state with the volume of the Constitution as we have. But the type of Constitution that was made by our colleagues in 1995 was so detailed that is has some problems when you answer certain issues that will put you down. 

For example, there is Article 63 in this Constitution and clause (5) says assuming we retained the status quo, subject to clause (1), the commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within 12 months after the publication of results of the population census of Uganda, and re-demarcate the constituencies. If this is so, my understanding of that clause is that wherever you carry out a census you re-demarcation of constituencies. This is a detail. 

One would ask, “If you are retaining the status quo, have we considered the census that was carried out in 2002”? Those are issues that we have to consider and look at the Constitution the other way.

Yes, I am about to end. On the issue of disqualifying Members of Parliament, it is already in the report and it was also in the White Paper stating that if you were convicted in a court of law for maltipractices in elections, you are barred from standing for a period of seven years. Some people argue that that is double punishment. If I have served my punishment, then why cause another punishment? So when we go for amendment we need to consider that argument as well.  

The issue of CAOs is the one I want to end with. Having had an experience of 14 years in local councils, I want to say it is not an answer in itself. Shifting the role of appointment of the CAOs to the center will not address the issue of mismanagement of resources. The people would like to think that there are other issues that we could consider for example the quality of the councils. Yes, they do the planning and monitoring role –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking this clarification basically for the benefit of our future Hansard readers. In the past there was a white lady who came here and when she was asked to go to Nebbi and meet the CAO, she felt she was being abused because CAO can be C.O.W or C.A.O. But for the benefit of our Hansard readers, should not this thing be clarified to mean the “Chief Administrative Officers” so that it can be reflected as that in the Hansard? I thank you.

MR MADADA: I have no disagreement with that. I was talking about the quality of the councils. Can we look at what we have in the law?

4.32
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know that many of my colleagues, in beginning their contributions, made reference to the fact that they consulted their constituencies. Just for the record I would like to let it be known that I have also consulted my constituents. However, I am going to confine myself to what I must do, that is, discuss the report of the committee.  

I have read this report and I commend the committee for the work done. But there are certain gaps, there are certain issues that they raised and did not give answers to, which I want to talk about so as to help this country as we consider some of the issues on how to amend our Constitution. I have only three areas to cover but before I do that I would like to draw the attention of members to what the chairman of the committee said on page 4 that in making his presentation, he hopes that “the presentation will make me deserve the true confidence they shared in electing me to chair the committee.”  

I am a little concerned about this statement being part of this committee report because I know hon. Jacob Oulanyah very well and I do not see why he should have been shaken by the process of being elected. I want to put this on record, but they are three other things.

First, on page 15 the committee made recommendations on the composition of the Electoral Commission and there are a number of questions that they raised. For example they raised the question, “Should parties not have a role in the nomination process rather than leaving it exclusively to the President?”  “What kind of principles of fairness in operation should the Electoral Commission adopt?” 

Having asked those questions the committee then fell silent on what direction to take. The recommendations of the Government on this are merely to amend the name of the Electoral Commission to the Uganda Electoral Commission and yet the crucial role of all political parties or groups participating in the process of forming a fair, independent Electoral Commission is a crucial component of our democratization process.  

The second issue is a matter that should have been covered in chapter 5, from pages 17 to 19. In the recommendations in the White Paper and in the recommendations of the Constitutional Review Commission, it was recommended by Government and I think I should read this. What I am saying is that this report does not make reference to Article 74. The amendment of Article 74 is not referred to in this report and yet it is a crucial element of what we must do in changing the political system. Just read and you will find that it is not there. 

The recommendation was that, “The multi-party form of participation should be adopted through a process provided by Article 74(2) of the Constitution,” and this was government response; “Government notes this recommendation, but it is of the view of that the change of the political system from the current Movement Political System to the Multi-party Organisations or Multi-party Political System can better and more cheaply be achieved by amendment of Article 74 of the Constitution.” 

Then they go further and say in (1), “Thus, it is proposed to amend Article 74 of the Constitution to provide that from the end of the current term of Parliament, public elections in Uganda will be held under Multi-party Organizations or Multi-party Political System. This amendment will require approval at a referendum under Article 259 of the Constitution. In the proposed amendment, the power of the people of Uganda to change the political system under Article 74(1) and (2) of the Constitution in the fourth year of future Parliaments will be preserved.” 

I am actually puzzled as to why the committee did not address this particular issue because first of all -(Interruption)

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me inform the honourable member holding the Floor - I had not intended to disrupt him but when he continually referred to the committee having ignored this, I want him to look at page 7 of the report where you find the recommendation. The committee says, “Amend Article 74 in the terms as proposed by government.” The committee certainly looked at this at length, and the committee felt that the Article should be amended. So, we did not ignore that Article. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA: I was going by the structure of the report because that should have appeared under chapter 5. Nevertheless, the fundamental issue is not that it was not referred to. The fundamental issue is what government has recommended. In my reading it is a very mischievous recommendation. First of all it says that it is cheaper. How is it cheaper when you still have to hold a referendum to amend that particular Article? Where do you cut the costs? A cheaper alternative is provided under Article 74(2), where the district councils will provide their resolutions and Parliament will give their resolutions. That is the cheapest way of amending it.

Secondly, they go ahead to say that when you want to amend it to this, at the end of that what is provided under Article 74(1) and (2) should be preserved, and 74(3) is about the fourth year, which is again referred to. What would you have amended? That is the fundamental question and I believe that this is a matter that this Parliament should consider very seriously. Embedded in this particular provision is an attempt to find an exit strategy away from restoring multi-party politics, because it is possible to go out there in the name of President Museveni and convince people –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have in the present set up a way of forcing district councils to make a resolution pursuant to Article 74? Suppose they do not make it, will they be breaching the Constitution?

PROF. OGENGA: They would not be but then it would not be any cheaper to amend this with the referendum. So, the issue of course does not arise.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, a few months ago we passed the Referendum and other Provisions Act and I do remember that it did make provisions for resolutions of district councils with regard to amendment of the Constitution.  

PROF. OGENGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope the interventions would have been considered. 

The last item is really the issue of removal of term limits. People have stood up to say what our people want. The issue is that in the village there is no basis for the common person in the village, based on their feelings, can provide an informed decision on term limits. But we have a basis. I have a basis, I have to scan East and Southern Africa. I will find that it is only in Zimbabwe where term limits are not provided for –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You are off.

PROF. OGENGA: Mr Speaker, the interventions, including yours, took my time –(Laughter)– unless I did like the honourable minister and refused all interventions. Let me just finish this last item. 

It is only in Zimbabwe where term limits are not provided for and in Zimbabwe every election is a year of chaos. Even the people are starved, denied food to ensure that President Mugabe retains power. Let us not deceive ourselves. In Zambia, a country that is less developed and less exposed to chaos than ours, even Vice Presidents resign to ensure that the term limits provided for stand. In Malawi ministers resign to ensure that term limits are provided, in Kenya there are term limits, in Mozambique there are term limits, in South Africa, name it -(Interjection)

MR KAKOOZA: Point of information.

PROF. OGENGA: My honourable colleague who wanted to give me information made reference to the United States. In the United States they amended the Constitution to entrench term limits and when they did that it was not because the President of the day was bad. It was just that they did not want to personalize the institution of the presidency and what happened was that in that amendment to entrench two term limits, they said that even the President under which the term limits would be removed would not be eligible for re-election under that provision. Even the next President would not be eligible. This is would discourage those who would want to remove the term limits. 

Recently in Tanzania a Member of Parliament proposed that the term limits be removed. He was censored by Parliament and he was suspended for three months. Parliament immediately voted money to renovate State House for the next President. President Mwinyi himself said that person was a danger to Tanzania. Those who for their selfish interests go to remove term limits, which were put when President Museveni was President and who when he was signing the Constitution said this is a good Constitution - except for the land matters - those who want to remove it for their selfish interests, if it happens they will find out for themselves. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I just want to seek your guidance in line with Article 119 of the Constitution. I want to know in what capacity hon. Adolf Mwesigye is seated on the front bench because in my later submissions I would want to make very close reference to him. I am quite aware that ministers with designated portfolios are to sit on the front bench and I want you to guide us. But I hope he is not sitting waiting for the amendments to create the post of the Deputy Attorney-General. So, probably you may guide us and have him re-allocated.

THE SPEAKER: The front bench, in our tradition, is for ministers and hon. Adolf Mwesigye is a minister. That is why he is sitting there and there is no established seat apart from the Vice-President, Prime Minister then a minister can sit anywhere he wants on the front bench.

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, I want to make close reference to his ministry so probably you should guide me and I know what affairs he is in charge of in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I know is that for some time hon. Adolf Mwesigye has been a minister and I have never been told that he has been reshuffled and he is no longer a minister; so he is still a minister. Unfortunately, when the President reshuffles ministers he assigns them portfolios and he does not inform the office of the Speaker. He only informs the office of the Speaker when he has nominated new ministers. He has been a minister. As far as I am concerned, since he has not been gazetted, I do not know which portfolio he is still holding.

4.48
MS JULIET SEKITOLEKO (Youth Representative): I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr Speaker and all Members of Parliament who visited me while I was in hospital and out of the hospital. Thank you.

I would like to commend the very good work the committee did and I would like to thank them specifically for being youth friendly. The views I am about to express here are the views of the majority of the youth in this country. The views of the youths in this country are the ones I am going to present to this Parliament. Mr Speaker, protect me from retired Capt. Guma, my neighbour here, because he is distracting me. 

THE SPEAKER: He is watched.

MS SEKITOLEKO: Mr Speaker, on the issue of the presidential, parliamentary and the local council V elections, the youth are of the view that the presidential and parliamentary elections be carried out on the same day; and the elections of the local council V and the lower councils also be carried out on the same day. We do not want to see a situation of national elections being mixed together with the local council elections.  

On the same note, the elections of the special interest groups namely the youth, workers and persons with disabilities in the local councils should also be carried out before the elections of the local council V and the lower councils. This is because usually when the big elections are over, the elections of the youth, the women and the people with disabilities in the lower councils are usually neglected and probably even carried out after a long time. So, we think with this we will also move together with the other elections.

With regard to federo and regional tiers, the majority of the youth in this country think that we should do with decentralization. That is because we think that selective federo is in fact going to divide this country and yet we are looking at a situation of moving towards the African Union. We think that federo and regional tiers should completely not be put in our vocabulary and we go with decentralization.

On the issue of adult suffrage, the youth support the idea of universal adult suffrage on the elections of the women but the youth elections should still be through electoral colleges. That is because the constituencies are too big and, therefore, if it is through adult suffrage the voters will be extremely many and the youth will not be able to handle.

On the size of Parliament we think that the status quo is fine. Most of the people feel that the interest groups should be scrapped. On this note we would like to take this opportunity to thank the Government and also to commend the very good work the committee did because they feel the youth should be retained in Parliament, and the workers should be retained - you have seen the results. The people with disabilities should also be retained, and the Army; we completely have no problem. Instead we should remain with the current Parliament and probably government should find a way of building a bigger Parliament to accommodate the current Parliament but not to add more Members of Parliament.
 
On the change of political system and term limits, most of the youth in this country have grown up in this system. I personally have grown up in this system and I have seen and heard and read books about what happened in the previous regimes; we feel we are comfortable with this regime.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to wind up by saying that so long as the right procedures are followed, the youth really have no problem with opening up the term limits. I thank you.

4.54
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Thank you very much. I want to thank the Legal Committee for the good work. I also want to express happiness and satisfaction that it is you, Mr Speaker, chairing the proceedings of the various amendments proposed by government because you have the experience and competence and because of your participation in the Constituent Assembly.

The late Grace Ibingira wrote, Forging of an African Nation, when he was a Minister of Justice, and he authored Detention Without Trial majorly for the Democratic Party members then. He was not looking at anything else apart from members of the Democratic Party because UPC was at the zenith of its political power. In 1966/1967 when he was arrested along with Kakonge and others by his President using the same law that he had authored, while in Luzira he wrote a book, Forging of an African Nation, and in that particular book the Late Ibingira says that, “Fate is a double crosser, what you wish for x, y and z may eventually turn against you”.

Some time back when we were discussing the Political Parties and Organizations Act – the Bill then - there were people who rose and talked about military officers being barred from politics when we are in political party arrangement. Some strong Movement ideologues pushed that position on the Floor of this Parliament. Little did certain senior Movement people, who had military tags, know that the law would encumber them. So, when they were explained to that before you participate in a multi-party environment you have to first retire, some of them looked at the ceiling and yet this was the law that the same administration had pushed here in the House.

In 1988 I met a teacher at Kampala road, I was in a military uniform. This teacher taught me in high school in Ntare. He saw me in uniform and got shocked and asked me whether I was the one who was in the military uniform, having been one of those students in Ntare who used to tease Amin soldiers that they were in the army because they were academic failures. I told this same teacher, at Diamond Trust in 1988 that, “Teacher, I have learnt never to say ‘never’”. 

In 1986 when we came out of the bush I was working with hon. Amanya Mushega in the political department in the army and I was actively involved in organising political activities in and around Kampala, telling people how political parties are bad –(Interjections)- I was! When I came from the 28th Battalion in Bibiya. Now here is a Movement believer telling the country just 19 years later that after all political parties are not bad, we can now embrace them. I have listened to colleagues here, “My people are saying this, my people have told me to come here and say one, two, three.”  Yes, these people incidentally - even according to the Sempebwa Report it is quoted that over 70 percent of the public memoranda from these people are saying that we still need the Movement. 

But we are now here saying that we embrace the political party arrangement. Where have the people gone? It is being quoted by the Sempebwa Report that over 70 percent of the public memoranda, both verbal and written, people still want the Movement. Some of them cannot understand but now on their behalf we are here saying that the 2006 elections will be under political pluralism .

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when these percentages are used, when commissions go out in the country, they do not go to take census of the population. When they use 70 or 60 percent, as the case may be, it is in respect of people who have been talked to. So this should never be seen as reflecting the total population.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, that is very correct. This then brings me to my wondering point that why then did we not, as commanded by the Constitution, organise a referendum to find the views of the people on this particular problem before we announced a political party arrangement? 

Let me point out that while the constitutions can be amended to reflect changing societal needs and aspirations, the proposed amendments to the 1995 Constitution – and a number of them in my view - do not have sufficient justifications. Some have, some do not have. Ten years in the life of a country, to propose more or less an overhaul of a national Constitution - and ten years in my view is not a long time. This suggests that you and I, Mr Speaker, and other colleagues like hon. Nasasira who were in the Constituent Assembly did not do any job at all! 

MR SEBALU: Point of information.

CAPT. GUMA: I will not accept information, because I have a time problem.  

MR SEBALU: It is useful.

CAPT. GUMA: Be that as it may, let us discuss the amendments. On the outset, while a number of issues were not resolved in the 1995 Constitution, there are many issues that were put at rest both political, administrative and human issues outlining functions and responsibilities of each arm of government, decentralization of political power to lower government units and giving political power to the people. All these issues are clearly spelt out in the Constitution, including the establishment of the independence of the said arms of government.  

However, we are saying we are seeing an effort and attempts to reverse all these games. We are seeing a desire to concentrate power in the Office of the President by way of a proposal that we should have an amendment to give power to the President to dissolve Parliament. I hope honourable members will not give a sword to some office to stab the institutions in the back. It is like a sword; that would be giving a sword to someone to stab the institution of Parliament. Do not be malicious. I am seeing an effort to undermine Parliament by way of controlling the manner in which its payment is determined.(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, the clerk at Table was not malicious. He was just indicating to you that you have about two minutes left.

CAPT. GUMA: I have withdrawn it, Sir. 

Yes, even when a reverend retires he remains a reverend. (Laughter). We are seeing proposals to call back powers, decentralized powers from the lower governments like the power to determine whether a chief administrative officer should be appointed by the district service commission. We are seeing proposals to give albeit limited powers of legislation to the President. They are saying that they are limited -(Interjections)- that they are limited powers. 

We are seeing proposals about the control of minerals. There is a proposal in the White Paper that the minerals of the local governments and so on should benefit - and we are seeing an attempt to alienate certain minerals from the explanation of what a mineral is; like petroleum. So, Mr Speaker, since I am pressed by time let me summarize that in my view I see the Movement really as being a captive in its own successes. Why are there proposed attempts to reclaim powers that were given to certain administrative areas like Parliament and district areas?

Let us not use the numbers to block very useful discussions of the amendments of a Constitution that should be for the prosperity of our country. (Interjections)- But people are speaking for 20 minutes, Mr Speaker! 

5.07
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report. There are a few issues in the report that are also part of what I had to consult the people of Kalangala about in order to know. Unfortunately some of these issues have not come out very clearly even in the committee report and one of them is actually the change of political systems.

A lot is being said about the method of a change but why we should change political systems is not talked about yet it is an issue the people were actually asking about. What are the good reasons that have been given? And in the background even in the White Paper it is not included. The reason given was that the NEC agreed, yes, but basically why did they agree? Most of the people I represent were actually feeling - we had our problems, we know what happened then including of course their representative being directly involved in some of these problems of the multi-party politics then. How do you explain this and how will the committee help in explaining the why bit of changing the political system?

And then there is an issue in the White Paper about regional governments. The request by the people of Kalangala, most of them are saying they want the regional government to be called federo because some people had explained to them that the two are the same, so why not use the word? And if we have a decentralized system, which we have now, this system started with certain districts and areas, including something like secondary education, which at the moment is not even decentralised yet it is still at the centre. Why do we not start off this federo in certain areas and then move on and see how it works in order to cover everybody? These are some of the things that are not very clear. 

When I answer now, after reading the committee report, it still does not come out very clearly to my people and how should I report about it?  

What was included about elections of president, Members of Parliament and LC V, the people in Kalangala really felt that the capacity for people to cope with a local election and at the same time a national election was not there - at least for our people in Kalangala. I agree with them as their representative and we are in agreement that if we look at the president and the Members of Parliament being elected on the same day that would be fine. But the local councils being involved as well, they really felt that was going to be too much, especially in a few hours. When will they finish the counting? You have to sit there. Are they going to count the president’s votes first, then the Member of Parliament, then the LC V chairperson? You know, it was quite a mouthful on their side.

That would mean that there has to be quite a lot of election education, which time may not be available at this particular time. Perhaps that may have to be handled when we go to another election, not the 2006 election. If a law could be made later, but at the moment there is still that problem. 

Mr Speaker, the dissolution of Parliament, that one was very negatively received and quite a number of people in Kalangala felt that they elected their Members of Parliament, especially me - they actually call me a permanent Member of Parliament for them. If they did that, why should it – the President is allowed to give me a ministerial post and sack me from a ministerial post but not from Parliament where they want me to be, where they basically feel I should be. That is how they felt. 

Then the term limit; there was a balance, about 60 percent feel the term limit should be lifted and the 40 feel - and I will apologize to whoever I will hurt - the 40 feel if we lifted it and Obote comes back, what are we going to do with this man? I am sorry for the people I am hurting but this is the expression they used. However, it was only 40 percent –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you for giving way, my sister. Mr Speaker, you recall that you and me had a big battle in the Constituent Assembly regarding this particular Article and some of us actually took a very strong position. I particularly, and a few other members in the Constituent Assembly did not want the term limit. There were some people from the Movement who took a very strong view that there ought to be a term limit but after lobbying we agreed that the term limit was necessary in view of the democratic environment that Uganda is set to enjoy and in view of the fact that the global trend of events favors a fully democratic environment. So, we agreed on this as a matter of consensus. I do not think there would be a contradiction in this House. 

So, I would like to assure my sister that even if you lift the term limit, since UPC is a democratic party, a party that believes in democratic principles, there is no way we would force anybody to power. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think to help your people in Kalangala, this present position in the Constitution about the term limit does not affect the former President Obote. No, for him he can start as if he is starting a new term –(Interjection)- yes! The only disqualification could be the age of 70, otherwise the Constitution was not backdated. So, it did not affect President Binaisa; it started when it was promulgated.

MRS KAVUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Finally, this is actually only my side. I have looked at additional proposals from the committee and quite a number of others in the White Paper and I get a bit worried when in the additional proposals from the committee and even the White Paper, there is nothing addressing issues like education in particular. You know, we should have compulsory, free, primary and secondary education.

We need to have it in the Constitution so that everybody who comes knows that it is necessary. That is how I feel. I feel this is an additional issue that should have been added to the committee report’s proposals. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

5.16
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong county, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, my name is Johnson Malinga. I am labouring to re-introduce myself because sometimes I have taken credit, which is not due to me. I will give you an example. When I was in Rukungiri I was put in a very difficult position when somebody was trying to explain how I am Dr Mallinga, the man who won elections in Butebo twice, the Chairman of the UPC Caucus. I was only humble enough to tell him that I can only be the Chairman of the Movement Caucus, not UPC.  

Mr Speaker, I also did consult with the people of Kapelebyong, with the Members of Parliament and other stakeholders, but there are very few issues that I would like to discuss at this particular point so that when the Bill is being drawn some of these things should be left out of the Bill.

One, the issue where my people were very unanimous on was on land.  The provision in the White Paper that Government should acquire land compulsorily for development was totally rejected by my people.  They reminded me that if land is touched, it could spoil the waters in Kapelebyong and Teso, because in 1986/87 their cattle were touched and it turned into a revolution. They said that you remind these people who are making the Bill, that if they want peace here, when they are drafting the Bill, they should leave out the issue of the land so that we shall listen to other issues of the constitutional amendment peacefully.  

Mr Speaker, the other issue that was of controversy was the lifting of term limits. In Kapelebyong, a constituency was divided nearly into half, half.  Some members said, “No, the two term limits are very good” and they gave their side of the coin and others said, “Lift it.”  Those who were against the lifting of term limits were asking questions that, look here, this is the first Constitution that was made by the people of Uganda, why do we not give it a try before we change this term limit? Others were asking, what would happen if we provided in the Constitution that you can stand as many times as you would wish, as a President of Uganda and another Amin comes to this country and manipulates this same Constitution that we have provided to his own favour? What would happen to the rest of Ugandans? 

And there is a group that asked, if President Museveni declined to stand, could the agitators of the lifting of term limits maintain their position?  In other words they are asking, as you amend this Constitution, we would like to know the position of President Museveni. Whereas the other group was asking that if this Constitution says the power belongs to us and then there is a provision in the same Constitution that limits our powers as far as the election of Presidents are concerned - you can read Article 1 of our Constitution, which says - maybe I can help you.

THE SPEAKER:  No, it is not necessary you know.

MR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, if I were to vote, I would get pass hold now and my people gave provisions. One provision they said was, if people in Uganda feel that President Museveni has done a very good job, let us give him a bonus time but do not tamper with a Constitution. But if you want to decide as Uganda, then for you you cannot divide your vote into half, bring it back to us so that we can decide and a decision will be binding.  

The other issue that we discussed was on the appointment of chief administrative officers. My people said that you would retain the appointment and the supervision of the CAO at the district.  They said that this is only and only when the district service commissions will have power to supervise and control the actions of the CAO. They also have fears that if the chief administrative officer is appointed at the district, how would we control the imbalances of appointments in this country? 

Then they asked me to recall the lists of the resident district commissioners. In fact, they did ask me if Kapelebyong had ever had a resident district commissioner. And they reminded me that look, a school like Kitende sends over 100 students to the university in one year, and who are the students that fill that school? What would happen to us here where you will need 100 years to compete with Kitende in one year? So, they said that we should retain the appointment of the CAO and supervision at district level.    

On the issue of presidential powers, they said when we have a deadlock, it is simple, we should refer the issue to them and none of us should take power over the other one. 

But the other strong issue that we had a lot of debate on was the separation of powers. My people were very happy with the judiciary. They said the judiciary in Uganda is very clear but they have a problem with the Executive and Parliament because of two reasons. One, you will find a minister is also a Member of Parliament. That minister now has two appointing authorities, the voters and then the President. And they reminded me of Jesus saying that you cannot serve two masters at the same time. They said now, if a minister is to explain a government position, which we the voters are not in agreement with and that minister is our Member of Parliament, which position will the minister take? 

 So, for this matter, they said that for collective responsibility, let the President appoint ministers and they remain independent of Parliament and Members of Parliament remain Members of Parliament.  If the eye of the President sees you and appoints you a minister, you belong there and somebody replaces you in Parliament.  

The other issue which was not stated in the White Paper that came during the discussion, they asked me, why is it that you do not read in the papers about the problems of qualifications in the judiciary? But you read about qualifications amongst the Members of Parliament, amongst the ministers. It seems this issue of A’ level and equivalence is the problem and their recommendation was that, we would put in our Constitution that to be a Member of Parliament or to qualify to be a President, you should have a minimum of one degree so that you do not have the bother to struggle to explain to the people, “Oh, you see, I went to school, I went to Bwaise, I went” –(Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I was also put at a very difficult task to explain the powers of Parliament. The question I was asked was that, Article 85 of the Constitution empowers you as Parliament to determine your emoluments, but Article 93 of the Constitution restricts you from bringing in a Bill as private Members, that charges on the Consolidated Fund. Is there a way you people can harmonize this so that Members of Parliament have powers at least also to determine ours on the other side because, you cannot determine yours alone and then you leave out the teachers, you leave out –(Interjections)- I do not know whether I have gone to the delicate area that is why – 
 
The final issue we shared, among many others, was the issue of change of political systems. I fumbled with this issue, I did not explain it well to the people because I looked at Article 74 of the Constitution, which I would like to refer to –(Interjections)- alright, Members say they know this article, that is where I need help.  I looked through it and I did not find anywhere where we would qualify now to stand and say, “In the next election, we are going in a multiparty system” because the procedure for change of a political system is clearly laid here. I did not read any resolution that we passed as Members of Parliament, and I did not get any petition from the district. So, my people asked, “On which basis do you come here and say that in the next election we are going into a multiparty system?” Maybe I will need to get your assistance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, the provisions of Article 74 are merely permissive and you cannot say Parliament did not take a decision the fourth year, it breached the Constitution. You cannot say that the district council did not make a resolution to petition Parliament to do this, they breached the constitution. Article 74 is merely permissive, it is that if those concerned namely, Parliament and the district, feel there should be a change, they should make a decision in the fourth year; but if they do not, then it goes. 

But then I think those who are talking about the other one amending is to make a step, that although this Parliament may not make a decision, now we amend it to allow multiparty system to start and they will subject that amendment, if it is carried, to the population, that despite of the original 74, people have decided that we go to a multiparty system. That is all. Otherwise, 74 is not mandatory, it is merely permissive to you to make a decision; you may make it, you may not make it.

5.31
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like my colleagues, I thank the committee for the good job well done, and since I have only ten minutes, I will only address myself to one area and if I have more time, then I can address another. I am strictly making my thoughts known on Article 105, and I shall need your guidance now and later to convince me otherwise.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to share with you and my dear colleagues, Members of Parliament, my sincere belief that an error or a mistake of great proportion is about to befall this country if we amend Article 105 of our Constitution. My thoughts here are just to appeal to you and the Members of this Parliament since we are mandated to make laws for this country.  

It is clear, Mr Speaker, as it is clearly stated in the White Paper and the report that, Article 105 is going to be simply eliminated or deleted. Some people believe that the matter is as simple as that. The truth in my opinion is that it is very far from that. Why do I say this? In Article 105(1), it is very clear that, “A person elected President under this Constitution shall, subject to clause (3) of this Article, hold office for a term of five years.”  In (2), “A person shall not be elected under this Constitution to hold office as President for more than two terms as prescribed by this Article.” And (3), “The Office of President shall fall vacant –“ and here it is enumerated how a President can leave.

Mr Speaker, if you look at clause (2), which I have cited, clause (1) left alone would have a completely different meaning and maybe when this clause (1) was put there, the meaning or the intention of this particular clause was completely different. I believe that if you were to delete clause (1) and leave clause (2), actually it would be meaningless because clause (2) makes reference to clause (1). The meaning of the two clauses, which are together entitled, “Tenure of Office of President” and which must be read together is that, a President elected under this Constitution must be elected to hold office for five years, and can only hold office for not more than ten years.  

If you amend clause (2) in my view, Mr Speaker, you are in effect amending clause (1). In my humble view, therefore, an amendment of one clause will result into an amendment by implication or infection of the other clause. Under Article 259 of the Constitution, you can only amend clause (1) by obtaining two-thirds vote of Parliament, after which a referendum must be held to prove the vote by Parliament. If you bear this in mind, the fact that an amendment of clause (2) results into an amendment of clause (1) as I think, then it must follow that clause (2) can only be correctly amended by Parliament and the people as provided by Article 259.

Mr Speaker, it is a very expensive undertaking, but why so much bother to do this? What is wrong with Article 105 in its present form? Has the Article failed us to deserve amendment so quickly? My guess on this is as good a guess as yours. I have suspicion as a Ugandan and as a Member of Parliament that the amendment is meant to benefit the incumbent President. Yet, it is my humble view that deleting clause (2) or amending Article 105 in any way will not benefit the incumbent President.  It seems to me that since he was elected under this Constitution of 1995 and he has held this office for two terms, the Constitution is very categorical and it states and this is my emphasis, “A person shall not be elected under this Constitution to hold office as President for more than two terms as described by this Article.”

Mr Speaker, it should be easy to see that a person, who has taken an oath of office of President twice and has had to exercise power of that office twice, is totally in my opinion disqualified from holding another term. The deletion, therefore- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sabiiti, are you saying it is impossible to amend a Constitution to deal with all these hurdles if there are merits, or you are saying there are no merits for amending the Article?

MR SABIITI: I am coming to that.

MR AACHIILA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my hon. friend Jack Sabiiti for giving way. The presentation of hon. Sabiiti Jack is quite serious and as a concerned citizen and representing the people of Jie, it is important his concerns are made very clear. It is stated very clearly and it is put in the Constitution that Article 105 can be amended like any other part of the Constitution and yet Article 105 according to you, you say that if amended it is intended to provide room for the incumbent and yet in the actual fact, this Constitution is now under question, it is what we are looking forward to amend. 

What convinces you that after we have amended this Constitution, any other group that may consider it proper to choose anyone to lead them, will make it very difficult for other groups, which are also in existence like other parties to provide checks and balances to the existing system? What convinces that this leader will remain a dictator and yet room is already open for you, for other organizations to provide checks and balances? Should other organisations continue giving instructions to other organisations to prevail? Can you clarify? Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: I hope, Mr Speaker, you will give me more time because they are taking most of my time.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, you give your time actually.

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to be clarified, from my honourable colleague, that actually the country is going into a review of a Constitution whereby every society has a right to enjoy in it and I do believe that every Article in the Constitution has a meaning. Could he convince us to suspect that the incumbent is the beneficiary of the proposed amendment of Article 105 yet he has never talked about it.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, for your contribution and information. Mr Speaker, a deletion of Article 105 (2) increasing or lifting terms would not only produce absurd results but cannot benefit the incumbent President after the intended amendment has been carried out correctly.  The Article can be amended as long as this Constitution remains in force then the incumbent cannot hold another term under this Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, I am not participating, but I want to inform you – (Interruption) 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I would like to be understood here. If you have sworn by that Constitution to hold a certain term say one, two or three and you want that Constitution amended as I was coming to it, the beneficiaries of this amendment are the future people not the incumbent.

THE SPEAKER: Hon Sabiiti, if what you are saying is the position that the amendment is intended to help the incumbent, somebody moving that amendment will make sure that all other consequential amendments are made to enable the situation to happen. So, I think the case here should be to discuss the merits and demerits. Otherwise, these technical hurdles, somebody really will look at them and will be able to remove them.  So, I think the important thing is to justify or to market the opposition or the support by merits but these technical things can always be removed.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, is that your ruling or your thinking?

THE SPEAKER: No, no, it is not my ruling.

MR SABIITI: What I am saying, Mr Speaker, is this, let me give an example. We were voted to come to this Parliament to be here for five years.  Now, if for, example, we amend this Constitution that we increase to seven years now, we cannot be beneficiary to continue. We cannot continue to say now we shall continue to five years. So, what I am saying –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you very much hon. Sabiiti for giving way.  As much as I appreciate your concern - but it is clear even in your own case as an honourable Member of Parliament, when you were being sworn in, you were sworn in to uphold the Constitution. Equally, the President was also sworn in and also swore to uphold the Constitution. He did not only swear in to uphold Article 105 (2) but was also sworn in to uphold all the provisions of the Constitution, as at the material time existing. Meaning, in case there is an amendment, that is the existing Constitution and you will be bound to uphold that existing Constitution. Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, let us look at this scenario. If this amendment is not handled carefully or correctly, if the incumbent President was nominated or elected by the people after this amendment, if it passes through this Parliament, someone could challenge his candidature or presidency on the grounds that he was disqualified at the start. Some of us would not go through that wriggle, but I was presenting this for you as a Speaker of this Parliament and this great Parliament to take note of this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my advice is that we should mainly concentrate on the merits and demerits of the amendment. The technical aspect, once the principle is accepted, that can be taken care of. All those technical points you are raising, if actually it is your decision to amend for the purposes you have stated, somebody will be able to remove and polish whatever will appear to be a technical problem. So, I rather think, honourable members, if you are for this amendment of this Article you tell us the merits or the demerits of amending. I think that will help us. The technical aspect, we may not be able to see, but that is very easy for somebody to handle the technical aspect.

MR SABIITI: I respect your guidance, Mr Speaker, but these are the demerits I am trying to highlight. That in the event we amend this Constitution, what happens? Let us agree that the President has done a good job, but we should not reward him by manipulating the Constitution. The Parliament of Uganda has already come up with a law to take care of these rewards; this is contained in the Presidential Emolument Act. We should not, therefore, try to reward the person however best he is, just to manipulate the Constitution, to make one Ugandan citizen to continue in office. I thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: I think I had identified hon. Lukyamuzi and Member for Busia and then we see how we go. But at the end of the day, I may have to ask you maybe tomorrow to give in two or three hours in the morning. But this will come afterwards; let us see how we proceed.

5.50
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker and honourable members, lend me your ears. I took trouble to make inquiries in my constituency on two areas: One, was the Government White Paper and the Sempebwa report because the two were very important in as far as the constitutional transformation is concerned.  

Mr Speaker, one question, which came to me first was that, how come that only about one-third of the Sempebwa report was embodied in the Government White paper? How possible is it going to be for you and other Members of Parliament to bring on board the issues, which were sufficiently covered in the Sempebwa report?  

Mr Speaker, the problems of Uganda since independence are constitutional-related. So, it is very important for us to pay a lot of attention about the amendment phase to this Constitution.  So, when we amend the Constitution we should not aim at making games, let us aim at getting balance and fairness. Let us amend what is amendable so that we do not get an impression that we are here as Parliament to finish off every constitutional problem. It may never happen anywhere in the world.

My people cautioned me to humbly beg you that, after that turbulent history in Uganda, we should avoid a situation where we postpone the right of the people to change governments by assuming that because there are too many problems let us postpone any election. This was the view of the Lubaga South people.

Before I say anything at all and I am going to be very precise –(Interjections)- I have already said something but, Mr Speaker, I would like to quote one prominent political scholar by the names of Alexander Hamilton, who was one of the founders of the American Constitution. He had the following to say, “A Constitution is a garment, it must be tailored to fit the contours of those wearing that garment.” (Applause)

So, whatever Constitution we make should be in consonance with the people of Uganda.  (Applause) So the question is, have we checked with the people of Uganda on the size of the garment they want to wear? Can that garment lead us to a peaceful sustainable Uganda? Can that garment make Uganda secure? Can that garment ensure that we have a Uganda where we have good living standards? Then that garment must be taken seriously.  

Mr Speaker, one of the issues, which must determine whether the garment is good, should be tailored in accordance with the problems existing in Uganda today. We have got war in Northern Uganda, we have rampant corruption, how wearable is the garment so as to address those concerns? That garment should be able to address the concerns about war, the concerns about injustice and the concerns about corruption, as well as the concerns about environmental degradation.  

Mr Speaker, I am going to zero on the concerns of my constituency in regard to the perception of federalism, which was left hanging by the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs report on the White Paper. Their concerns are as follows: They are saying that before you come to Parliament, find time to go to the main entry point, you are going to see a conglomeration of emblems representing various regions and districts of Uganda. They are saying that this country now is 43 years of political independence age. Since we got our independence, the country has never fully settled. 

They are also saying that the Movement Government has tried its best, but as we speak now there are still many gaps. These gaps should cause concern about the earlier assertion by Hamilton that possibly the garment we are wearing is oversize. Let us ensure that we tailor the garment to size so that all Ugandans can fit in that garment. 

Mr Speaker, our rich mosaic of cultures is an envy to so many in the world today, perhaps found nowhere else in the Africa. Let us tailor a garment, which can ensure that the Ugandans can harness the mosaic of cultures so that the garments can fit within those dimensions. For example, we have been independent for 43 years, but if you took trouble to find out our problems up to now, we are still building institutions and yet we have existing institutions which could be harnessed; up to now we are still building districts.

I want to challenge everybody here listening to me -I liked the address by hon. Kavuma. We should not give an impression that those advocating for a federal system of government must get full grown with everybody on board. We want an infrastructure which is for all, we do not want a segregation infrastructure. People are saying these are Baganda things. They are not Baganda things because when we were getting our independence we had a quasi-federal arrangement accommodating all. We do not want a federal arrangement, which will isolate others, save for situations where some regions can say, “for us are still waiting.”  

In the case of the decentralization order, and the Rt hon. Prime Minister is my witness, in 1989 when we were beginning the decentralization arrangement, not all the districts came on board, only 13 districts came on board the others followed later -Interruption)

MR KAYONGO:  Clarification.

MR LUKYAMUZI: No clarification. As we speak now, Mr Speaker, all the 50 districts are on board. I speak about the United States of America. It started with a few states. One of the states called Nebraska rejected the federal arrangement, but after seeing a good taste and the good pudding enjoyed by others, after one year it applied to join the federal union. So, you should not be shaken by a beginning. You can begin by even five federal states, you can begin by nine federal states others can later on come on board.  

Mr Speaker, why does Uganda yearn to have a federal arrangement? We have some commonalities in a economics, for example, in our agricultural yields many regions would like to come together or to form one fully-fledged region so that they can ensure markets for their produce. Others would like to strengthen their cultural diversities; others would like to come together because they have common security demands and requirements. Others would like to come together because they have a common language, others would like to come together because they would like to be more secure and others would like to come together because they are planning to fight cattle rustling, a case in point is the Karimojong.  

If you form a strong government base in Kotido under a federal arrangement, you empower the infrastructure of Kotido under the Karamoja government those Karimojong do not have to return the guns in Kampala, they need a small government to administer the guns so that they can amicably fight the enemies - (Interjection)  

So, in conclusion, I do not why, Mr Speaker, you could not give me one minute to - in conclusion, why do the people of Lubaga South reject the regional tier? They are saying the regional tier first of all, according to the government White Paper, is assigned a role of being spectator depending on the central government. While the district is given the chance of taxation exercises, the regional tier is given donations regularly to depend at the centre. 

The essence of taxation in a federal union is to ensure capacity building so that you can handle issues related to institutional building including the fighting of corruption. You need economic empowerment for the region so that you can fight for your security sustenance so that you cease to be a spectator. Otherwise, if you want to build an institution, you cannot build it under a district arrangement.  

In conclusion, the districts will remain under a regional tier but it is absurd for the district and the region to respectively ran parallel activities. They are supposed to have one common economic political goal. The decision is yours, but I hope you understand the issues I have raised. Thank you very much.

6.05
MRS ROSE MUNYIRA WABWIRE (Woman Representative, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the work they put in this report. I consulted the people of Busia concerning the ideas in the White Paper and these are some of the issues that they put across. 

Concerning return to multiparty system of government, Mr Speaker, the people of Busia welcomed the idea and they thought it would be a good arrangement except in some instances. Some people were not very comfortable because they could reflect on the not very mature type of multiparty politics that we used to experience earlier, but then they prayed that Parliament puts in place laws that are going to assist or to help in the running multiparty politics. Otherwise, they welcomed the idea.  

Mr Speaker, concerning Article 105 that talks about lifting of term limits, the people of Busia had different views that I thought very wise to reflect on. About 40 per cent of the people thought that term limits should remain arguing that supposing the present head of state was not in place, what would have happened to this country? Or suppose we got somebody who was not foresighted and good leader who is interested in dictatorship, what would have happened to this country? So, because of that kind of fear, they thought that it would be better to leave the term limits so that the people may by constitution remove that one.  

But the remaining about 60 per cent, that was the majority, thought that we should remove term limits so that the people of this country have freedom to decide on the leader that they want to lead them. There was a minority that thought that instead of lifting the term limits, why do we not make it three terms of five years so that really after 15 years, a leader has performed what he thinks he should do for this country. So, really that was the situation concerning term limits. The 40 per cent were mainly the people in the urban areas and the 60 per cent were mainly from the rural areas.

Concerning dual citizenship, the people of Busia were happy with this idea, they welcomed it because there are many of their sons and daughters who have lived abroad for many years and some of them had to give up their citizenship because of wanting to retain the employment in those places, and they thought it would be good for their children to come back here and have citizenship in this place instead of giving up Ugandan citizenship to obtain citizenship in other places.  

However, they cautioned that, in awarding dual citizenship to people who are not Ugandans, Parliament should put in place a law that is going to stipulate what their rights should be. Because they looked at their position; most of them are still rural based and with very little income and they know that most of the people who come to this country to invest have a lot of money, and if they are awarded citizenship at the same level as our ordinary people then they are likely to acquire land and acquire all other citizenship rights when the people in this country are not yet able to achieve these other rights. So, they thought that it would be wise to put in place a mechanism of the rights of people who are getting Ugandan citizenship as the second citizenship.  

Concerning regional tiers, the people of Busia were really not in favour of this kind of arrangement.  Busia is a small district mainly occupied by Samias, Itesots and some other tribes who have come to settle there. They look at this arrangement as resembling the kind of arrangement that was in place earlier whereby we had provinces, and in that kind of arrangement they felt that they had been marginalized. They are enjoying the present arrangement as an independent district and they are enjoying a lot of development, and they would rather be left to internalise and take on to the decentralization that they have a right to decide on the development in their areas. So, they did not want anything to do with regional councils or regional tiers. 

In fact, they suggested that, instead of Government voting money to these regional councils, why do we not as Parliament come up with a law to vote money to the lower councils like LC1, LC2 and LC3, the women councils, youth councils and people with disabilities who have been asking for this kind of money for their development, instead of putting up again a regional council that might be very controversial. 

The people of Busia also agreed that traditional or cultural leaders should actually be regulated because some of them have been brought in place through voting by their people and there must be a law to regulate them. And they got it very clearly that Parliament is not going to remove them but there must be a law because there is no Ugandan who is above the law.

Concerning the power to dissolve Parliament, the people felt that the President should not have powers to dissolve Parliament. They thought it would be better, if there is anything contentious between Parliament and the Executive, then such issues should be treated like other issues that are taken to a referendum so that the people themselves, since now they will be having the power over all issues in this country, can assist Parliament and the Executive to come up with a solution. Otherwise, they think that it would be better for a President of this country to have that kind of power only over his Cabinet. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MS MUNYIRA: Do I not have extra time? I thought that was a warning.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude then.

MS MUNYIRA: Thank you very much. Concerning a chief administrative officer, Mr Speaker, the people of Busia think that it is better for the CAO to be appointed or to be recruited by the district service commissions, because other than this Parliament would be undermining the true sense of decentralization. How can the CAO or the chief officer in the district be elected from the centre while he is in charge of the district?  

Then with time, they said, the chief administrative officer would be manipulated by the centre and maybe the centre would send people who may not be very good as they expect and then it would be a problem for the councils to discipline them. Instead, they suggested that it is better for Parliament to improve on the law that is in place that controls or that gives powers to the CAOs. Otherwise, they were in agreement with the suggestions in 44 and 45 concerning the qualifications of the RDCs and removal of the Chairman LC5. 

Mr Speaker, concerning minors, the amendments are good, expect that in issues of defilement the people think that it would be better to put in place a law that favours children of both sexes.  The law as it stands now, you find that some people are just using it to extort money from others by stage-managing their daughters and then they imprison the boys when actually sometimes it is the girls themselves who go out to look for these boys.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I intend to ask you that we sit tomorrow and continue. We have just come back from recess, there are many ideas you want to give and Government, which is drafting the Bill, would like to take benefit of your views because by 15th, as the Prime Minister said, we would like to have the Bill. So, do you not think we sit tomorrow in the morning, maybe we start at 10.00 a.m. then we see how we progress. So, when we come tomorrow I will start with this side then go this side. So, I think it is the convenient time really to adjourn until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 4 February 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

