Tuesday, 10 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to warmly welcome you back from Christmas recess. I hope you had a good recess and you were able to meet your constituents and, therefore, you have come with new ideas to push on with the second half of our mandate. In a special way I want to heartily welcome back Members of the Lango Parliamentary Group who are with us today in the House. Welcome, honourable members. (Applause)

I deeply regret the terrible massacre of our people at Ambia in Lira District, which occurred just a few days ago. Honourable members, let all of us combine forces and resources to ensure that this Kony, beastly programme is halted. 

While on this issue, I feel it is appropriate to thank hon. Margaret Zziwa and a number of Members of Parliament, with the assistance of Development Associates, who organised a trip to the North to visit the internally displaced persons in camps. It is a good gesture that deserves appreciation. (Applause)

Honourable members, efforts are being made to improve the environment in the Chamber and I hope within two to three weeks the air conditioning in the Chamber will greatly be improved. Efforts are also being made to improve other facilities in the Parliamentary Building, funds permitting.  

Following my attendance at the Parliamentary Day in Italy, Rome, in May 2002, an event that was attended by all Parliaments of Africa, the Uganda Parliament was identified as one of eight Parliaments in Africa to be assisted with their information systems Last month I was again invited to Rome to discuss the same issue. I am pleased to report that a sum of US $400,000 has been granted to the Uganda Parliament for use on the ICT programme. The details as to what to do with these funds will be worked out by a technical team I will set up to work with an international consultant.  

At the end of last month, a judgement by the Supreme Court concerning a constitutional amendment made by the Sixth Parliament in 2000, was delivered. I gather there was a lot of fear among various sections of people about its consequences. Apart from the fact that the amendments were set aside, I see no serious problems with the operation of Parliament. We shall continue to carry out our business as authorised by the un-amended Constitution of Uganda and our Rules of Procedure. We shall continue to apply the rules, subject to the Constitution.  

There is an impression that certain rules were ruled out as being unconstitutional. I have had an occasion to read all the judgements, and there is not anywhere where they said voting by saying “aye” and “no” is unconstitutional. What was said is that if we use it we should not trespass on the established constitutional provision. Good enough there has never been any incident where we used the “aye” and “no” voting system to trespass on the established constitutional procedures. I do not intend to go into details of the facts of this particular case, but I must say it was unfortunate that the facts were not listed and the facts quoted in the judgement are not the correct ones.

Since the Order Paper indicates that the Attorney General is to make a statement, I will leave the details to the Attorney General to elaborate. I wish you fruitful deliberations for the last part of this session. (Applause)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REFUGEES BILL, 2003

2.44
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Refugees Bill, 2003” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it accompanied by the certificate?

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: I have the Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance, signed by the Minister himself. I do not know whether I should read it. It is addressed –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is not necessary. If you have it then we shall examine it.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: I have it.

THE SPEAKER: So, the Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

UGANDA LAW REFORM COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT, 2002

2.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Dora Byamukama): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Law Reform Commission Annual Report for 2002.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let the appropriate committee handle it and then give us a report on the same.

REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 2000

2.46
THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Dr Okulo Epak): Mr Speaker, honourable members, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the Public Accounts Committee for the year ended June 30th 2000.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, let the committee handle it.

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN, LANGO PARLIAMENTARY GROUP

2.48
THE CHAIRMAN, LANGO PARLIAMENTARY GROUP (Dr Okulo Epak): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I am privileged to make a statement on behalf of the Lango Parliamentary Group to this august House on the security and humanitarian situation in the Lango sub-region. It is a statement, which will now specifically state that we have come back to carry on with our colleagues the normal activities of Parliament. (Applause)

Inroduction.

Members of the Lango Parliamentary Group presented an interim report to this august House on the security and humanitarian situation in the Lango sub-region and then walked out in expression of their dissatisfaction with the way these matters were being handled, on the 19 November 2003. This report followed a lamenting and in some aspects disappointing report on the situation in Northern Uganda by the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to this House on 11 November 2003, as a result of which Parliament established a select committee to study the matter and report to this House.  

A full report, which was to be presented following the mobilisation programme, which was sponsored by Parliament, was eventually prepared and presented to the Speaker of Parliament in his boardroom on 19 December 2003. The report reaffirmed our continuation with staying out of Parliament activities until in our own assessment we were satisfied that the security, humanitarian, and international attention on the situation had improved. I hereby table a copy of the report we presented to the Speaker, which contains more detail of our findings in the field, and because Parliament actually financed this mobilisation programme. 

The members of the Lango Parliamentary Group met on Monday, 9 February 2004 to review the state of affairs and in consideration of many appeals by sympathetic colleagues decided to resume the normal activities of Parliament and to present this report on what transpired during the walk out and on the way forward.

Reactions to the walk-out.

We would like to express our appreciation to the hon. Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, and the hon. Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs for their understanding and sympathies. We are grateful to some of our colleagues and the general public for expressing their support, and to the Members of the Acholi, Pallisa and Teso Parliamentary Groups for joining us in the walk out. Our people and this nation at large need such demonstration of support and national solidarity and sharing, in particular on the matter of security and humanitarian suffering in any part of this country at any time.

We want to thank the Prime Minister, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi who, except for the limitation of the capacity in his office to deal with the matters satisfactorily, gave us full attention and held a special meeting to try to understand and respond to our needs or indeed, demands. This meeting was followed by an immediate, albeit inadequate, response. The meeting did also, and at last, agreed that it will now be possible to give humanitarian support to internally displaced persons who live with families rather than in camps. This was not the situation before.  

President Museveni, as usual, outsmarted some of his sleeping ministers who chose to condemn our walkout by appreciating the cause and following a previously arranged meeting, met us - the Lango cultural leaders and the Local Councilors of Apac and Lira Districts - on 20 November 2003. This is the meeting in which a number of useful discussions and actions stated below were taken.  

In national interest, we feel we must mention and abhor the attitude of some of those who poured mockery on our walkout. We were mocked by hon. Cripus Kiyonga, the Movement Political Commissar in the New Vision of Saturday, 22 November 2003 - I am very surprised; and hon. Prof. Kabwegyere - I am not surprised –(Laughter)– the Minister of Local Government, who in the Monitor of Saturday, 22 November 2003 said that we were collaborators of Kony, who had merely walked out to give credit to Kony. 

A character called Nagenda who is supposed to be the President’s Media Adviser actually said in the New Vision of Saturday, 22 November 2003 that we should go drown in Lake Kyoga. To us, these tell a lot about the quality of leaders and people who hold national responsibility in this country as well as about some of the attitudes towards the war raging in the North.

Measures taken.

We constituted three committees on security and defense, humanitarian assistance, and diplomatic and international aspects to address the three critical areas of our concern. 

We wish to report that partial progress has been made in each area of our concern and we shall continue to pursue the remaining omissions or neglect as we go along with our normal Parliamentary activities. We also believe that the select committee established by the House will cover the Lango sub-region and the entire war ravaged areas to provide additional opportunity for more information and debate in the House.  

However, we wish to mention succinctly the following state of affairs and conclusions:

(a) We have agreed with the Government on a participatory approach and mobilisation framework for security in the Lango sub-region. Everybody from national to local level now has a role to play. There is established a security and defense committee in Lira and Apac Districts. 

This is a very significant development. It means there will now hardly be any opportunity for finger pointing. If there are any errors, we shall all be to blame. If there are any successes, we shall all be given credit.

(b) Up to 8,000 Amuka auxiliary forces were recruited, trained and deployed, but a number of them lack uniforms and all of them were deployed in the field without essential facilities. This situation is causing unrest.  

(c) The President agreed to relocate the school, which was to be built in Katikamu using the fund of the Belgium Government. It is to be built in Akokoro now.

(d) The President agreed that business people who suffer serious losses as a result of war and who may have borrowed money may be considered for compensation.

(e) It was agreed in the meeting with the President and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that internally displaced persons who live with families rather than in camps will receive humanitarian assistance through service centres. These will be sub-county headquarters.

(f) A trauma counselling center and service is to be established in Apac by the United Nations OCHA as soon as resources for it are found.

(g) A number of international humanitarian agencies have now located their offices and activities in Lira.

(h) The question of educational assistance to the students in, and special grants to war-affected districts is to be considered and is to be pursued.

(i) The President promised to increase UPDF regular force in Lango, but instead it has been reduced, unfortunately! Our view is that the President does not treat all the war-ravaged areas of Lango, Acholi and Teso with equal consideration. Without prejudice to our Teso brothers and sisters, we have never witnessed in the Lango and Acholi sub-region the scale, magnitude and response, which were accorded to the districts of Soroti, Katakwi, Kaberamaido, when Kony invaded them.

(j) We believe that Government does not have enough capacity to provide for motivating welfare facilities to the soldiers who have been involved in warfare for more than 18 years, and to provide for adequate and prompt humanitarian assistance to the war-affected persons. The poor welfare situation of the soldiers will continue to affect their commitment and performance in the war.

(k) During this time, we assessed and witnessed a big change in the diplomatic and international understanding on the northern war and suffering of the people of Northern Uganda, but they are yet to match it with practical input. For instance, it defeats our understanding that both the Government and the European Union would seek and devote over Shs 18 billion merely for strengthening the capacity and network of NGOs, instead of providing the most needed humanitarian support to the people in war-ravaged areas.  This is a very recent happening. 

We would like to report and condemn the dastardly massacre of over 100 people in Abia and other murders in Amugu and Abako following that one. Although these are more horrendous than the ones that propelled us to walk out of Parliament, we have decided to resume Parliamentary work because of the participatory framework we have now adopted.  

We appreciate the prompt action taken by President Museveni to investigate the Abia massacre and we urge that the culprits should be dealt with seriously. We have also instituted our own independent fact-finding team on the same incident.

The way forward.

1. Mr Speaker, Parliament should handle the UPDF and LDU Bills expeditiously, and in our view, they should pay special attention to the welfare of the Army. It continues to be the single most difficult situation in the war challenges.  

2. The Government should be provided with more money to effectively execute and end the war and for humanitarian support from its own resources and by mobilising international support. In the latter case, it may be necessary to declare the North a disaster area.  

3. Human resource development in the North has suffered a serious and irreversible blow. The situation must be salvaged by providing free studies in secondary schools and some tertiary institutions, and full scholarships to university students. Government may also need to mobilise international fellowships for this purpose.  

4. The local governments in the war ravaged areas must be considered for and given special unconditional grants in order to support their development as well as administration expenditures before they collapse altogether.  

5. The security roads linking Ajaga in Minakulu to Koc Goma in Nwoya, a ring road from Otwal-Aromo-Okwang-Olilim-Omoro-Amuga up to Abako, the triangular road Bar-Aloi-Bar and the road linking Aromo sub-county headquarters to Malaba market in Gulu District, should be constructed to allow easy access for the Army.  

6. Increase the number of UPDF soldiers as was promised by President Museveni. 

7. Seeing the monstrosity waged and intransigence towards peace talks by Kony, we now feel inclined to advocate for total defeat of Kony.  

8. Finally, we shall continue with our activities under the three areas of concern and committees. We take these steps strictly in consideration of our patriotic responsibilities because the latest killings in Abia, Amugo and Abako would seem to justify our continuing with the walkout. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I also lay a copy of this statement on the Table. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson, and welcome back. Honourable members, this is not a personal statement but a statement made by the honourable members, and according to our rules, any statement other than a personal explanation may be commented upon by other members for a ration of time not exceeding 30 minutes.

3.02
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. First, I welcome the statement, which hon. Dr Okulo Epak has just made, and once again I want to associate myself with the difficult situation our people in the North and in the East find themselves in. I have lived under war conditions and I very much appreciate the difficulties that go with that situation.  

In the statement that hon. Dr Okulo Epak has just made, if I understood him well, he indicated that according to a newspaper report, I am one of those who made a negative statement in regard to the walkout by our colleagues. Mr Speaker, this is the first time I learn of this. I was out of the country from 22 October up to 22 December and I did not talk to anyone in the newspapers or anywhere else regarding this incident. 

I would like in concluding, Mr Speaker, to make reference to one or two communications that I sent by telephone to hon. Okot Ogong, the Minister of State for Youth Affairs. When I heard, for example of the massacre that took place, I sent my personal message through hon. Okot Ogong to colleagues in the House expressing my sympathy. So, I want to assure you that at no time did I condemn the walkout by our colleagues. I thank you. (Applause) 

3.05
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): I also welcome the statement by our colleague and also register my pain at what has been happening and continues to happen in that part of Uganda. Apart from trusting the Monitor for what it quoted by hon. Okulo Epak, I am surprised that he could say he was not surprised as if I am known to be unsympathetic to -(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, when we met His Excellency the President in Soroti, he said there are people who collaborate with Kony but in spite of that we cannot do anything with them. The hon. Minister should not have said, “these collaborators, Mr President, I urge you to deal with them seriously”. His Excellency the President just told him off. So, it is the same attitude. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you for the information. I would like to categorically state here and now that if there are people who have been collaborating with Kony, they should be handled seriously. I say that with no hesitation, and the honourable member has himself come round saying that he is now convinced that Kony must be defeated. So, we are together in the same camp.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that when it was alleged that I said what is said in the paper, I was in Mbale and I was told of the walkout. I was not in the House to know exactly what had precipitated the walkout. Having said that, I state very categorically that I do not associate and could not associate everybody that walked out to be a Kony collaborator. There is no way I could. But, I also exist in this country and I have known in my quote and even the quote hon. Okulo Epak has given to the House, the President did not deny that there were collaborators. I was talking about those who collaborate with a destroyer of society. But I welcome the walkout especially when the following has come out: a participatory framework has come out and work on the ground has evolved more than had been the case before. 

Secondly, this House has now heard clearly that Kony must be roundly defeated; and those who want to talk to him can use a different method from the ones that must really solve that problem. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BEN WACHA: Mr Speaker, I was waiting for the hon. Minister to state the one thing, which he obviously decided to miss. He stated, and I quote, “some of those who walked out are collaborators”. This is a very serious statement in this House. It is unfortunate that sometimes we use the privilege of this House to malign others. Could the hon. Minister state in no uncertain terms who of those who walked out collaborate with Kony?

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the hon. Chairman of the Lango Parliamentary Group was quoting two national papers and I believe these are two papers, which are read by most of us especially people on the front bench. How is it that the hon. Kiyonga and the hon. Kabwegyere have never been quoted in the papers to deny such serious allegations that were stated about them, about a matter which is so grave, and wait to come to this House and begin telling the House how they were misquoted, how they were out of the country? 

You do not have to be in this country to make a comment on something, which concerns your country. I just cannot understand. How is it that they have not up to this moment really come out in the press and denied that these statements were actually false?

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Supplementary. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Supplementary to what? There was a specific question from hon. Ben Wacha to hon. Kabwegyere. I think we should allow the Minister to answer the question.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I as hon. Kabwegyere have no power of investigating and proving people to be collaborators or non-collaborators.  

Secondly, I did not say, because I know all the people who walked out by name. If I wanted to say in the paper that is quoted who was supposed to have collaborated, I would have said so. But let me further point out that hon. Ben Wacha cannot stand here and say there cannot be collaborators. And my point of departure, if that issue seems to be of interest to the House, is that I withdraw what may not even have been said. I will withdraw it.

Lastly, the point by hon. Mwandha, if really any of us were to spend time answering the papers, what they quote and misquote – that is precisely why I am not bothered about it because it was not correct. That is why I am not saying that I said so and, therefore, I am not about to admit that anything that appears in the paper any of us should answer it.

3.14
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to the statement by the Lango Parliamentary Group. In spite of everything else that we have seen since that statement, the statement by the Lango Parliamentary Group was a mature, responsible and very balanced statement. And I do hope that when the embarrassments are over our leaders, particularly those on the front bench will take that statement as a foundation for a way forward.

Mr Speaker, we walked out in support of the walkout of the Lango Parliamentary Group. We were roundly praised by our people who sent us here because that walkout was louder than any statement that we had been making on the Floor of the House, in regard to the situation in our place. And we are glad we did because there have been many responses as we said when we came back, and as it has been said when the Lango Parliamentary Group made their statement.

We would like to thank Parliament for the very positive attitude that has emerged and continued to expand very broadly in support of the ending of this conflict, simply because Members of Parliament have understood the true nature of the conflict. I have had occasion, before the opening of this Parliament, to meet with at least two ministers and each one of them said: “You know on this issue of the ghost soldiers, when you used to tell us that there are ghost soldiers, we thought you were playing politics.” I do hope that when these statements are made, people take the experience of the ghost soldiers to accept them seriously.  

Nevertheless, Mr Speaker, we believe there must be some elements that still do not want to see harmony in Parliament, that still do not want to see the war in the North ended because it serves their political interests. Today, I believe they must be in the background but are represented by two hon. Members of this Parliament: my young colleague hon. Godfrey Kiwanda and hon. Byamukama Nulu issued a press statement declaring that they were going to join His Excellency, the President in the North. 

In point (4) of the statement they say: “We thought it wise that instead of talking and criticising the Government against fighting Kony or walking away from Parliament, we should join His Excellency, the President to finish off Kony and his few commanders that are still terrorising Ugandans.” Then (5), “Some members are used of …” – I am sorry because this is not my English –(Laughter)- let me read it as it is. “Some members are used of talking and criticising the Government against fighting Kony but at the same time they get happy whenever Kony advances because this is where they can capitalise to tell the donors and other interested parties how government has failed to protect its people. And at one time some members proposed to government to declare the Northern Uganda a disaster area. So, before we do that, we as peoples’ representatives need to actively participate in the struggle and fight for our people.”

I know where these honourable colleagues come from, but I am very sorry that in the midst of all the progress that we make, some people choose to take several steps backwards. Fortunately, the two people involved are very young people who can be quickly excused -(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate what the honourable professor is articulating. I am a young person who has been elected by the people of Apac District, and I think there are so many other young people in this House. For the professor to insinuate that a young person can be excused for doing something wrong and yet there are people who are older and who could also do the same thing - and associate it with age - I think is very unfair to the young people. So, could I know whether it is in order for the professor to associate age with what people do? 

PROF. OGENGA: Thank you very much -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Was it a point of order?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: What we can do here is to read the intention of the hon. Prof. Latigo. I think he was giving a benefit of doubt and that is –(Laughter)

PROF. OGENGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to remind you that I gave you 30 minutes and you are only remaining with five. So, you can see the problem you are facing. If you have a point, just make it and then -(Interruption)

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: I thank the honourable Member for giving way. Mr Speaker, whereas some of the points that have been raised here are truly abominable, I would like to give information to my dear colleague from Agago County that the spirit with which hon. Godfrey Kiwanda and hon. Nulu Byamukama have come out to fight Kony is commendable. All these years we have been yearning for people to come to our aid. But then it defeats that very spirit with which they have come out for them to say that all along the issues we have raised about the welfare of the soldiers, the mistakes we have pointed out, we have been against what Government and the President or the Army is doing. It is very unfortunate.  

It is not true and you can read the Hansard. Some of the issues that we have raised, I will continue raising them even today and tomorrow, should I see any mistake whether with the UPDF or the Government. I know I support the Movement but that is no guarantee for me to support what is wrong. And for the honourable members to insinuate in points 4 and 5 that some of us MPs who are representing areas currently under conflict have not supported government in its endeavour to end Kony, is really malicious. It is wrong.

I wish to inform this House that as members hailing from that sub-region, we have mobilised our people, we have supported government, we supported the UPDF and we will continue supporting the UPDF. But about the mistakes that are made, we will be loud about them and we will not keep quiet. If that means wrongdoing, we would rather do the wrong thing by speaking it out so that remedies can be found.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I appealed to you during my communication, from today onwards, on this issue of Kony and the problem facing us in the North, we should move as a team. We will move as a team from today so that we fight this enemy and bring peace to that region. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have had the opportunity to read the said statement and we will surely put it on the table. But the issues raised in that statement are not minor ones. You know, people should not be happy when others are being killed. Members of this House, Parliament is under attack by the same statement! I would rather that instead of us debating it and attaching it to the statement of the Lango Parliamentary Group, we commit it probably to the disciplinary committee or somebody who can handle it. Otherwise, it discourages us. Unless my colleagues can come out very clearly to tell us who the Members they are referring to are, you know, it will not give us courage to press on. Making such general statements it is very discouraging.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you not think if we forget anything that divides us now, we will be able to fight and win the war? Please, let us from today try to fight this matter -(Prof Latigo rose_)- but time is over, wind up.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, the two interventions came before I even made my statement and your ruling was very appropriate. I would like to conclude that fortunately my two colleagues are young people with a lot of enthusiasm. In the process of doing what they think is right, they are still vulnerable to making very simple mistakes. However, I thank the Lango Parliamentary Group for the statement and I thank you, Mr Speaker, for urging us to work together to end this conflict. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday the Business Committee sat and one of the issues we discussed was time management. We shall confine ourselves to time and in future, on every subject, we shall be allocating either the days or hours we will spend on it. We are going to deal with this issue of questions in such a way that in one hour we will be answering ten questions. Let us adhere to what we decided as we manage the time. The time for that subject has ended, but we shall continue to debate this issue so that we find a solution to this Kony problem.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.26
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I read my statement, I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to Page 3: there is a minor correction there in paragraph (b). I have just noticed that, and I was reminded by Prof. Latigo’s statement about language, that is why I think it necessary to make this correction. The sentence should read, (b) “That the procedures prescribed by the Constitution for amending those Articles were….” The word should be “were” not “was”. 

There is a more serious one, Sir, which could easily distort the statement on page 5 again (b) - (b) seems to be very unfortunate with my secretaries. “That the implications and consequences are that laws passed by Parliament after the Constitution (Amendment) Act No.13 of 2000 came into force on the 1 September 2000.” It should now read:  “In particular the Presidential Elections Act under which the Presidential Elections of March 2001 were held.” That is how the sentence should read and then the rest - are you with me?

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

MR AYUME: Okay, let me start again because this part is very important. (b) “That the implications and consequences are that laws passed by Parliament after the Constitution (Amendment) Act No.13 of 2000 came into force on the 1 September 2000” - then that is where you should now start correcting – “in particular, the Presidential Elections Act under which the Presidential Elections …” and it continues. Are we together?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, I wish to be clarified on this issue. Does the Attorney General not proofread his statements before he comes to the House? Does he not have to read them before he goes to court?

MR AYUME: Well, I do. But on this particular occasion, because I was in a meeting elsewhere and I wanted these statements to come here as quickly as possible for honourable members to at least read, I decided that I should not delay the House because I had to proofread. 

The other reason is that although under our Rules of Procedure I was not required to distribute my statement, I thought that in this particular case, because this statement is very important, that I should do so. If you look at rule 35 of our Rules of Procedure, I do not have to. Mr Speaker, I would like to once again thank you for this opportunity.
 
The background to this presentation is that on the 31 August 2000, Parliament passed the Constitution (Amendment) Act No. 13 of 2000, which came into force on the 1 September 2000. 

According to the long title of the Act, the purpose of this law was as follows:

(a) To repeal and replace Article 88 of the Constitution, which deals with the quorum of Parliament.

(b) To amend Article 89 of the Constitution to provide for the manner of ascertaining the majority of votes cast on any question.  

(c) To repeal and replace Article 90 of the Constitution to recognise the role of the Committee of the whole House in passing of Bills, and to make provision in relation to committees of Parliament.

(d) To amend Article 97 to protect the proceedings of Parliament from being used outside Parliament without leave of Parliament.

(e) To insert a new Article 257A to ratify certain acts relating to procedure of Parliament, that is, to validate Acts of Parliament, which had not been referred to standing committees of Parliament.

Learning from the experience of the events that led to an earlier decision of the Constitutional Court declaring unconstitutional the Referendum and Other Provisions Act, in passing the Constitution (Amendment) Act No.13 of 2000, Parliament ensured that the quorum prescribed by Article 88 of the Constitution was followed and did vote using the head count procedure. 

In September 2000, Dr Paul K. Ssemwogerere, hon. Zachary Olum and hon. Juliet Rainer Kafiire filed Constitutional Petition No.7 of 2000 against the Attorney General, challenging among other things the constitutionality of the Constitution (Amendment) Act No.13 of 2000. The Constitutional Court dismissed the petition, holding that contrary to the submission of the petitioners, the Act had been properly passed and had only amended the Articles that were specifically mentioned in the Act, and that the Act had not amended other Articles as alleged by the Constitution –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Is it in order for the Attorney General to read something different from the statement he has given us? On page 1, he said “standing committees” when there is “standby committees.” On this one, it is as alleged by the petitioners and he is reading the Constitution. Is it in order for him to give us a different statement and read something different?

THE SPEAKER: Why do we not get the statement and then we shall get clarifications? It is his statement.

MR AYUME: Let me maybe read it again for the benefit of my colleague, who I may have confused in the process. The Constitutional Court dismissed the petition, holding that contrary to the submission of the petitioners, the Act had been properly passed and had only amended the Articles that were specifically mentioned in the Act, and that the Act had not amended other Articles as alleged by the petitioners. I think we are now together.

However, on appeal to the Supreme Court, that court reversed the decision of the Constitutional Court and declared the Constitution (Amendment) Act No. 13 of 2000 unconstitutional, null and void. The court did so on the following grounds:

(a) That in amending Articles 88, 89, 90, 97 and in introducing a new Article 257A, the Act had amended several other Articles of the Constitution by implication and by infection, namely;

• Article 2(1) and 2(2), which deal with the supremacy of the Constitution.

• Articles 28 and 44(c), which deal with right to a fair hearing.

• Article 41(1), which deals with right of access to information.

• Article 128(1), (2) and (3), which deals with independence of the Judiciary.

• Article 137(3), which deals with the right to petition the Constitutional Court for an order of redress.

(b) That the procedures prescribed by the Constitution for amending those articles were not followed. For example, that on the basis that Articles 2, 48 and 128 were being amended by the Act, no referendum was held as required by Article 259 of the Constitution.

Secondly, the mandatory voting period of 14 days required by Article 262(2) between the second and third readings of the Bill for the Act was not observed.

(c) That no certificates of the Speaker of Parliament and the Electoral Commission were attached to the Bill when it was being presented to the President for assent as required by Article 262(2) of the Constitution.

(d) That whereas the voice voting procedure may be suitable for Parliament when making a decision or taking a decision on non-contentious matters, it is unconstitutional for approving a Bill of amending the Constitution or for passing a resolution where the Constitution requires a specific majority of Members. Further, the court held that this procedure was not appropriate because it does not identify who voted one way or the other, and does not ensure that the ex-officio Members of Parliament do not vote.

Mr Speaker, there is this important point regarding the failure to produce a certificate of compliance with Chapter 18 of the Constitution and the relevant part of the Hansard to prove that the correct voting procedure in passing the Act was followed.  

Honourable members, as stated above, one of the reasons for nullifying the Constitution Act No.13 of 2000 is that the Bill for the Constitution (Amendment) Act 2000 was not accompanied by the certificate of compliance with Chapter 18 of the Constitution.  

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to state here that the correct position is that indeed, the Speaker of Parliament did send the Bill to the President for assent accompanied by the certificate of compliance. The problem is that the three senior officers of the rank of commissioners who are responsible for preparing the case in my chambers and one of whom was responsible for handling the case in court, erroneously treated the matter as a mere technicality as to necessitate production of the certificate. Consequently Sir, they did not consult the Office of the Speaker on the matter.

This gave the impression that the Speaker did not transmit the certificate with the Bill to the President. Mr Speaker, I wish to sincerely apologize to you for this serious omission on the part of my officers who handled the case, and for their failure to produce the relevant copy of the Hansard to prove that the head count procedure was in fact used when passing the Act in question.

Media Reports:

Mr Speaker, following the delivery of the judgment of the Supreme Court, the media reported extensively on the matter. In substance, the report covered two main issues, namely:

(a)	That the Supreme Court nullified the parliamentary procedure of voice voting. 

(b)	That the implications and consequences are that laws passed by the Parliament after the Constitution (Amendment) Act No.13 2000 came into force on 1 September 2000, in particular the Presidential Elections Act under which the Presidential Elections were held in March 2000 and the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 8 of 2001; and under which the present Parliament was elected in June 2001, were nullified and, therefore, the President, Members of Parliament and the Government as a whole are in power illegally. That was the thrust of the report in the newspapers -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Order, order, please!

MR AYUME: What is even more astonishing is that the media reports appear to question the legality of the Movement system, which was endorsed by the people in a referendum conducted in June 2000 on the basis of the provisions of the Referendum (Political Systems) Act No.9 2000, which came into force before the enactment of the Constitution (Amendment) Act No.13 of 2000.

I would like, therefore, to make the following clarifications on the constitutional and legal position of the laws, decisions and actions taken and those laws, which were passed by Parliament after the enactment of the Constitution (Amendment) Act. No 13 of 2000.

The gist of the decision of the Supreme Court is that the parliamentary legislative process is conducted on the basis of two process distinct and separate procedural methodologies, namely; the voice voting procedure and the head count procedure.

Voice Voting Procedure: 

It is not true as alleged in the media that the Supreme Court nullified the Parliamentary practice of voting by saying  “Aye” in favour and “Noe” against the passing of Bills. It is not correct to say so as reported by the press. The correct legal position is that the court decided that voice voting may continue to apply in deciding non-contentious matters where only a simple majority of Members is required to pass legislation as provided for under Article 189(1) of the Constitution. 

Therefore, apart from legislation to amend the Constitution, all legislation is passed on the basis of simple majority. Since the bulk of ordinary legislation covers matters, which are non-contentious, the procedure of voice voting will therefore continue to be applied by Parliament in the conduct of most business in the House, which is mainly to enact ordinary Acts of Parliament. Consequently, all ordinary Acts of Parliament passed by the voice voting procedure prior as well as subsequent to the nullification of the Constitution (Amendment) Act No.13 of 2000 cannot be open to legal challenge in court.

The Head Count Procedure:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, according to the provisions of Chapter 18 of the Constitution, a decision to pass an Act of Parliament to amend the provisions of the Constitution must be supported by two-thirds majority of the Members of Parliament on the second and third reading of the Bill. 

The Supreme Court decided that in order to determine the two-thirds majority there must be a head count of the members in favour of, or against the amendment at the Second and Third Reading of the bill by lobby division, or such other mode that can ascertain the accuracy or certainty of the two-thirds majority.  

The nullification of the Constitution (Amendment) Act NO.13 of 2000 by the Supreme Court does not affect the constitutional validity of the laws passed after the 1 September 2000 when the said legislation amending the Constitution came into force irrespective of whether or not the laws were passed under the Parliamentary procedures of “Ayes” or “Noes” to indicate approval or non-approval of Bills, respectively.  

It is an established principle of law that an Act of Parliament will always be regarded as valid until expressly declared null and void by either the Constitutional Court or by the Supreme Court on appeal. Equally valid are decisions made and actions taken based on the laws in question.  

Consequently, the various laws passed after the enactment of the Constitutional Amendment Act 13 of 2000, and decisions made and actions taken under those laws such as the Presidential Act and the Parliamentary Elections Act under which the elections of both the current President and the Members of Parliament were elected respectively, are lawful and therefore cannot under any circumstances be successfully challenged in the courts.  In other words, the legal position is that despite the decision of the Supreme Court, previous decisions and actions of Government and Parliament are valid and good unless challenged in court and declared invalid. Even if such decisions are challenged, the legal doctrine of prospective overruling does not allow courts to nullify actions or decisions made or taken in good faith prior to the date of judgment.  

In conclusion, Sir, I would like to assure the country that the Supreme Court judgment does not expressly or by implication question the legality of the Movement Political System, the election of the current President and Members of Parliament, or appointments in any of the other two arms of government, namely, the Executive and indeed the Judiciary.  

Mr Speaker, after the judgment, when consulting colleagues, the possibility of applying for a review of the decision of the Supreme Court has been suggested on the grounds that the Certificate of Compliance under Article 262 of the Constitution was in fact duly transmitted by the Speaker of Parliament with the Bill to the President. And that the nullified Constitutional (Amendment) Act No.13 of 2000 was in fact passed using the head count procedure. I am still, Mr Speaker, consulting on this matter with a view to taking appropriate action. I thank you.

3.50
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my senior brother, hon. Francis Ayume, and who also doubles as the Attorney General for having made this passionate explanation. However, before I seek some points of clarification, I would like to say that my senior brother today is apparently wearing two hats. 

At the time when this law was challenged in court, he was the Speaker of this August House. Little did he know that there would come a time when he would be a member of the Executive and Attorney General and be expected to appear in court to make good what went wrong during his term of office. However, now he is in a better position than any of us to know how difficult it is to experience life in these two separate institutions.

Mr Speaker, right from his explanation there are a few things that I would like to seek clarification about. Being Attorney General and the executive head of that very big office, he allowed three of his commissioners to work on a case of this magnitude, and allowed papers to go to the Constitutional Court and later to Supreme Court without his due scrutiny. I think is a serious matter! It is serious oversight and no wonder time and again people have been saying government has been losing a lot of cases. Of course, when it loses in our favour the way it lost this, we will always be happy.

Mr Speaker, another issue on the same page 4 that the Attorney General has decried is that there was a failure to produce the relevant copy of the Hansard to prove that the head count procedure was in fact used. If you follow the gist of this case right from the Constitutional Court, one of the grounds for which the petitioners appealed to the Supreme Court was that they were being denied access to information from Parliament. 

One of the issues they cited that contravened Article 41 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda was that they were denied vital information, which would have given basis to a fair hearing before the relevant courts of law. Could the hon. Attorney General clarify to this House as to whether the application and or request from his chambers was meant to be an automatic grant of access to the Hansard as opposed to what the petitioners had sought in the Constitutional Court and they were denied?  

The other issue on which I was seeking clarification is on page 8 where my senior brother says he would like to assure the country that the Supreme Court judgment does not expressly or by implication question the legality of the Movement Political System. Mr Speaker, we should very quickly recollect and follow the judgement, which was given by the Constitutional Court in March last year. That was a ruling in Constitutional Court No. 5, which was challenging, among others, the position of the Movement Political System. I think the Constitutional Court did pronounce itself on that.  

Could we also hear from him about what has happened because I have not seen government challenge the ruling of that Constitutional Court No.5? What is the position now? Could we say that even if the Supreme Court remained silent the position, which had been taken by the Constitutional Court in the earlier ruling, still holds the ground? Is there an explanation for those three issues? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.55
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want the Attorney General to guide this House correctly. An earlier Constitutional Court judgment had declared that voice voting was unconstitutional. So, I want him to guide us, did he appeal against that judgement so that we are clear on this? We are tired of being bashed! 

And in his consideration for appealing for review, his only ground is this certificate, which he said the Speaker sent, but they are saying by implication that they have attached other laws, which needed 14 days, and we know and you also agree you took one day. What are you going to do about that? Why do you want to waste the taxpayers’ money to appeal for review of the case you will not win?

We also know that the Constitutional Court has the duty of interpreting the laws we make to harmonise them with the law of the Constitution. Could you guide this House as to which laws we have made that this court ruling has harmonized with the Constitution, and which laws are inconsistent so that we handle them and in what manner?

Lastly, we are disturbing the population a lot, particularly members of the frontbench, including the NPC, by moving around disturbing the population on this third term issue. We are instilling anarchy among the population saying we shall bring a referendum and yet the Attorney General and court here has told you that you cannot amend the Constitution without resorting to Chapter 18 and you also know that a referendum can never amend the Constitution. Why have you not come out to guide this country to stop us from this anarchy coming from the Prof. Mondo Kagonyeras? “Referendum, referendum” – when referendum can never amend the Constitution. Why don’t you guide this country? Thank you.

3.58
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Attorney General for the good paper he has given us. I want to ask him just a few questions: Does he recall that by the time they passed this Referendum Act he was the Speaker of Parliament? Why did he not advise Parliament on the best procedure to avoid having problems when he became the Attorney General? 

Mr Speaker, it looks like this constitutional amendment is haunting our Attorney General seriously, but it is time he reconsidered his position. I want to put this to him also: the commissioners in his chambers, who is their supervisor? How many years do you take to present a document, which has been requested by somebody? In this case the court asked for it. Do you take ten years or you wait for the ruling before you deliver it?  

Mr Attorney General, we have seen from the previous – in fact now in many cases, the Government of Uganda has lost cases, which are a cost to us the taxpayers because of the inefficiency of the big persons, including the Attorney General. Don’t you think it is time you thought of retiring before they can retire you in public interest –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, in making our contributions we need not be personal. In our debate here, you do not have to be personal. You just put your point and then we proceed.

MR MAFABI NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is okay, we shall not be personal but they are holding public offices on our behalf and they must be responsible persons when holding them.  

The Attorney General says the Court said that they wanted information from the Hansards to be used, did you try to ask for it and it was not given to you, and that is why we lost on those grounds? 

Lastly –(Interruption)- no it is Parliament, which lost in this case – okay government lost. Lastly, the Attorney General was talking of reviewing the case. You are still consulting to review this as you said, “I am still consulting on this matter with a view to taking appropriate action”. When the review is done, when do you hope to complete the consultation? When do you hope to ask for the review and what do you expect out of it? Will it change what the court has decided, or it will mend the few parts? Thank you.

4.02
DR STEVEN CHEBROT (Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to refer the Attorney General to page 6 of his speech, specifically under Article 189(1), which is referred to. I have read the provisions in the Constitution and Article 189(1), which the Attorney General is referring to, has nothing to do with passing of that legislation, and I wish to read it.

“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the functions and services specified in the Sixth Schedule to this Constitution shall be the responsibility of the Government.” 

It has nothing to do with what the Attorney General is referring to. So, could he clarify? Is he referring to the Schedule or he is referring to another provision of the Constitution because this provision does not cover what he is trying to say.  

Number two, if the Speaker did give the certificate, what about the Electoral Commission? He does not seem to answer that provision. Did the Electoral Commission provide a certificate as well or did they not? Thank you. 

4.02
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Attorney General for his statement. This problem the Government has been having from time to time of losing cases in the High Court and Constitutional Court is definitely caused by very many factors. 

One of the factors is caused by this very House, that is, by passing laws very quickly without thinking and in the end it backfires. (Laughter). Could I know what advice you can give this House so that they pass sober laws so that when we go to courts we are not fired? Could you give us advice; because you are not alone, the problem is in this House too.  

The second issue is, I am totally embarrassed by this document presented by the Attorney General to the House with a lot of errors. And some of the errors are the very ones, which were committed by the commissioners when they took the document to the High Court. What measures have you taken about such people who do not know their job and are letting us down? Thank you very much.

4.05
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a few questions. 

One; is it now mandatory that the quorum of Parliament must be observed whenever conducting Parliament business? That is for you, Mr Speaker, to clarify on. 

Number two, may I know –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Let me answer that. Honourable members, when you raise this issue of quorum, be careful because there is no reason at all why you should not be here. The public elected you to come and do work here in Parliament. You are paid by the taxpayers everyday you are here. Therefore, to ask the Speaker whether we shall be transacting only when there is a quorum, I will ask you, “Where will you be in order not to raise quorum?” (Applause).

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, this is a serious matter because as you know, obviously, this court judgment is based on quorum and, therefore, there is no need for Parliament to continue when there is no quorum. That is why I am asking whether quorum is only necessary when we are voting or whether at every transaction of business quorum must be present.

THE SPEAKER: At the beginning of this sitting I made a communication and alluded to this judgement.  I said that we shall continue to deal with our business in accordance to the provisions of the un-amended Constitution and our Rules of Procedure, which we determined because the Constitution allowed us to do so. So, if you think that there is lack of quorum and you stand up and say, “There is no quorum,” I will observe. But then in your mind the question will be, “Where are our friends?”  

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I think this is a very important area, which I think all Members of Parliament should observe so that we do not make future mistakes. Because if we continue with the way we have been handling the business of this House, I can see most of the laws having problems in future.  

Secondly, may I be advised by you - and me not being a lawyer: is it mandatory that the Constitution cannot be amended without reference to Chapter 18?

THE SPEAKER:  No.

MR SABIITI: I mean Chapter 18.

THE SPEAKER: I do not have to repeat this because if you check with your Hansard, when we started the session I made a statement on how we are going to handle the constitutional amendment. I do not have to refer to the judgment of the court because what is in the judgment of the court is what I said. I said that the mandate of amending the Constitution is vested in Parliament. I further said that the Constitution must be amended in accordance with the procedure laid down by the present Constitution. We have always been conscious of this.  

I think what is happening in this particular case is that we amended the procedure - not all Articles of the Constitution are for instance subject to the spacing of 14 days. No! It is only those Articles, which are mentioned in Articles 259 and 260 that must be subjected to the special procedure. The majority of other provisions can be amended in one day and the court did not say that you could not do that. 

They only said that putting in some Articles, which were put under the judicial microscope and found to have bacteria, had infected other provisions that fall under Articles 259 and 260. Because of this, these Articles were not subjected to 14 days spacing, and those Articles were inconsistent with the Constitution. Actually the answer is in Article 22 because anything, which is inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution, becomes void in as far as inconsistency is concerned. 

If other things could have been presented, certain provisions could have been saved and others would have been ruled out of order because the procedure would not be followed. So, I have no doubt at all that we are going to religiously follow Chapter 18 and may be we shall be equipped with a judicial microscope to scrutinize every Article and there will be no problem thereafter. (Applause)

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much for that assurance, Mr Speaker. With this judgment, could you guide me whether the following Acts are not vulnerable to nullification if challenged in court? These are –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You should be asking the Attorney General not me.

MR SABIITI: Yes, the Attorney General. The Land Act, that is number one –(Interruption)- yes, I am seeking clarification. I know you have an interest in that one.

No.2 is the Political Systems Act. In addition to this, Mr Speaker, the Referendum Bill, 2003, is based on provisions, which could be nullified given what is being quoted in this Bill. Is it, therefore, necessary to pass this law or discuss it on this floor, as we know that it is most likely to be challenged?

THE SPEAKER: I am being reminded that you only have ten minutes left and the Attorney General will have to answer. I do not know how I will balance up.  

4.13
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just have two issues of guidance to government. Government should get back to the drawing board and find out the problem in the Attorney General’s chamber. Whereas as the Secretary General of Reform Agenda and Member of Parliament for Tororo County I am happy that this kind of ruling is good for the opposition, there are bigger cases that the Government is losing under the control of the Attorney General. 

For example, government was going to lose a lot of money in the Nile Hotel deal had it not been the President who intervened and ordered that private lawyers come in. And there are several cases where the Government is now paying money. So, I would like to call upon government to go back to the drawing board and find out who is causing this problem, which is causing a loss of a lot of money. When we come to government we would not like to find the whole system destroyed. 

Secondly, I hope that when the review is done, those individuals who caused government to lose will be punished according to the law.  

Mr Speaker, this embarrassment is not only to the Attorney General’s chamber, it is even to your office. I hope that henceforth all ministers will always co-ordinate with your office as regards any issue that concerns Parliament to avoid this kind of embarrassment because to me there was total lack of co-ordination in the way government handled this issue.

Finally, I would like to seek clarification. One of the reasons why Parliament moved this amendment was to protect Members of Parliament as regards the issue of privileges, immunity and other issues. It seems court has made this open. Are we still protected? What is the level and degree of our immunity?  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I hope that the National Political Commissar and government will now take the issue of dialogue with the opposition very seriously because this ruling has now opened up opportunities for people who would like to challenge other provisions. For example, the Presidential Elections Act, among others, is null and void. It is a matter of seeking a court declaration. I want to agree with the Attorney General that all the laws may not be null and void, but one only needs to go to court and seek that a certain Act be declared null and void because of any given grounds. 

And we are already moving to declare other provisions null and void, unless government takes the oppositions’ demand very seriously. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us proceed with Prof. Kamuntu and then I see how to proceed.

4.17
PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU (Sheema County South, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much. I want to thank the Attorney General for his statement and I also I want to thank him for being a gentleman by apologising to the Speaker. The Speaker had effectively done his job but in the judgement it is implied that his certificate was not submitted when he did. So, we thank you for apologising to the Speaker.   

I want to assure the Attorney General that the questions I am going to raise here need not make him defensive because he really has my full support. There is no reason why I should want to ask questions that imply lack of confidence, not at all. The issue I am asking is, in your statement you dealt at length about the provisions of the Constitution and the laws we have passed, which are not affected by this judgment. I would also like to hear from you specifically about the laws and provisions of this Constitution that are affected. It is very important for us not only to know what is not affected but also to know what is affected.  

The judgement was made. There must be some effect from it, because your statement is very significant. Indeed, the judgement has caused a lot of debate and anxiety across the country. So, your statement is quite welcome but I want you to tell us specifically and in detail what law and constitutional provision is affected by this judgment. That is number one.

Number two; you have given us a statement referring to the judgement that was given in the Supreme Court. It would have been more comprehensive and balanced if you also gave us the judgements themselves so that we can make reference to what it is.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, when I look at pages 2 and 3, the court made its judgment on a number of grounds: a, b, c, and d. So, when the Attorney General is considering the possibility of applying for a review, the implication is that you are simply pointing out the fact that the Speaker duly transmitted his certificate of compliance. How about the rest of the grounds, which were used in making this final judgment?

In your conclusion to the statement you said, “The Attorney General is considering the possibility of applying for a review of the decision of the Supreme Court”. It sounds so unconvincing that one would doubt whether you are in fact going to do it. It looks like – yes, is this the legal gentility of expressing serious points or is it indeed lack of conviction that you are really going to win? 

Finally, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, there is –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would not want to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We have really gone beyond the time allocated for this. The Chairman of the Committee on Rules and Privileges had indicated he wanted to say something. I want to do that now so that the Attorney General can answer. I am borrowing some time from another programme.

4.21
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do propose that in future when the Attorney General is going to make a statement of this nature - this House has got a Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It would have been better for the Attorney General to discuss this matter and we sort of harmonise our positions because we have lawyers there and then we could come here and guide our colleagues. I hope in future he has the courtesy to discuss this issue with our committee.  

Mr Speaker, there is a big problem. Most of these cases have got some of our colleagues as litigants. It underscores one point: the problem is not even with the Attorney General’s chambers, the problem originates here; and it is here because we fail to develop politics of consensus. It comes down to who wins and who loses. So, the losers run to court because they think that is where the remedy is. 

Therefore, one of the implications of this judgment and indeed other judgments is that we should as much as possible try to develop a consensus such that we do not have some of our colleagues running to courts of law. Because as it is now, Mr Speaker, it is becoming very expensive on the part of the taxpayer, and embarrassing on the part of this House.

Three; apparently most of the crucial issues have only come up as questions. I hope the Attorney General will answer them. There is the issue of our records, because what the Constitutional (Amendment) Act had done was to safeguard our record from public scrutiny except with our permission. Now we have opened up - or the court has opened it up. Gone are the days when we could make careless mistakes and we safeguard the records. So, we should be very careful especially as we go towards the very important task of constitutional review. 

If we make mistakes, these mistakes will certainly be scrutinized by the courts of law. So, I pray to honourable colleagues, especially the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs - you know this is her jurisdiction – to make sure that we develop politics of consensus and two, let us not make mistakes.

THE SPEAKER: But this judgment did not say that you could not make a law to protect your record if you wanted to. The court only says, “Just follow the procedure and once you have followed the procedure the law will be in place”.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, you are right. Until that law is made - unfortunately the law is not there – so, as of now we have gone back to the Constitutional Court because that is now the legal position. Until that law is made, that is the position. I agree with you entirely.

Lastly, can the Attorney General and indeed the Minister of Justice, tell this House whether as a result of this court they have got time to address clauses 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the Referendum Bill, 2003 before us. If you have not done that, it is high time you did. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.25
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I will make very few comments. I think it is obvious that the court judgement has taken us back on matters of procedure in this House. As on the 31st of August 2000 we tried, in the amendment to the Constitution, to move away from certain awkward situations that we found ourselves in. Unfortunately, we are back to base. There is, therefore, an urgent necessity for this House to pass a law to back up our Rules of Procedure. 

According to Justice Kanyeihamba in his lead judgment, that can be done even without making an amendment to the Constitution. I consider this a very urgent matter, if we want to move swiftly in our proceedings in this House.

The Attorney General talked about the issue of voice voting, the “Ayes” and “Noes”. He made his interpretation as to what the court said. But I want him to go back and reconcile his interpretation with the lead judgement of Justice Twinomujuni on the same matter, and maybe find time to come and re-advise us.

On the matter of review, I am very reluctant to see the Government acting as if it is desperate. It is bad for government and the public. I can only see one instance where a review in this matter could succeed, that is, if it were possible for the Attorney General to introduce new evidence to court. Unfortunately, it is not possible. So, any attempt to go for review is bound to fail –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, now that the Attorney General said that he is consulting, don’t you think that it is necessary to give him the opportunity to make the necessary consultation before we can do this and the other? You discuss the pros and cons rather than –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Thank you, Sir. I thought I was being helpful to him by giving my advice in public.  But if he needs it in private, he knows where to get me. (Laughter). We have had consultation with you on this matter and I think it is urgent that we move quickly.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need clarification, since –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said I was borrowing somebody else’s time.

PROF. LATIGO: It is a very short one. I am seeking clarification on whether, in terms of costs, it is not cheaper since we are going to amend the Constitution, for the Attorney General to bring his amendments when we are amending the Constitution rather than going back to review this?

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, this is not a judgement for the Attorney General. The judgement is for the public. The record of the court is suffering. It is suffering because a lot of inaccuracy was taken up because the court did not have evidence. Do you want a judgement of court that remains a precedent to continue with inaccuracies? 

If the court is talking about a Bill that was assented to by the President on 31st and indeed that Bill does not exist at all, do you want that judgement to continue with that record? Do you want the judgement to continue saying that we used voices when actually we counted? Do you want the judgement to continue saying that even ex-officio members participated when they did not? I think, definitely, it will even be in the interest of the court to correct the record.

MR WACHA: I had finished, Mr Speaker, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Learned Attorney General, do you want to make some brief replies?

4.30
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): I would like to thank my colleagues for making comments and criticisms, which I have taken in good faith as being constructive for future purpose. 

Hon. Ezati was wondering why in such important cases, such as the one we are now talking about, the Attorney General did not participate. As an individual, I would say that at the commencement of this particular case I was not in a position to participate. But I have no doubt that those who were in a position to do so did participate by way of advising how the proceedings should be handled. 

I would like to also inform hon. Ezati that it is only recently that I effectively participated in a case where he and his colleagues sued the Attorney General, and in spite of that, the Attorney General lost. The message I am really giving is that it does not necessarily mean that when the Attorney General is handling a case personally you are going to succeed. This is not how we look at things in our profession. When you go to court you are just one side and the other side is the second one. The final arbiter is the third institution namely, the court. So, we always go there prepared that although we all go there to succeed, we can also end up losing. 

We should take it that he raised an important question, which others have raised, of accessibility of the Hansard. I think I answered that issue that the relevant Hansard was not produced in court because those who handled the matter proceeded on the wrong footing right from the beginning. It was a technical matter and that is why the Hansard was not produced. 

By the constitutional judgement I think he meant the judgement in relation to the Political Parties and Organisations Act. Yes, the Constitutional Court ruled the way you obviously know. The Attorney General has appealed and that appeal has not been disposed of yet.  

Hon. Capt. Byaruhanga asked, “What happened to an earlier ruling on voice voting”? I think it is not necessary now to talk about an earlier ruling whenever it was. What I have been talking about here is the position as expounded by the Supreme Court, which is the highest court on the land, namely that there is nothing wrong with using voice voting provided you confine it to where it is supposed to be used; and provided that you are clear in your mind regarding the use of the procedure in Chapter 18 of the Constitution for amending especially those laws that relate to amending the Constitution. I do not know whether I have missed out another question.

Hon. Mafabi said that while I was the Speaker, why did I not advise on the correct procedure? I do not know whether this is relevant because the position here, which I have explained, is that the correct procedure was in fact followed. We voted here using the head count. So, I do not know whether this cannot satisfy him. 

You also said, as Attorney General, I should retire. Yes, I am not going to be around until I die on the job, I can assure you, and it has not been my habit. One time I was the highest government bureaucrat in the Ministry of Justice and I walked out and went to the private sector.  Again while there, I decided that I should come back and serve my country in another capacity, and that is where I am. Definitely, I want to assure you that time will come when I will retire and I am waiting for the appropriate time to do so.

My good friend, hon. Mafabi, also asked about when I am going to complete consultation. I think his question has a bearing on what hon. Kamuntu said that the way I made this presentation on the question of review seems as if I was not making it out of conviction. I have stated, and moreover in writing, that it has been suggested that we examine the option of applying to the Supreme Court to review its decision for those two reasons, and somebody asked, what about other reasons? Yes, when you go for a review, you raise everything, which you are allowed to raise, because a review has also got its limitation. But the important point is that I am consulting with high profile lawyers, and I will be able to make a decision in one way or the other.

Hon. Chebrot, I apologise for the typing error in my statement in relation to Article 89. That Article should read Article 89 instead of 189, but I think this is a small point. I do not mind if you blame it on me, but that is the position; it was a typing error.

“Did the Electoral Commission also produce a certificate”? You see, the production of a certificate by the Electoral Commission would only have been necessary if at that time we knew that we were amending only those four provisions or Articles of the Constitution. We did not know, as the court has now held, that we were amending other Articles by infection. So, there was no need to produce a certificate from the Electoral Commission. What for? There was no need for a referendum. What for?

Hon. Baba Diri, my sister, said laws are passed in a hurry sometimes. Yes, it is true, but I think hurry or not, we really try in this House, and the Speaker guides us, to make sure that we follow the correct procedure. I have said in my statement and the Speaker has said so too, that in fact the correct procedure was followed in passing that Act and, therefore, the question of passing them in a hurry and ignoring procedure does not really arise. There may be other arguments for hurrying, like the Electoral Commission is always criticising us for passing laws very late and when time comes we tend to move at top speed, which sometimes causes some problems But I want to assure you that that has never, in my opinion, been to the prejudice of not following our Rules of Procedure.

She is also concerned about what the Attorney General will do to people that will appear to be letting him down. I will discuss this issue with my colleague, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, who is responsible for the management of affairs of the Ministry.

Hon. Sabiiti, the question of quorum was really explained in my presentation and the Rt hon. Speaker has also amplified it and probably made it even much clearer. You are saying, “What about the Land Act? Is it also going to fall by the wayside?” I do not know why. What is wrong with it? The Referendum Act; we have not yet passed the Referendum Act, have we? We have not. I want to assure you that there is no way this House, the Government or the Attorney General, could stop anybody who feels that his or her right has been violated by an action of government or by the passage of a particular law or that an Act of Parliament has been passed not in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution; you cannot stop such a person and I think we should –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I raised this question of the Referendum Bill, 2000 and my colleague, hon. Katuntu, also referred to it by saying that sections 6, 7, 8, and 9 are a blatant breach of the freedom of speech, assembly and association. Given the ruling of the Supreme Court, we are appealing to the Attorney General to go back and have a look at this Bill and see whether it should be tabled on this Floor of Parliament as it is or whether there is need for surgery so that it does not give us problems tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: At what stage is this Bill, hon. Sabiiti?

MR SABIITI: If I look at the Order Paper today, it was even supposed to be tabled here but it was not. That is why I am asking the Attorney General to have a look at that Bill before it comes to the Floor of Parliament because we feel the judgement does affect this particular Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Has it received its first reading?  

MR SABIITI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: So, it is with the committee? Then the committee will make its recommendations at the appropriate time.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: This Bill indeed was given a first reading but it did not have a Certificate of Financial Implications, and as you know, section 10 of the Budget Act obliges us to have it tabled with a Certificate of Financial Implications. That is why it is reflected again on the Order Paper today because as far as we are concerned as a committee, this was not done in a legally acceptable manner.

THE SPEAKER: Then it is okay; it is still with the committee. I think we can call the owner of the Bill to discuss it. If he refuses then you can come here and give us a report and then we really consider this matter.

MR AYUME: If that was the intention of my hon. colleague, hon. Sabiiti, in making that statement, then I take his advice. Then not only the committee but also the Minister of Justice or myself will obviously be contacted so that we can discuss and see whether the provisions of the Bill can be appropriately adjusted.

I would like to welcome what the hon. Ekanya has said about going back to the drawing board in respect of the Attorney General’s chambers’ administration. I want to say this very clearly and without hesitation, that the Attorney General as of now lacks the necessary personnel to conduct his business satisfactorily. The issue has been raised with the appropriate authorities including the Ministry of Public Service on the question of recruiting and retaining, because the lawyers have got their field outside government. 

While the lawyers who go to court here on behalf of government are paid Shs 500,000, the lawyer for the other side could be getting about Shs 300 million from this case alone. So, it is not fiction to say that the attraction out there would obviously make it impossible for the Attorney General to retain competent personnel who would serve the interests of this country. I, therefore, welcome his proposal that something should be done to – I believe what he meant is to empower the Attorney General’s chambers in order to do its functions efficiently.

Hon. Kamuntu asked about the laws that are affected by this judgment. I will say there are no such laws - he is not listening. We should have had copies of the judgement, it is a very bulky document and the time I had at my disposal was not enough but I am prepared to give him the seven copies of the judgement even after here.  

Review: I want to assure you that I am considering this matter very seriously, but subject to being advised by my consultants.

Hon. Katuntu, yes, that is good advice but I would like to say that I was under severe pressure from my clients that I should tell them something about what was happening. In some areas the impression was given that heaven was about to fall down. So, I had to say something but then the very people who were collecting information and advising the members of the public were the ones ringing me saying, “Mr Attorney General, you have kept quiet for too long what is happening, the country is getting confused” and so on. That is why I took it that it was a matter of urgency that I made that statement. Definitely, I take your advice for the future, time allowing.  

Yes, when conducting our business here the ideal situation would be to work on the basis of consensus but if you cannot generate this consensus what do you do? You end up having to vote and in some cases having to vote by head count, which some people may be shy of. Your point is that the best thing would be to develop a consensus to make a decision. I think what you mean is that those who are dissatisfied with the decision would not go round to petition because they would have been part of that consensus. That is the point you made and I take it.

Protection of records of Parliament:  

Yes, I am equally concerned about the need to have a law to protect records of Parliament. I have, if I remember very well, recommended this to Cabinet and we shall take it up from there. I am sure it will end up in your committee. Similarly, we shall have a look at clauses 6,7,8 and 9 of the Referendum Bill when the time comes so as to take care of the concerns that you have expressed.  

Hon. Ben Wacha I answered you through my answer to hon. Katuntu’s question, namely the need to pass a law to back Parliamentary is specifically an issue of our Rules of Procedure. What I have recommended to Cabinet also is that these two Articles of the Constitution, namely 88, which deals with quorum, and 89, which deals with voting, we could have a look at them. We could see whether there is need to amend them in the course of the current constitutional review exercise. 

Yes, I will look at Justice Twinomujuni’s judgement in order to reconcile it with my position. I think that is good advice.  

I have said so much about review and I do not intend to say more, because if we talk so much about it here, we are giving somebody ammunition including the court –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Then leave it.

MR AYUME: Thank you very much.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 1998

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Dr Okulo Epak): Mr Speaker, I am going to seek your guidance before I proceed because of the following reasons.

First, this is a report on the accounts and decisions of the Public Accounts Committee of the Sixth Parliament. We were that behind with disposing of the Auditor General’s report. Whether many of us here really will be competent to deal with issues, which concerned the Sixth Parliament, is another story. I happen, fortunately, to have been a member of the Public Accounts Committee of the Sixth Parliament.

Secondly, and I think this is most important, this report was tabled and copies were distributed to members some years ago, in the Seventh Parliament. I actually presented this report to Parliament in its second session, 13th sitting, third meeting on Wednesday, 12 March 2003. So, this report had been presented on Wednesday, 12 March 2003. What happened then, unfortunately, was that your Deputy was in the Chair. At the end of the presentation members complained that they did not have the document - she probably assumed that at one stage we could get the document and then the debate would ensue. So, the debate on the report was deferred until another time when members would have the documents to be able to debate it competently.  

Unfortunately, that deferment continued until today and even today that scenario is still the same. These members definitely do not have copies of this report and they may not even have them because they were distributed a long time ago. And I know our ability to keep documents and even to search for them is not that good. We really have a lot of documents. My request is, should I present this report so that it is entered in our Hansard a second time, or is it technically possible for Parliament to pronounce itself on this report without debate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the chairperson about the problem we have and the suggestions. We either just adopt without seeing it, which would be rubberstamping, or he introduces it then we hear it, debate it, then at least do something when we know it.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true we got the document and the majority of us, when we came here today, never knew that it would be on the Order Paper. I would plead with your office to allow us to go and look for our documents so that tomorrow we should begin with it.

THE SPEAKER: Is that okay?  

MR MWANDHA: To save a bit of time, and it is possible that this particular report was not saved; I am of the view that it would help us if the chairperson made a presentation, then tomorrow we could start the debate when we have our copies.  

THE SPEAKER: Agreed? I think let us do that. Tomorrow you will come and –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a worry with tomorrow’s date. It may be so close that we may not be able to have accessed that document within just 12 or 18 hours. Is it possible for us to have two or three days?

THE SPEAKER: No, what is going to happen tomorrow is that the chairperson will come and re-present the report. At least we will be able to hear and follow on that note. Those who will have found the document will also have read it and then will be able to participate so that when we really pass it, we pass something we have seen rather than passing something, which we have not seen. T1hat will facilitate us to reach a just decision. Do I take this as a consensus? Honourable chairperson, tomorrow you go and prepare. You will come and present then we debate and see the way forward. 

You are also reminded that after that we shall consider another report as you have seen on the Order Paper. With this we come to end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 11 February 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)
