Thursday, 10 February 2005

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I would like to draw the attention of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to the need to re-organise their committee so that we can get  a substantive chair to handle the business, which is outstanding.  So could they find time and do the needful and let us know.  

Secondly, for item 3 and 4 of the order paper, I am allocating one hour. So 30 minutes for the ministerial statement and 30 minutes for the statement from the Chairperson of the committee on the National Economy, so that we can complete what is on the agenda.

2.30
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We do appreciate you deliberate distribution of time to allow members to communicate the views of their constituents on the White Paper. However, 10 minutes is too little time for members to explain and clarify on positions on all that voluminous work of proposals to be amended.  

I am, therefore, Madam Speaker, requesting your indulgence in the matter that people be allowed to explain their position because too much speed kills.  We seem to want to finish as fast as possible, and we are dealing with a delicate matter, which is very important and would affect our future generation.  

The point of clarification I am seeking from you is a point of concern on the Custom Union. With beginning of February, we begin to apply new rates according to custom union on the protocol that was signed by the three member states and this is affecting our business community. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs I am told is supposed to circulate this information so that people know it.  

As the Chairperson of the Committee on Finance Planning and Economic Development, I am finding it very difficult to explain to callers, especially, from the business community who are concerned about lack of knowledge about the new arrangement.  Could the minister clarify and promise that this information will be disseminated so that people are dealing in things they understand so well. I thank you so much.

DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now, concerning the first matter, I do appreciate that 10 minutes is not enough, but the promise that many people want to speak. I have a list of 42 who would like to contribute today. I do not know how we are going to achieve that.  

However, I would like to allay your fears in that, in that there are two stages to this exercise.  We are looking to the possibility of giving at least 20 minutes when we are actually debating the bill itself.  So, this is also helping us to gauge how much time we shall require for the main exercise.  So we shall enlarge time for the other one.  

Now, Prime Minister, I do not know who will answer about the Customs Union. Oh! The Minister of Finance is here.

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, my apology is that I was still consulting on this report. So I got here when the question has been made, my apologies again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Rwamirama, you heard the question. Yes, Office of the Prime Minister.

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS) (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon Rwamirama’s question is extremely important, in fact His Excellency the President is preparing to address Parliament presumably next week on these matters pertaining East African Community. 

As we talk the Ministry of Foreign affairs, they are in their final stages preparing all the documentation. So, soon you will get the information and His Excellency the President will officially address Parliament on those matters.  I thank you.

2.32
MS SARAH KIYINGI (Woman Representative, Rakai):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a matter of importance.  First of all, I want to appreciate the presence of the television and the ability of our constituents and everybody outside Parliament to be able to see what is going on in the House. 

I want to say that I have got information which I think needs to be clarified to the public.  There have been cases where some Members have been put to task either by their constituents or their partners to explain where they were since they were not seen on television.  

Madam Speaker, it needs to be clarified to the public that, that camera does not get everybody who is in the House at every sitting.  So- of course, for the frontbench, which is visibly empty they will be able to see that they are not there.  

But the public should be fair to us to know that somebody can be in the House, but may not necessarily appear on TV.  That is what I thought needs to be made clear.  Thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Supplementary, Madam Speaker.  It is actually not members of the constituencies. Some spouses are asking their –(Laughter)- about the whereabouts of their husbands and their wives when they do not see them in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, the member wanted the country to know what we are doing.  So, I do not know how I can protect you when I am not sure where you are.  All I can say is that, we shall ask them to ensure that what appears depicts a full House as much as possible.

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Madam Speaker, pursuant to our Rules of Procedure Rule 58(1), I have been requested by the people of Lubaga South whom I represent in this House to seek your advice in a matter of procedure- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Which Rule? 

MR LUKYAMUZI:  To seek your advice.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Which rule, Rule 58 sub rule (1)?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, Rule 58(1). In accordance with Rule 58(1), debates in this House may be interrupted on matters of procedure, order, information, and clarification.  

Madam Speaker, yesterday with humility I caught your eye when I moved a point of information, at the time when hon. Sebuliba Mutumba was holding the Floor.  Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba gave way.  

Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba is one of the Members of Parliament representing Kampala, and constitutionally we have a lot in common because we have been interacting on matters of resource in intellectual circumstances.  

So the advice and guidance I am seeking is, Madam Speaker, you ruled me out of order. I could not proceed even before I pronounced what I wanted to say. The people I represent humbly requested me to seek guidance from you whether the precedent you created can be sustained, very humbly.  

They were very humble, I said, “Will I not be scared to present this alarm?”  They said, “Do not worry, the hon. Lady is good enough to appreciate your concerns.”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Lukyamuzi, since Tuesday you have intervened about 15 times when Members are contributing and I have been counting - you, one person! 

We have given members ten minutes.  But you want to appear as if you are the authority on federo. Whenever you hear federo you jump up; and yet the members from Buganda and other areas, in my view, are able to articulate their issues themselves.  Why do you want to be the one to speak for them?  You have intervened 15 times since Tuesday, and I think that is not fair to other members.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with a lot of humidity it was hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, who was to lose out on his ten minutes.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am in charge of this House.

MR DOMBO: I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank you for the time you have been guiding this House.  

The sub-rule is very clear.  It says, “may” and it does not say “shall”. The interpretation of the Speaker, given the time constraints, the Speaker’s ruling is final.  Anything that comes to challenge the Speaker’s ruling of the previous rule should be done through a substantive motion.  Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HEALTH) (Dr Alex Kamugisha):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Members.  It may be recalled that on Monday this week, members from several constituencies raised issues on two important issues.  

The first one was the situation of sleeping sickness in Uganda. There was another query on the cholera situation in the country. I was directed to come and inform the House on how we are proceeding on the two issues.  

As I speak now I have a Statement on the situation of cholera in Uganda and the other Statement on sleeping sickness is being finalized. 

As I talked to you earlier on, I promised to bring it here at the next Session of Parliament if I get a slot; it will be ready by that time.  

With that introduction, I want to go ahead with a situation of cholera in Uganda.  My statement has been circulated or is being circulated and some Members already have it; and if you do not have it, you will get it soon.

The country experienced a serious cholera outbreak in the period 1997/1998 in which a total of 55,000 cases and 2,000 deaths were reported.  Kampala District alone reported 5,000 cases with 200 deaths at the end of that serious epidemic.  

This outbreak affected 41 out of the then 45 districts, which translates into 91 per cent of the districts, except for the districts of Sembabule, Kalangala, Ntungamo and Katakwi.  That outbreak was effectively contained.  

However, sporadic cholera cases persisted in ten districts bordering the Democratic Republic of Congo.  This was largely due to increased risk factors resulting from a large inflow of refugees and high mobility of communities across the border.  

Since the beginning of this year, 2005, the following districts continue to report cases of cholera, Kasese, Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Hoima, Busia and Gulu.  

The average number of new cases or patients reported is approximately one daily in each of the districts of Western Uganda.  That indeed is a very serious situation.  

The current cholera situation- and I will start with the situation in Busia District.  

During the past two weeks, Busia district has reported some cases of cholera after a six-year period of no case at all, in other words, they had six years without anything reported.  

On 21 January 2005, an index patient was reported in Buhehe sub-county of Busia district. This is one of the 4,000 sub-counties bordering Kenya.  This index case had attended a funeral on the Kenyan side. 

Subsequently nine more cases were reported by the 4 February 2005, and I have learnt that there were many more cases on the Kenyan side.  

So far a cumulative total of ten patients with two deaths have been reported in Busia.  I will report on action taken later.

Gulu District, a large outbreak, about 200 cases, of cholera was contained in Pabbo Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camp between August and December 2004.  However, after one month of no case there is currently a new outbreak in Palabong IDP camp near Gulu Town, since mid-January this year.  

For the last two weeks, a total of six patients have been confirmed; fortunately all the recent cases were treated and discharged.

Bugiri, last night we received a report from Bugiri and we are investigating eight suspected cholera cases in the parishes of Bulamba and Nansuma in Buyinja Sub-county of Bugiri district.  

Buyinja Sub-county borders the southern part of Busia District, where some cases have been reported as I mentioned slightly earlier.  

Investigations are also going on in the neighbouring districts of Iganga and Mayuge to determine increased cases of diarrhoea. 

The main two risk factors are poor sanitation and hygiene. As you know cholera is hygiene related condition, and it goes hand in hand with poor sanitation and power hygiene. Similarly in inadequate safe water especially where the coverage level is 50 per cent.

Action taken. Timely investigations of these report was carried out by our rapid response team from the centre and the district; and these teams are there 24 hour a day in both the district and the centre, but normally action starts with the district before the centre comes in. 

We are very grateful to the LC V Chairmen and the Resident District Commissioners who have supported these investigations and subsequent actions. 

The action was taken as follows: 

(a) We have reactivated all district cholera task forces, each district have got a task force.   
(b) Standard supplies have been provided, treatment centres identified and strengthened with additional resources.  
(c) Community mobilization is continuing as well as education. 
(d) There is a constant surveillance, which has been strengthened to allow early warning.
(e) Cross border collaboration and dialogue has been undertaken especially with using the existing mechanisms where there are formal cross border talks. 

The way forward. As I said the main risk factors continue to be poor sanitation, poor hygiene and inadequate safe water sources.  

A multi-sectoral response, therefore, critical in prevention and control and this is why the famous Sanitation Forum was organized in October 1997 to agree on a common strategy with all the districts.  LC5 Chairmen committed themselves to implement the Ten Point Programme of action to improve sanitation. 

Resources for water and sanitation improvement are already available under decentralization grants of Water and Sanitation Programme.  The district should, therefore, use these resources to provide improved water and sanitation services.

Madam Speaker, and hon. Members of Parliament in this endeavour to contain cholera and other water and food born diseases, I appeal to all of you to mobilize your constituencies in support of the Kampala Sanitation Declaration Objectives so as to improve water supply and sanitation in your districts.  

Madam Speaker, I stop here and I hope that Members will join hands with us in the fight against this water born and food born disease.  I thank you.

2.50
MRS MUNYIRA WABWIRE (Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for his report on Cholera. But I would also like to update him that in Busia the cases are three so far they are not two, because there are two cases of people who have died in Buhehe and one person in Busia Town Council. 

I would like the Minister to inform the teams that they should really do more of sensitisation other than grabbing the foodstuffs.  It looks like the teams that have gone out in Busia so far having been more interested in grabbing peoples mandazis and what have you instead of first sensitising them. 

 According to reports from Busia by the next morning the Mandazi and Kabalagala have disappeared and the people wonder whether those things have been taken as exhibit, or those people have eaten them or whatever happened; so, it looks like they are taking the situation very lightly. 

I would also like to bring to light the situation in the neighbouring district; that is Idudi.  If anybody has passed by Idudi market where most of us buy meat when we are travelling upcountry some of it is roasted and there are juices that are being sold there. 

The situation is very bad should cholera get to that place then it would just be a calamity.  Maybe the Minister for Health should work hand in hand with the Minister for Works to fill these potholes so that this stagnant water is eliminated from that place.

2.52
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe county north, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to supplement to what my Colleague have just said hon. Munyira expressing concern that the Government instead of spending more resources on sensitisation, they have applied force to teach people how to be sensitive on matters of public healthy.  

I would give an example, and I also wish to know, not only an example but I also wish to know what steps the Government is taking to make sure that the person or the family that lost a person in the mosque shot by the Police during the so called “Mandazi” raid - they were going around with a Police man armed checking on every home and mosque. 

Those of you who may not be familiar with the Moslem faith unless you belong to the faith there are certain areas in the mosque you are not supposed to step. 

Now the Policemen took this as a place where people are hiding the mandazi; they would force their way into the mosque; the Imam resisted and in the process of resistance they opened fire and a person who was passing by was killed in the process. 

Now that is causality, I do not know whether to consider him a causality of cholera or state violence. If it is a state violence, hon. Minister are you liasing with your Colleague in charge of Internal Affairs for fair compensation of the victim who was taken away for no fault of his? 

Two, the matter which has also been raised by my Colleague here, the neighbouring district, as the hon. Minister himself has put it, the first incidents of transmission of cholera from the neighbouring district, was as a result of a funeral feast. 

It happened at a place called Funyula. Unfortunately or fortunately, I do not know how to put it, it happens to be the constituency of my relative the Vice President of Kenya.  

Now, I am surprised –(Interjection)- Funyula is a small village one kilometre from the border, and it happens to be the home of the vice President of Kenya. His name is His Excellency, Moody Awori Tim, 10 years senior than me. 

Hon. Mbabazi is looking puzzled. I hope he will not have to go to the encyclopaedia to look up for this information. 

However, Madam Speaker, the most important aspect of it is that whenever there is an outbreak of a transmissible disease like cholera, why is it that we do not take measures to limit movement of people.  It is quite obvious.  

In Funyula side on Busia District of Kenya they had already lost 10 people, and it was actually no longer an isolated case but an outbreak, and yet the movement of people between Buhehe and Funyula was as if nothing had happened.  What measures are you taking?

Two, it is not a question of mandazi alone.  Now we have a problem of people making their local beverages, passion fruit and oranges. They put this unhygienic beverage in the used mineral water bottle, and this water is not purified nor boiled. 

As passengers alight from Kenya or from Uganda crossing the border, they take this.  So, you will find that the next few weeks there could be an outbreak of cholera, not just in the neighbouring districts, by way down here in Kampala.  

So, Madam Speaker, I am just wondering, is the Ministry of Health taking any measure to make sure that beverages, which are sold to passengers, especially bus passengers, are sanitized or somehow some measures are taken?

Madam Speaker, the person who was killed by the Police was a Health Officer inspecting facilities. 

Last but not least, take note, if you are not a Muslim; do not just walk into a Mosque with your shoes and boots on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us be brief, hon. Members.  Hon. Awori’s question could have been asked in half a minute.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. Minister of Health for this statement, and for the measures our Government is taking to protect the lives of our people, especially against this deadly disease.  

Madam Speaker, mine is only one question, especially when it comes to the regional factor.  My understanding is that when we talk about Congo, especially Eastern Congo, we are talking about a region or territory, which almost has no Government.  

Also when we look at our borders with Congo, we know very well we may talk in terms of having official entry points, but the borders are extremely porous.  But now the Minister is telling us that we are going to limit the movement of people between Uganda and Congo.  

This explanation is not satisfactory.  How exactly are you going to limit the movement of the people along our common borders?  For Congo I can understand, but when it comes to Kenya, I am disappointed.  

Kenya is a stable country with a stable Government.  Why don’t we attempt regional initiatives to work with our brothers and sisters in Kenya to ensure that we can control infection along our border?  

So, hon. Minister, what measures have you taken at regional level to ensure that we get a regional solution or an African solution?  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as we are discussing the cholera situation in Western Kenya and Eastern Uganda, I am delighted to introduce to you, Dr Noah Wekesa, the Assistant Minister for Livestock Development of Kenya; he is there in the Gallery-  (Applause). 

 So, I hope you will be able to take back the message about coordination to prevent cholera moving from the two borders.  You are welcome, Dr Wekesa!

3.00
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole county, Pac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not the first time Uganda is suffering from cholera, we experienced the problem not so long ago.  By that time it might have been a strange thing, but today I believe it is no longer strange.  

If in the past we have had experience and we have build structures to fight it, by now I think the Ministry and the Government should be competent enough to answer and challenge so that it may not cause more problems in our society.

The issue of grabbing mandazi, the issue of preparing food by the roadside are just the effect of what is going on in our society.  It is the poverty, which we have; it is a reaction to poverty that we have people cooking mandazi by the roadside.  

So, I think the first thing the authority should look into is to fight poverty.  Otherwise, the cause of cholera, the cause of mandazi, the cause of all these by the roadside will not come to an end.  How we fight poverty is the question now.

Now, Madam Speaker, the Minister on page 2 is talking about investigating eight suspected cholera cases.  My question is, what is the mode of investigation and how long will it take?  

You know cholera is not anything you can plan and re-organise your planning; it is a very sad event, it comes within time, it kills people and so it is.  So, I would like to know from the Minister what mode of investigation his Ministry is taking, and how many people are involved.  

Sometimes it pays, Madam Speaker, to involve people who are affected so that they know the process of response to a challenge, which is within their society.  So, I want to know from the Minister how many people he plans to involve in the investigation.

Madam Speaker, as I said at the beginning, it is not a new problem in our society.  I do not know how many Government sectors the Ministry is planning to involve.  Indeed we need to know the work and involvement of disaster preparedness.  

Now, this is a standing organization that must be in, whether things are good or not good.  So, I want to know from the Minister concerned how much he is planning to involve for this disaster preparedness, not only for now but forever and ever, Amen.

3.02
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole county, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  According to the Minister’s Statement, he has identified basically two risk factors. The first one is poor sanitation and the second one is inadequate safe water, which has been put at 50 per cent, and below 50 per cent is below the national average of about 65 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the action taken, all the action is targeted at the risk factor number, which says “poor sanitation and hygiene”; there is nothing substantial mentioned that is going to do about enhancing this water coverage of below 50 per cent to an agreeable percentage that will remove this factor.

Then secondly, when you look at the way forward, on the last page, the Minister says, “Resources for water and sanitation improvement are already available under decentralization grants for water and sanitation programme”. The district should, therefore, use these resources to provide improved water and sanitation services.  

The clarification I also want to get, does it mean to say that when the planning was done for the district water resources, was it planned in anticipation that Cholera would break, or it was the usual resources that are sent to the districts and how would these help in situations of emergency like this one?  I wish to thank you.

3.05
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (Kilak county, Gulu):  Madam Speaker, I have just very brief comments.  First and foremost, on behalf of people from Pabo where there was cholera outbreak, I would like to appreciate the effort by the Ministry of Health who were very swift when there was outbreak in Pabo.  

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time, I think the Ministry of- somewhere we should appreciate, because I remember when there was also Ebola outbreak in Gulu, also there was a very swift response.  So we encourage you to continue like that, Mr Minister.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, what the Minister is saying that, Cholera has been contained is not true; in the sense that when there was cholera outbreak, it was still a rainy season and somewhere, there came the dry spell.  And you know Cholera during a dry period just actually reduce a lot always.  

So, I would like to encourage the Minister still to have the surveillance team to be active on the ground, because in the event that rain now comes back, I am very suspicious that the cholera outbreak may still be again there.  Evidently, that is why we say there is a case in Parabong camp.  

Parabong is just about six kilometres from Pabo.  So it means around that area, there could still be outbreak.  I thank you so much.

3.07
MR PATRICK OCHIENG (Bukooli south, Bugiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this time.  I thank also the Minister for giving us the information contained in this Report.  

Madam Speaker, I come from Bukooli South Constituency and I would like to inform the Minister that the report says,” A brief to Members of Parliament on Cholera situation in Uganda as of 10 February 2005.”  

I would like to inform the Minister, possibly this leaves out my constituency. As I speak now, by yesterday, we had lost about five people in one of my sub counties, which is Banda sub county. Today in the morning, they told me the situation is worsening, a number of people have been admitted.  

I would like to thank the Minister of Health for quick response, because yesterday when I told him, he assured me by evening something will be in place.  It is true, Madam Speaker, something has been done, but I think the situation may even worsen.  

The truth about the matter is that, the Minister has said that we are talking about 50 per cent coverage.  Madam Speaker, this sub county I have just mentioned which is Banda sub county Bukooli South, is really as I speak at zero per cent water coverage.  

Madam Speaker, many people may think we are not giving them the correct picture, but that is the truth.  The whole constituency as I speak today stands at around 11 per cent water coverage.  I am mentioning it here, because for a long period of time I think Government has not done enough for the people of my constituency.  

In 1996 when the President came to that constituency, he did pledge to help the people of that area and he said he would do everything possible to avail them water.  As I report today, nothing has been done. The situation may worsen basing on this information I am giving and this is where I want the Minister to help.  

It is not only the water coverage that may bring the problem even to worsen more, there is a problem of sanitation in the beaches; more especially these beaches which have markets.  I have a number of beaches, Madam Speaker, but the problem there is that, there is very, very difficult soil texture more especially on sandy areas.  

Sinking a pit latrine on a sandy area is a problem, very expensive for these people who live in these areas, because you cannot go deep.  Immediately you reach about five to six feet, Madam Speaker, you find the soil collapsing. We need urgent Government response now otherwise the situation will worsen.  

As if that is not enough, Madam Speaker, there is also the element of health workers at Health Centre II and III. Most of them are Nursing Assistants who have been complaining. By yesterday they were seriously complaining that many of them have not got their salaries, some have not been appointed, they are just working and they are doing it for the sake of it.  

This situation cannot be allowed, I beg through you Madam Speaker, that this situation be attended to and attended to immediately.  I thank you very much.

3.07
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The report about Cholera is not the first; we have always had them.  This time is Eastern Uganda and Western Kenya, but soon it might be somewhere else.  

I understand that even 75 per cent of Kampala here, the sewerage is not connected to the main – so people find disposal of this, either in the lakes or it sinks down there and people must drink this water through boreholes or whatever.  

Now, that is there, but I want to take this opportunity and inform the Minister of Health, that perhaps he did not know, please be informed that the Members of Parliament from Eastern Uganda and Western Kenya, they number about 150, have formed a caucus and we had identified such things earlier and one of the objectives is to deal with epidemics of this nature.  

The Minister of Health can take this advantage to pass through this caucus, the patron of this caucus is the Deputy Speaker of Parliament of Uganda for Ugandans and the chairman of this caucus is hon. David Wakikona from Manjiya County.  

We are tackling this matter through the Eastern Caucus, 78 Members of Parliament is quite a good number and another 75 from Kenya.  So, while we tackle these matters, I thought I should inform the Government that these caucuses are available to you to handle such matters.  Thank you very much.

3.14
MRS JANE ALISEMERA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I hope I will get another chance to talk on the White Paper, but this is cholera.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We are dealing with cholera.

MS ALISEMERA:  Yes, this is cholera yes.  I am just requesting that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You are lobbying?

MS ALISEMERA:  Yes.  Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for the Report.  I feel it was long overdue, because I have been following up the Cholera epidemics especially in the Rwenzori region.   

Madam Speaker, when you look at the epidemic, you will only see the districts, which have been affected by the war or which are in war; districts like the ones in Rwenzori region and the Northern region, and also those along the borderlines.  But I am also surprised to see that districts, which have not had problems, are also being included.  

I wanted to inform the Minister that the problem of cholera has not been handled effectively because we know what causes cholera, how cholera is transmitted and yet the Ministry has not done much because when you look at the water coverage, especially the Ministry of Water, water coverage in my district is still very low.  

You will find water coverage in Bundibugyo, only in areas where the Internally Displaced People’s camps were; it is only where you find social services like water and schools.  So, when these people went back, they are finding it a problem; there are going back to drink the bad water, the running water in the streams.  

So, I have tried my best to contact the Ministry of Water; and to make matters worse, in the budget for this year the water to cover Bundibugyo District was reduced.  I have written to the Minister, I have talked to the Directors, and I do not know what is happening; but cholera has continued to be endemic in my district.  

When you look at the areas in Bundibugyo District, which are mainly affected by cholera, it is the areas near Democratic Republic of Congo and Ntoroko. 

I want to inform the hon. Minister of Health that when the Committee on HIV/AIDS visited that area on the lake, if it was the Committee of Social Services they would have closed the Health Centre, because you may even get cholera from that Health Centre. The situation is bad in Ntoroko Health Centre III.  

The Chairperson said, if we had gone their in the capacity of Social Services we would have closed that area, and in that area cholera has become part and parcel of the community and yet –(Interruption)

MR MAATE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my Colleague for giving way.  I want to inform my Colleague that the situation in Ntoroko actually is already known to the Minister, because I did submit a written document about the situation to him, and he promised that in the coming financial year there will be a budget line for that activity. 

 But on the side of the cholera, which was also part of the written document, which I presented to him, there is need for an emergency programme for that area as an extract of that document I presented.  Thank you.

MRS ALISEMERA: Thank you, hon. Member.  So you can see the Member of Parliament of Ntoroko County had already sent messages to the Minister.  But what I am also observing, Madam Speaker, is that the Ministry is wasting a lot of money on emergency programmes.  

If you want to cure something, you cannot wait only for emergency.  We know the causes, how it is transmitted, why can’t we say that this year we give water to all these areas so that we stop the suffering and deaths of the people.  

Many people are dying in Bundibugyo District because of cholera; it is one of the killers of Bundibugyo District and yet it is a preventable disease.  How can you die of cholera because you have failed to access water?  

Last year Ministry of Health allowed Bundibugyo District to use Ugshs 50 million to do an emergency programme for cholera, and yet that money was supposed to build a Health Centre IV. 

So now there is a problem; the Health Centre IV will never get finished, the cholera outbreak has continued though people got per diems, night allowances and so forth.  So, we are having a big problem.  I want to call upon Ministry of Health, Ministry of Water –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, I allocated only 30 minutes to the Statement, the queries and the response.

MR AWORI: I just wanted to inform my honourable colleague that cholera is spreading first due to inadequate preventive measures.  The biggest problem in our budget is the Ministry of Defence eating up the money, which could be used to stop cholera.

MRS ALISEMERA: Thank you for informing me. I want to conclude by saying that I would like the Ministry of Water, and the Ministry of Health to try and ensure that the coverage of water in this country is kept up.  

We should not only talk of coverage; we talk of coverage when other people are talking of zero, like in my district we are talking below 40 and that coverage is only in areas where there were Internally Displaced People’s camps.  So with that, Madam Speaker, I hope I will come again.

3.20
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa county, Gulu): Madam Speaker, let me take this opportunity to thank Ministry of Health.  

Ministry of Health is among those Ministries I still have a lot of respect for because they are thorough, they are professional, they are ethical, they have always responded promptly in a number of things and I congratulate them, the leadership of the Ministry.  

But, Madam Speaker, what disturbs me is that when it comes to matters like this, the country is treated as if everything is normal and equal throughout the country.  

For example, the situation in Northern Uganda is an extremely unique situation; it is different.  When there is a cholera outbreak, you are not going to treat the North the way you are treating the other regions because people are in camps; people are not in their homes.  

Therefore, I would request the Ministry that, apart from waiting for emergency, the North is already in an emergency situation; despite the resilience of the people we feel that you should treat the North extra.

I would like to find out whether the Ministry, for example now, has a strong monitoring mechanism in these camps because at least from the constituency where I come from, Aswa, there are people who die in these camps and they do not appear on statistics because they do not report to the Health Centres, because the health workers are not there; the health workers do not report.  

So, some of these cases actually do not get reported; the matters that get reported are the matters that eventually get on to the statistics and the matter, which the Ministry gets.

But many of our people in these camps are suffering and dying.  If you go in these camps, children are dying, what mechanism are you putting in place?  Because, in some of these camps even the health workers find difficulties in going to these camps – (Interruption)

MR KIDEGA: Thank you Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way.  Last week, I was in Gulu with the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda. We visited about two camps, Olwal camp and Pagak camp.  

In Pagak where there are more than 5,000 people, there is not even a single Health Centre in that camp and the people were complaining that for them to access health services, they have to foot from that camp to another camp. So, the situation is very pathetic in the camps.  Thank you very much.

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Thank you, hon. Kidega.  Of course, his information is the real situation because in these camps, it is not only Olwla. In most of these camps the health facilities are not there and children die, people die. It does not enter on statistics and, therefore, they are not counted.  They cannot reach Ministry of Health since Ministry of Health will always rely on formal statistics.  

So, I would like to request the Ministry at least to add on additional effort, because in these camps the sanitary conditions are extremely poor.  

Even the food that is distributed to the people, I would like to request Ministry of Health to closely link up and monitor the food distributed with World Food Programme.  

There is a lot of overcrowding in these camps and therefore there are a lot of other related sicknesses that accompany this.

So, hon. Minister my simple request is, please, try to treat the people in the camps with extra care and extra caution.  They are already in an emergency situation, do not wait for an emergency situation to come up and then you treat the whole country as one as if the situation is normal.  The North is not a normal situation; it is extremely a bad situation.

My other last clarification, which I want to get from the Minister, is what measures are in place by the Ministry of Health to monitor hotels?  Because, there are so many mushrooming hotels in urban centres and the quality of food and services in these hotels are extremely very poor.  They can easily be a source of cholera outbreak.  

What mechanism do you have in place?  Do you license them to operate; because even here on Parliamentary Avenue people have now turned food into a serious business; anywhere, anyhow you will find a food market, people selling cooked food.  What mechanism are you putting in place to monitor and to license these people to operate in those places?

Lastly, in most cases when emergency situation comes – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe wait, if we could take all the questions then you can answer. 

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Just as I am concluding up, I wanted to find out, Madam Speaker. I participated closely during the Ebola outbreak with the Ministry of Health and that is where I really recognized their ability, their ethical performance and their nationalistic outlook in responding to this situation. But the biggest situation with the Ministry of Health is that they have reserved the entire emergency thing in the headquarters.  

Why don’t you also regionalise these resources for emergency response in regional centres?  So that when there is an outbreak in Northern Uganda, people do not need to run up to Ministry of Health to look for vouchers to get money.  So that people there can address their problems immediately without really coming to the Ministry of Health.  Why don’t you do this?  This would help us a lot.  Thank you. 

3.26
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibale): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the Minister for his statement.  

However, Madam Speaker, with the mention of Hoima District as one of the districts which has so far been affected by Cholera since this year started, I am already very worried that Kibaale is almost on the list; because what happens in Hoima really affects Kibaale immediately. Part of my Constituency closely associates with Hoima and, therefore, we are at risk.

Madam Speaker, what makes me uncomfortable is the way forward given in this statement.  It does not convince me that there is something serious and something concrete, because, Madam Speaker, I do not want to say I am trying to de-campaign decentralization.  

However, to say that the money which is going to the districts as grants for water and sanitation will be used to combat this problem, we are just deceiving ourselves.  

That makes me remember that the Ministers in the Ministry of Agriculture whenever we have complained about poor services in the districts they are quick to say it was decentralized and now Health is saying decentralization.  

But, Madam Speaker, the money that goes to the districts for water and sanitation is little.  Actually it is being used to rehabilitate the existing water sources and that means where a water source has not been developed, either a borehole has been sunk, we will never get a borehole sunk.  

Therefore, they will still continue being exposed to having no safe water.  What I would have wanted is for Government to come up with a strong strategy on how we are going to improve water coverage. 

 Then this issue of sanitation – because, Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that there is a big population out there who have no latrines and they need a bit of law to force them to dig the pit latrines and it should be part of the strategy on how you are going to improve sanitation.  

The biggest problem, Madam Speaker, is, members know that Chairmen of LC I who are supposed to make sure that people get latrines, many times cowed down from forcing the citizens to get these latrines because they fear to lose elections.  

Madam Speaker, you will agree with me even bulungi bwa nsi (access roads) are becoming impassable because people have stopped clearing the roads.  The chairmen are cowed down, they fear to force the people to clear the access roads because they will lose elections, the same thing with latrines.   

Therefore, something concrete must come from the Ministry of Health and say, “We must do this if we are to improve sanitation”.  

More money must be available to make sure where – for example, Madam Speaker, in the lost counties in Bugangaizi, the biggest part of my constituency – (Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is a point of clarification.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I wanted to find out from the person holding the Floor whether the House will understand the word “bulungi bwa nsi”?  Thank you.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, when I said, “bulungi bwa nsi,” I even said, “access roads”. so I am okay, people have understood.  In any case Madam Mugerwa would want to convince me to support her to make Luganda – But that way, I am yet to be convinced. 

Madam Speaker, I was saying that the biggest part of Bugangaizi, the only water source, which is safe that you can provide is a borehole. 

Therefore, we need more big money to have boreholes sunk, and I do not see it as a way forward in the Statement of the Minister. Maybe what he called Kampala Sanitation Declaration, but we need to get more details whether it said that more money would be availed to sink boreholes and other water sources constructed.  I thank you.  

MS AMAJO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Mine is on a related issue.  I would like to thank the hon. Minister.  When the hon. Minister was beginning to make his statement he mentioned that the report on sleeping sickness is on the way.  

I would like, Madam Speaker, to request the honourable Minister to be more precise.  Are we going to have it today or tomorrow, or next week because -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It is coming on Monday. I allotted him time on Monday for sleeping sickness.

MR MWANDHA: I gather the report is in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am in charge of the Order Paper, it will come on Monday.

MS AMAJO:  Madam Speaker, we are anxious because according to the reports we are getting from the district, they say according to World Health Organization, the district should have already been declared a disaster area because of the outbreak of the sleeping sickness.  

So, I would like to thank the Minister in advance for getting us the report here on Monday.  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Industry, can you address the hotel issue?  Hon Akaki Ayumu, you address the hotel issue raised by hon. Okumu Reagan.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TOURISM)(Mr Jovino Akaki): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise to respond to the concern raised by hon. Okumu Reagan on the issue of standards, or should I say lack of standards in hotels in Uganda.  

When tourism arrivals improved, there was a rush for people to put up structures to meet the demands. Accommodations were turned into hotels, and as a result the standard, I agree, came down a little bit. 

 What we are doing now as a Ministry and Government is to come out with a criteria of grading and classifying all these hotels so that before we begin closing them down, the hotel owners should know what to expect; and we are doing this one jointly now as a region of East Africa.  

Actually as I speak now, our Officials are in Arusha trying to finalize on the standards and the criteria to be applied.  So, while we regret that at the moment the standards are not up to it, but I want to assure this House that we are doing something on it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, you may be talking about Imperial Hotel, but the hon. Member was thinking about these hotels, which mushroom in the trading Centres where they cook food.

MR AKAKI: When you do the classification and the grading, you take into consideration the actual location as well. You consider whether it is properly placed, whether there is enough space for that category of hotel; and where you find that it is not in a right place, you advise that it is moved to some other places.  

The classification is comprehensive, and I can assure you that the standards will improve; we are working on it. 

Now as for the hippopotamuses, which somebody was mentioning. I hope that very soon I will be given an opportunity to update this House on the status.  

Madam Speaker, I hope that I am going to be given an opportunity to brief this House because my report is ready, the report I promised this House.  I thank you.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HEALTH)(Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank all the Members who have made various remarks and useful contributions on this matter.  

Before I go to respective questions, I would like to make one general remark about cholera by saying that, it is a food and water-borne disease; these are some facts that you need to know.  

It is related to poor hygiene, poor sanitation and drinking unsafe water; and any matter related to unclean handling of food can promote its transmission.  

Before a person gets cholera or anybody who gets cholera, it means that person has swallowed faeces or faecal matter; that is fact that Members need to know.  You cannot suffer from cholera unless you have ingested human faeces –[An. Hon. Member: “Live”]- yes, live; raw, yes, if -(Laughter)- thank you for lending me that kind word.

Having said that, also let me say that the issue of sanitation is a joint programme, not by Minister of Health alone, we work hand in hand with others. Ministry of Local Government are very key in this matter, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and obviously Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, who have the budget for water and largely urban sanitation.

With those remarks let me make some comments on what individual Members have mentioned.  

The hon. Woman Member of Parliament from Busia, thank you for the information. The information I had was that there are two cases, two lives, which were lost.  If they are three, maybe that information is not yet with me, but I thank you for that information. 

I agree with you that we need more sensitisation.  I wanted to be put on record that Busia is one of the districts, which for quite some time has been performing extremely well in matters of sanitation.  

I think since six years back when you had the cholera outbreak, a lot has been done and I want to salute your local government and all of you leaders from there for upholding very high standards of sanitation, and as we have heard the index case from a funeral across the border. These borders are definitely very porous; there is no chain link around the border, people have relatives across the border. You heard our friend there who has a brother there who is a very big executive in the Kenyan Government. There must be other many relatives in and around. 

So whenever there is a function for better or for worse, obviously relatives must go either way and it was unfortunate that this one happened when there was cholera on the other side and someone picked it from there and spread it in and around.  Otherwise, Busia has been doing very well.

Idudi market: I take your comments. I am not responsible for potholes, but I will talk to my colleagues. Potholes are more, I fear them especially in as far as breeding of mosquitoes are concerned and also on food handling. I will take it up with my brother from the Ministry of Works.

Hon. Aggrey Awori, yes, why don’t we spend more time on sensitisation? That is why your district is doing well. The Chairman LC V and his team have really been doing a good job together with our staff, and that one we can definitely strengthen so that we bring it to an end.  

The issue of entering a mosque: Well I did not know about that. I am sorry about someone who lost his life, but I am sure other relevant authorities of government are handling that matter. I will definitely squeeze my colleague in the Ministry of Internal Affairs; he is already there.

MR AWORI: I was just wondering if your colleague is aware. Is he aware?

DR KAMUGISHA: He is here and I will tell him more.  Why don’t we limit movements? Hon. Aggrey Awori, is that possible with your relatives across? Is this practical?  Probably not.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My hon. colleague, I believe, carefully listened to what hon. Wakikona was saying a few minutes ago.  At the same time, one time my hon. colleague was in diplomatic service and he is aware of the relations between the two countries and he is very familiar with the protocol regarding the two East African countries. Is he in order to insinuate in his statement that may be Awori and his family could go through extra judicial methods in achieving this goal of maintaining good health on both sides of the border? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, short of closing the border, I do not expect that when you hear that somebody has died in Funyula, you will stop and not attend the funeral; I am sure you will be in a hurry to go there. I think that is what our people are. They will not understand that there is a problem; they will want to go and bury their relatives.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, I think the hon. Awori’s point of order is in respect to the possibility that one of the Aworis could be a carrier. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I will ask the Minister of Health to examine hon. Aggrey Awori, to establish whether he is not spreading Cholera across the border. (Laughter)

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, I will oblige. Hon. Ndeezi, on DRC. Well he must be having some arrangement there. But it is true we have heard complaints from the neighbouring districts, not only on cholera, but also on immunization. Whenever we have sessions, we do immunise their people, but every time we go to count those who are not immunized, we find new ones have come in from across. Joint border meetings will continue to be encouraged so that these matters can be sorted out.

Hon. Omodi Okot said that Cholera is a result of poverty. Well, yes and no, but from my preamble, you can tell that even a poor person can prevent himself from Cholera by boiling water, washing hands, having a simple pit latrine. These are simple but very important. You do not need to be having a lot of money to insulate yourself against Cholera on these food borne diseases. May be I do not agree with you.  

“What is the mode of investigations?” We normally use microbiology. Whenever there is suspected cases of diarrhoea and vomiting, we take samples to the laboratory to confirm whether actually cholera bacteria are present, then we confirm or dismiss cholera.  

The other issue is to do surveillance by going around and detecting more cases of diarrhoea and vomiting.

Hon. Dombo said that no substantial mention has been done about what will be done on water. Well, my colleague from water is not here, but as you know government, water supply is one of our biggest programmes and massive resources have been put in and every year we realize more and more coverage on safe water supply. I am sure you must have seen a lot of work going on in the countryside. So that is an annual effort which is on-going and it is among priorities of government.

MR EKANYA: I would like the Minister to clarify and inform the country especially the people of Malaba, Tororo, on what steps you have taken to address the actions of our counterparts in Kenya, who release untreated sewerage on River Malaba from where our National Water and Sewerage Corporation gets water and supplies to Tororo and Malaba.

DR KAMUGISHA: Hon. Member, I think right now I may not have the correct answer for you, but I will find out and get back to you.  

Hon. Ochieng said that water coverage in his constituency is very dismal. I am sorry about that, but I will take it up with my counterpart.  But you can also do the same so that we combine hands.  But I do not think there is a deliberate effort by government to provide water to one area and deny it to another, but we can find out what the problem is.

That Health Workers have no salaries, I would not know why because since the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister gave his directive that salaries must be paid by 28th of every month, my feeling is that many of our Health workers are paid on time. I do not know why Health Workers in your area do not get their money on time, I will find out and let you know if you give me some details of which Health Centre you are talking about, then I will find out from the district itself because that money is paid in the district. 

Hon. Wakikona, thank you very much for that information I will use the forum for this and many other problems that we are facing in that part of the country. That one could actually help us and I promise to take advantage of it. 

Hon. Alisemera, that Ministry of Health is wasting a lot of money on emergencies; why don’t we give water to everybody? Well, an emergency is an emergency, once it comes we must deal with it and the routine programmes are also separate. On this issue, let me assure Members that every district, which gets money for Primary Health Care, this is very important for you to note, 15 percent of that money is set aside for emergencies. In other words, we are prepared at anyone single time to handle emergencies of any nature in health like cholera. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, I do not know whether some of these things cannot be raised when we are handling the Budget.

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you. I just wanted to be clarified on the money, which again is picked from the other budgets, because in Bundibuyo if 15 percent is for emergency cases of cholera or any other health outbreak, why does the ministry again get monies, which are supposed to be for construction to be given for emergency services?  Like the Shs 50 million, which was supposed to build Ntoroko Health Centre IV. Why did it go for cholera outbreaks instead of using the 15 percent?  That is what I want to be clarified on because we are now losing the Health Centre. 

DR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Member. The budget for construction is budget for construction, and it has nothing to do with the other emergencies. If money was diverted from one source to another, that was not correct. 

Hon. Okumu Reagan, we have a very strong monitoring mechanism, you may not be aware of the details.  But I want to assure you that anything, which happens in any part of the country, we shall know it within 24 hours. After that we monitor progress and performance and there is a two-way feedback mechanism. If you say that deaths are not reported, well, if deaths take place within our health units, those are reported routinely; and if they do not take place within our health units, then they are reported later on in other subsequent activities.  As you know, in some districts we have started this programme on registration of births and deaths, and when it covers the whole country then there is no single case of death that will escape being recorded.  

Hon. Kidega, it is possible that we may not build a Health Centre in every Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camp, but I want to assure him that every IDP camp has a sound health service. So, if you do not see a health centre there in the traditional sense, it is not correct to think that no service is being rendered, and we have given a lot of priority to the IDP camps, because if it was not that, we would have lost very many people. 

Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, now that you know that there is a problem in Hoima, you will just do what I requested at the end of my last statement; that all Members should sensitise their populations on good sanitation and personal hygiene now that you have it in your neighbourhood.  This is a joint effort by everybody, and leaders at any level are very important in this.  

So I appeal to the House that whenever you are sensitising your communities or doing other programmes, even including vote seeking, you must chip in matters of health and sanitation so that you have a healthy population to give you votes.

Lastly, hon. Amajo, my statement in fact has, since I came in the room, been reported complete; and as the Speaker has said, I will deliver it so that those who have raised issues on sleeping sickness can also get clarified. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and all of you honourable members.  

STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE LOAN REQUEST BEFORE THE COMMITTEE AND OTHER WORKS

THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this statement should have been presented maybe by Tuesday but because of so many technicalities it has not been possible. I hope today it will be presented.  

Madam speaker, I have made some amendments to the statement. Initially, it was called a report, now it is a statement by the chairman of the Committee on National Economy on the Loan Request before the Committee and Other Works. 

Madam Speaker, some Members were concerned about the signatures; they have been appended now.

The other issue was the Cabinet not being present; they are around now. It was one of the reasons why the statement was deferred.  

Madam Speaker rule 138 of our Rules of Procedure states that: 

1. It shall be the function of the Committee on National Economy to review, consider and scrutinize on matters relating to the national economy generally, finance and any other matter referred to it by this House.  

2. The Committee on National Economy shall in particular have the following functions:

(a) To examine and monitor the state of the national economy;

(b) To examine and make a recommendation to the House on all loan agreements required to be authorized or approved by the House under Article 159 of the Constitution; and

(c) To explore means of improving the national economy.

Madam Speaker, I am making this statement on behalf of the committee to put Members of this House in picture in respect of the business so far covered by the committee. There are some misplaced concerns that the committee has not done its work and it was generally agreed by Members that a statement be made to your honourable members to eliminate any bad feelings towards this committee on work covered.

Since this Parliament begun in July 2001, the committee with the support of this Honourable House has so far reviewed, considered, scrutinized and recommended loan agreements as required by Article 159 of the Constitution for the approval of this House. So far the total loan portfolio recommended by the committee and passed by this House is a staggering figure of US $1.12 billion. This is without grants, and of course the grants are over a billion dollars too. I have attached the loans approved by you honourable members of the 7th Parliament and the 6th Parliament at the back of the report. All of you will recall the minister of Finance laid on the Table all the indebtedness and grants, which have been acquired by this government.

I wish to point out that while it is important to expeditiously transact and recommend loan requests to this House for approval, honourable members ought to appreciate the need to get relevant information that would enable the committee to table a beautiful well-reasoned report to this House. If the requested information is not provided in time, it constrains the committee to transact business and execute its mandate.

In the meantime, this august House should be informed that while the committee is experiencing undue pressure to recommend in any manner possible the loan request for approval, there are various loans passed by this House many years ago, which have not been utilized some to-date to less than 50 percent.

In short, it is not true that the committee is responsible for the delay of any loan. The concerned ministries ought to cooperate with the committee to realize the objectives and aspirations of the committee and this august House.

Loans before the committee:

These are the loans, which were before the committee before we went for the recess of November and Christmas.  

1. Apex IV, which was laid on the Table on 6th October 2004.  

2. Phase III of the Roads Project, laid on the Table on 21 September 2004.  

3. Second Private Sector Competitive Project, laid on the Table on 19th October 2004.
 
4. Water for Small Towns Project, laid on the Table on 16th November 2004.
 
5. Government Guarantee for Islamic University in Uganda, laid on the Table on 13th October 2004, 

6. Household Income Enhancement Forest Conservation Project laid on the Table on 19th October 2004.  

There were interruptions, which caused these loans not to be discussed: 

• The White Paper consultative process, which took place during November 2004, 

• The Christmas recess that ended in February 2005.  

• The information, which was requested like on roads, private sector and water projects which came during recess in January 2005. 

This meant that the committee could not meet during the two recesses and nothing could be nothing done during that time.

The delay also in bringing information has affected the discussions on these loans. 

The committee also needs ample time to scrutinize these loans before it can lay them before the House.

However, the committee has been patiently waiting for more information to be availed but to no avail.  In fact we received some information on 8th February 2005 at 10.00 a.m. and that is the day were supposed to have made the report.

Today we had a public hearing from the Uganda Manufacturers Association, Uganda National Chamber of Commerce, Uganda Bankers Association, in respect to loan request and any interested parties thereafter. (Interjection)- Today.  No, I was just giving additional information because this report was written sometime back. 

Apex IV Loan:

Madam speaker and honourable members, it should be noted that the loans of Apex I and III have been disbursed and the following needs to be noted.

1. That this loan does not fall under the debt strategy as agreed with the development partners.  It is not on concession terms as supposed to be.  Concession terms is that the loan should be lent at 0.75 percent per annum to 1 percent with a grace period of 10 years for a period of about 30 to 40 years. But this one is for a short period.

(ii) These loans are disbursed by Bank of Uganda to Commercial Banks for development purposes. Bank of Uganda charges interest to Commercial Banks who in turn charge the borrowers. This ranges from 8.5 per cent to 20 percent. The majority of this money is borrowed by multi-nationals and foreign companies while the local entrepreneurs have almost nothing.  These loans are concentrated in Kampala and nothing in the rest of the country.  

The committee had concerns, which have been raised to the ministry, and these are some of them:

(i) That the resources are meant for local entrepreneurs, why should we provide them to foreigners who have access to foreign resources?

(ii) The affirmative action by Government about other areas of Uganda as far as the loan is concerned.

(iii) The impact assessment of Apex I - III and taxes so far paid by the beneficiaries.

(iv) That Uganda has a development bank (UDB), where such resources should have been channelled instead of commercial banks, who load commercial interest rates other than development interest.

(v) In the Budget Speech of 2004/2005, the Minister of Finance said the development department of Bank of Uganda was to be transferred to Uganda Development Bank.  When will this be done, and this is a department is the one currently responsible for Apex funds?

(vi) The affirmative action to give these funds to local entrepreneurs.

(vii) Any loan, which follows the other, the performance of the previous one has to be presented to the committee; the evaluation of the report.

Roads Loan – Phase III:

This is to be administered by Ministry of Works, which has delegated its function to the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU). Part of this money is meant to construct a building for RAFU, among others.

The committee concerns were:

(i) To be availed the evaluation report for performance of Phase I and Phase II.

(ii) The total road works to be completed in Uganda and how much so far done, that is, the coverage.

(iii) Why build a building for RAFU, which has no legal status?

(iv) Why has the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication left its duties to RAFU?

(v) The cost of tarmac roads in Uganda compared to other countries in Africa; in East Africa to begin with and the rest of Africa; and of course the plan for the road network.

Government guarantee for Islamic University in Uganda (IUIU): 

This loan is meant to build hostels for students in Islamic University in Uganda, and it is to be paid by the University and Government of Uganda has to guarantee it.

Committee concerns:

1. There is no Project Plan (appraisal) on how the university will generate the resources to be able to pay the loan.

2. The committee wondered if this cannot be done by private people as it is in Makerere University, Kampala. The private people should get loans from the Development Bank.

Household Income Enhancement Forest Conservation Project:  

This is another loan before the committee. It was meant to plant trees in Uganda, among other things.  However, there are loans we have approved for the same function like under the Uganda Wildlife loan of US $ 34 million. You recall we approved a component about planting trees, and then we got a grant from the European Union to Forestry Authority also about trees. 

Committee concerns:

1. Harmonization of these programmes.

2. The methodology of the implementation of this loan.

3. Forests could be planted by Government if local councils can enforce the tree-planning programme in Uganda. For example Kakungulu planted trees in Uganda in 1900 without the help of a loan.  (Laughter)

4. The required documents are not yet submitted.  These are: the project appraisal document, project implementation manual, the development credit agreement and the evaluation report.

Water for Small Towns Project:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, another loan we have before us is Water for Small Towns Project.  This loan is meant for water in small towns and villages. A report about water, which was done by the consultant, is in draft form since the year 2000 and this is the one, which was given to the committee on 14th January 2005.

Concerns of the committee: 

(i) The water plan; Members have raised complaints here about water so we asked for the water plan, that is, a map for coverage of the whole country and how it is going to be implemented.

(ii) The plan for how many units are to be done and how many so far have been done. 

(iii) In May 2002, Parliament approved a loan under BADEA for small towns, which included Soroti, Sironko, Nakapiripirit and Kotido, but none of these water works has ever been done; and of course you approved it.

(iv) To increase the debt burden when already the secured funds have not been utilized.

(v) To provide the points of water done in the country to Parliament and confirm if they are operational. This was meant for the committee to ask Members of Parliament of those areas to confirm this position.  You all recall that there are many boreholes, which have been sunk, and they have never worked since the day they were sank, but they claim they have done the water.

(vi) The committee was of the view of water harvesting and piping instead of dams and boreholes, which concentrate in one area.

Second Private Sector Competitive Project:  

This is a loan meant to develop Namanve Industrial Park. The majority of the resources are for capacity building, compensate the woodlot growers, land registration, better business behaviour award scheme.  

The concerns of the Committee were:

(i) Namanve was a Government forest, who then acquired there plots to increase the cost?.

(ii) Why Namanve not Jinja? Why congest Kampala?  Jinja has the infrastructure in place already.

(iii) The affirmative action of other areas in the country. 

(iv) The performance of the previous loan, that is, the First Competitive Loan.

(v) The employment and how enterprises have been licensed and how many are still operating.  Here, you will note that many came in, got tax incentives and went away.

(vi) What type of manufacturing consultants are earmarked for Namanve.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will all recall that during the Budget speech of 2004/05, the then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development stated that the debt burden was unsustainable. The committee is concerned with this statement and we hope all Members are. 

The purpose of the committee is to report on all the findings to the House on these loans, if they are sustainable or not, and we promise in due course detailed reports will be made available to the House. We request the Executive to stop running to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker without first putting their case to the committee. Please play your part and we shall do ours.

The Minister of Finance has a tendency of bringing the loan requests late and start pressurizing Parliament that these loans will expire. Loans do not expire. It is the effective date, which is delayed and I pray that we do not accept loans for the sake of it. The lender’s business is to provide loans because they expect a return in form of interest. Uganda Government is a good client as far as national lenders are concerned because a country will never end.

Government should provide the loans utilization as at 31st December 2004. All of you will see how much is un-drawn balances and I want to tell you colleagues that our un-drawn balances attract a charge. 

I want to give you a few examples of monies we have borrowed which have not been utilized. For example North West Uganda Small Scale Holder Loan for agriculture approved in 1997 for US $24.5 million, by 30th June 2004, we had utilized Shs 5 billion that is about US $ 2.5 billion only. You remember the Kafu-Masindi road, which was approved in 2001; I am told they are working on it now. We have the Agriculture Area Based Program in South West Uganda, which is to replace SWARP humps, is just starting. We have fisheries which was approved in 2001 among this money is US $ 22 million meant to do landing sites all over the country, nothing has been done. Given all this information, we have a lot of money lying un-utilized and it attracts a charge. 

Projects visited

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to inform this House that under my able leadership, this committee has visited many projects funded by various agencies whose funds were approved by the 6th and 7th Parliament. Cases in point are Kamuli and Kisoro hospitals under a Spanish loan, Lake Victoria Environment Development Project in Kenya and Uganda and the purpose was to establish value for money.  The reports are ready for presentation.  

I want to assure you Members that the committee is determined and has embarked on the exercise to visit more projects and we have been promised by Parliament that they will give us the necessary support and the resources.  A vigorous, insightful, professional and well-researched report will be presented to the House detailing the performance and the direction of the economy.

Finally, I wish to request you, Madam Speaker and honourable members to continue supporting this committee by way of advice, professional and otherwise. Madam Speaker, I wish to move. Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Thank you Madam Speaker. We have received a report, which is excellent from our colleague, the chairperson. What is this report?  Is the Front Bench able to answer these concerns that have been expressed in this report? Are the relevant ministers especially the Minister of Finance in charge of Monitoring, able to or shall I assume that in the presence of the Leader of Government Business, the Minister of Finance can handle it. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, these will be lamentations. So, really, can you guide me; what is the procedure? Should we debate this or do we ask for answers from the Front Bench?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Standing and Sessional Committees are required to report to this House almost annually. But the Speaker and I were concerned that a number of them have actually not reported.  So part of this arose because of power prompting but as you can see, it requires a lot more.  We may even have to join it to your report, which you say you are about to complete so that we discuss it comprehensively because this one is just touching the issues a bit.  So, can you indicate to me when you will be ready so that this and your report will be presented and debated at the same time?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have no objection if Members can contribute to this to beef up our report unless they are not ready. But (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe the Minister is ready.  Let us find out if the Minister of Finance is ready to absorb the missiles (Interjection)- Wait please, this is not an order report as expected, this is just a statement, let me guide the House please.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. First of all, for us we welcome this statement by the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. We welcome it very strongly because, Madam Speaker, there ware a lot of things that were being said by people out there and we did not have an explanation as detailed as this one about the loans that were referred to the committee by this House. 

Madam Speaker, the committee and Government and my ministry will have to continue to work together and interacting so that we comply with Article 90(3)(c), which enjoins committees to assess and evaluate the activities of Government. What has been stated here is like the committee can only wait until a loan is brought to ask these questions. The committee is entitled to ask these questions everyday and we are ready to supply the answers. So, we will want to continue working with the committee to answer these questions.  

But also, Madam Speaker, we will also want to work with the committee in keeping with Rule 138(2)(c) of this House, which enjoins that committee to explore ways of improving the economy.  So, we have to work together. I would be happy to hear a report from the committee on how we can improve this economy.

Madam Speaker, I sympathize with my colleague, chairperson, because as this House knows, I was a chairman of that committee for some time in this House and I know the pressures that people can bring. In this particular case there have been all kinds of allegations. They have said, for example, that the chairperson does not support Government, therefore he is delaying because he does not support Government. I do not think that is true, but that allegation has been made.  So, until we get a clarification such as this one, we would not be able to provide sufficiently grounded answers.  

This, Madam Speaker, is a statement and I can advice my colleague, hon. Nandala Mafabi, that when a matter is referred from this House to your committee and you find that you do not have enough information to approve or to make a positive ruling you still have to come to the House and tell the House that I have failed to find good cause to pass this loan. It has not happened and this is causing us a lot of discomfort.  Therefore, I would want to propose that, let the chairperson come to this House at the earliest opportunity come and tell this House that he has been unable to approve a particular loan; he states his grounds and the House will arbitrate. We will be in this House and we will also present our side of the story.  A statement such as this one cannot do justice to a case that we have prepared elaborately, brought to this House and this House has referred to the committee.

So, Madam Speaker, I pray that you make a ruling that enables the chairperson to bring reports to this House so that he does not have to keep reports for over three or four months for whatever the reason.  Whether he does not approve them, let the House be told.  I thank you.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the Minister. I am actually at a loss that is why I am seeking your guidance. At the beginning on the first page the chairperson actually reported these loans, which Government is seeking, they are under his jurisdiction. And actually when you read the statement he has presented to us, it looks as if it is the Executive, which has delayed him. At the end it alleges that maybe somebody – and that is why I wanted the Minister to name the person.  

Somebody was alleging that the chairperson does not want to approve these loans, and at the end of the day - You remember, Madam Speaker, yesterday you guided us that he was supposed to make a statement as the chairperson, but now he has the support of the committee. The committee Members acknowledged and signed. They are five and that is the third, even in this House we are not 303, so he has the majority; he has the quorum as far as the report is concerned. So my worry is, I want hon. Nandala Mafabi or the Minister or you, Madam Speaker, to guide us whether hon. Nandala Mafabi is being pushed by somebody or –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this status statement was prompted by inquiries from the Speaker and myself about why there appear to be delays. Thus he was responding to the queries of the Speaker, and yet under the rules all your committees are required to report to this House.  So I want the report of the National Economy Committee. Either your first or second report, I can give you time on Wednesday, we handle it and have a fully-fledged debate because you are supposed to report to this House.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is true and I think all the time I have attended the Business Committee meeting, we have mentioned that we need to put this report to the House. I recall one time we were on the Order Paper and under “Business to follow”. I had anticipated it would follow immediately, but it has never followed. But on Wednesday we will have no problem.

But, Madam Speaker, in fact if I had asked the committee to bring this reports that we reject, I think that is when the Minister of Finance as he has stated would have said I am interested in this Government, because I have been so kind, asking and asking, and I have written for this information.  Madam Speaker, there is no way politics come in a development programme. I want to assure you, Mr Minister and my colleagues, that there is no politics in these loans. It is unfortunate that –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Nandala Mafabi, for giving way. I was a Member of the Committee on National Economy in the 6th Parliament under the able leadership of hon. Musumba. Madam Speaker, I want to state without fear or favour that this Committee on National Economy saved this country by questioning the Power Purchase Agreement, which was about to be signed for Bujagali.  

Madam Speaker, even when accusations are made that Parliament sabotaged, I still insist that the committee of the 6th Parliament saved this country because there were so many conditionalities. If we had signed, we would have lost our sovereignity already.  

So, Madam Speaker, this is not the first time that the Committee of National Economy could be accused of dilly-dallying. They could be asking genuine questions in order not to throw the country into problems and somebody somewhere does not provide necessary answers. I want to concur with you, Madam Speaker, that the committee must bring a report and then we adequately debate it. Otherwise I am sure the Committee on National Economy as regards the loans will keep getting those accusations and I want to encourage them to be firm.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon Nandala, let me also allay your fears. You know on one or two occasions you have recommended rejection and this House has gone with you. So you have my full protection in this matter. So do not fear to bring the reports whether for approval or for rejection.

MR NANDALA MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, I want to assure you that by Tuesday you will have these reports with -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you Madam Speaker. I am seeking guidance. I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and the chairperson has put the facts on the table as to which information we have been waiting for. Some information is coming; some has not come. So, Madam Speaker, the kind of report that you want from our committee, Wednesday is too short a time for us to have scrutinized these loans. So requesting the committee to come up with a hurried report for approval or disapproval - What you expect us to come up with these kinds of loans that are being reported to us? - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yesterday I had a meeting with your chairperson over these matters and he says has reports, which are ready. So that is what I am asking him. Please bring what is ready and we debate them.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the report we shall have for the Committee of National Economy I have assured you under my able leadership on Wednesday will be here. But Members, I want you to look at this document with possible attitude and see where the committee has erred. But all in all, the committee is on the right channel and the reason is that, the Executive does not come to the committee, they go to the head of the institution for pressure -(Interruption)

MR BEN WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I respect your ruling that this committee should come with whatever report it has ready so that it is discussed before this House.  But I also see, Madam Speaker, that the chairperson of the committee has raised a number of fundamental issues in this document. I do not want us to be diverted by statements such as: “The chairperson is dilly-dallying because he does not support government”.  I think that is intimidation and should be rejected by this House. 

Each and everyone of us has a political thinking and a political line, but that does not stop us from handling matters of this House. Various issues of import are raised in this document, certain loans were approved and they have not been utilized; certain documents are required and they have not been provided. 

What I would have expected the minister to say is that, he is going to give answers to what was raised in this matter so that when we are discussing the report of the committee we have background information why the minister has not utilized the loans; why certain loans are still in abeyance; why certain documents are missing; why they themselves do not act fast enough so that the committee provides us with whatever information we want. I want the minister to rise up and say he is going to provide answers to issues, which are raised in this document.

MR ISAAC MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, the minister has risen and I am saying that when the chairperson comes with a comprehensive report of the position on each of these loans, definitely, I will give detailed answers to this House. Whatever has been stated here has a complete history and genesis and there is an answer to each of the issues raised here.  But many of these were raised merely as examples and I am saying that I am inviting the chairperson to bring a report on each of these matters and we shall appropriately respond to this House. It is me inviting myself to make these statements to this House.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me assure this House that we shall do two things on Wednesday: we shall discuss the report, which you will present and we shall also deal with this matter. So expect a response to the report and a response to this specific matter.     

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry that I am coming in at this point when you closing this matter. I was of the view that the minister listens to other concerns on this statement such that when he comes on that day, he has ready answers for them. Instead of us raising the questions again, let us ask him to bring another day or he may not be ready because, as per now, the minister may not be in position to answer all the questions here. There are so many questions on loans, which we approved in 2001. 

For example, we approved a loan on landing sites and Kasilo County was a beneficiary of three modern landing sites. I even worked hard to get the land titles for these areas but up to now nothing has taken place. Madam Speaker, I beg that we give more questions to the hon minister such that on Wednesday when he comes, he will be in a position to answer. Thank you

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we sat as a Commission yesterday and we agreed that we should operate in a more organised manner. So we want to give that day just for reports and deal with these reports and do nothing else. This one is a statement, which they obliged to make because of our queries, but we want to have a day specifically just to deal with reports and nothing else.  So on Wednesday, you can raise all the questions you want.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, in view of rule 36.2 of our rules of procedure, which says, “Any Statement other than Personal Explanation may be commented upon by the other Members for a limited duration of time”. I am seeking your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that some Members of this House may have comments of a general nature on the statement as it stands now; couldn’t it be possible, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that rule says you comment for about 30 minutes but I determine which 30 minutes and when. So those comments will come on Wednesday, if necessary we start in the morning and spend the whole day on this matter of national economy. 

MR AWORI: I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker, as a Chairperson of this august House, especially in reference to the last paragraph of page 5. I think it is absolutely unfair to you and Members of this august House for the Government to come up with such a devastating statement that our loan portfolio is not sustainable. Why do they come to us for approval knowing very well what we have borrowed? Is it fair to you really, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall handle all that on Wednesday. So, hon. Nandala Mafabi and your committee, be ready on Wednesday. Minister of Finance, you come here at 9.30 a.m. in the morning.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, we are very interested to be here and the relevant questions may clarify issues, which have been raised. Since on Wednesdays we hold our Cabinet meetings, I would request that we meet in the afternoon so that we hold our Cabinet meeting in the morning and in the afternoon we shall be available to clarify and remove any misunderstandings, which have been portrayed.  I thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am convinced about your guidance for Wednesday, but I would like an assurance first from the chairperson of the committee, that he is able to satisfy this House with his report, which he will bring on Wednesday if information is denied him as he has stated in his report. It is important for us to know whether he can do without that information. If he cannot do without that information, Madam Speaker, can we have the assurance and the commitment of the Minister of Finance here and now that he will provide that information for purposes of Wednesday, Madam Speaker?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I was imagining the report we are to present is just a general overview about the performance of the economy, about the loans and whatever, but not coming here for approval of loans on Wednesday.  So, I think the report of the committee is not about loan approval.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is nothing for approval; nothing is pending approval because nothing is ready. What we are going to examine is how the committee has been working, what the ministry has been doing or not doing, that is what we are going to examine, and how they have been doing it. Hon. Nandala Mafabi, please keep the Minister company there.  (Laughter)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure requesting that your Chair gives me opportunity to present the matter of urgent importance to this House with respect to what has come out in the Press today about the increment of tuition fees in Makerere University.  Madam Speaker –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there five members who believe that that matter is of importance? You see, when he moves like that, five Members must stand up to confirm that the matter is important.  Okay, you can present it.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, in today’s Press, mainly The Weekly Observer issue No.047, there is on the main page an article referring to the rise in fees in Makerere University, and the rises are stated as follows. The current fee for the Faculty of Agriculture per semester is Uganda Shs 665,000; it has been raised to Uganda Shs 1,078,750; Science has been raised from Uganda Shs 655,000 to Uganda Shs 1,178,750; Medicine from Uganda Shs 1,015,000 to Uganda Shs 1,698,750; Institute of Psychology, from Uganda Shs 655,000 to Uganda Shs 1,041,250  –(Interruption)

MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA: Madam Speaker, I feel a little bit uncomfortable.  First of all, the Chancellor of this Institution is here; secondly the Minister, the Lady who has been praised for almost a month now, is also here.  Is it really fair for the presenter to give us a newspaper report because sometimes so many articles have been written in newspaper and they are not factual?  So, is it really in order for us not to give the chance to the Minister, not to give a chance to the Prime Minister to give us a factual report rather than using a newspaper report? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The good Minister and the Chancellor of the University has not also volunteered. So, I think what the hon. Member has said and Members stood up is important, they will want to elicit an answer from the Minister.  So, let him raise the query then we shall find out.  

CAPT. BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, Rule 55, says “Subject to these rules, Members shall not read newspapers or periodicals or books in Chambers except when the matters in them are directly connected with the business of the House.” Is it in order for him to read a newspaper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is something that has come to the attention of the Members of this House through the Press. So he is not reading, he is just quoting from what is in the papers.

MR ERESU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that very wise ruling. May you live longer. I did not know we had so may other agents of – well, let me proceed. In other words, for a student to be admitted for a bachelor of arts, he will now have to pay Shs 6,700,000 - according to the new fees - from the current Shs 5,200,000. For medicine, if the new fees structure is to work, it would mean each student will have to pay Shs 21.2 million, from admission of 2005/2006 academic year, from the current Shs 13.2 million. A student admitted to do veterinary medicine will have to pay Shs 18 million, from the current Shs 10 million. 

And when you are admitted to Makerere University there is what they call functional fees. These functional fees include the cost for application, the cost for registration, certificate, graduation, et cetera. For the undergraduate students, it means they will have to shift from paying Shs 214,200 to Shs 403,000. The postgraduate students will no longer pay Shs 548,200 but Shs 1,023,000 million. The foreign students will have to pay, from the old rate –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, not long ago you made a ruling on the matter. Really the honourable colleague brought it to the attention of the august House saying that it is a matter of national importance and urgency. The way you have presented it, I would go along with the position of the Speaker that you put it to the relevant minister and the chancellor in his other capacity. Are the two officials concerned with higher education aware of this concern? Without going into details, can you react to that? Are you aware of any situation pertaining to school fees at Makerere? Just react; you are a professor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us summarize this way: there is concern from members of the public and the House about information that is circulating to the effect that there has been a hike in the fees structure at Makerere University. It has now been brought to your attention. Can we get the attention of our distinguished minister seated beside the chancellor?

4.53
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have noted the concern as raised by the colleague. I would like to say that we are studying the situation and I will be coming with a detailed report here next Thursday. I thank you. 

MRS SENINDE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In addition to what my colleague has just said, it is important that we take note that a number of students at the university were refused to sit for their examinations just because they had balances on school fees. We are all aware that our people are poor and the Government is struggling so much to get our people out of poverty. But what is going to happen if all these students are refused to sit examinations? 

I would like the honourable minister to help us understand what is going to be done to those students because they will have to pay school fees for the next years. The minister must also explain this because our people are crying because we know they are poor and they do not have the money to pay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not - now we are stampeding the minister.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Just one second, Madam Speaker. Now that this concern has come up, I would like to take you back to the statement that I once made here. This is actually not only about fees but also about the open corruption that is going on. For example, there are so many people who have already graduated at the university and they cannot get their certificates because they are not able to give some money to the academic registrar. (Laughter). Yes, so everything should actually be overhauled. That is what is happening at the university -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Is the honourable member in order to make such a serious allegation without showing proof? Is he in order to make such a devastating statement without substantiating it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Alintuma, you know you are talking about somebody who is not in this House, and who cannot answer back. I do not know whether the sessional committees will sit but that might be in June. So, the gentleman or lady may not have a chance to answer back till then. Can you substantiate what you have said?

MR ALINTUMA: Madam Speaker, if the chancellor is convinced that everything is in order and that there is no corruption and that you can get your papers without giving money under the desk, I withdraw the statement. Let him run it like that; we shall not talk about it and we shall see if we really get the best of everything. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you can talk about her at the right time. So, hon. Minister of Education, on Thursday we will give you time for your statement. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE WHITE PAPER

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you walking out on me?

5.00
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to make a few comments on the White Paper. I must thank the chairman in a special way for this report presented, of course not forgetting the committee members because without the members the report would not have come. The chairperson did say they allayed the fears of those who were opposed to members moving to this committee, but I think this gave you encouragement to produce this type of report. I am very delighted that that resistance came in and it made you perform to the best of your performance. Madam Speaker, can you protect me from my former university secretary here, hon. Tibarimbasa?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know you have only ten minutes, so –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Sure? I will not even use up more than ten minutes.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are protected. Please leave him, let him present. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I cannot be intimidated by hon. Tibarimbasa because he knows what I did to him. He remembers it so I think that is why he is trying to revenge. 

The report sets a challenge for this House. It is the time that we Members of Parliament are going to be tested, and it is my prayer that we shall live up to the expectations of the public. There is a saying in Teso that, “It is only when the toad is dead that its length will be known.” So this is a challenge to us. It is not until we live to the expectations of the people that the people will believe in us.

I did consultations on this matter of the White Paper. There were concerns from the public. One, which was key, was that the Government had kept them out of the know on the Constitution. This Constitution was supposed to have been translated, they are supposed to have explained, civic education should have been done but now to come and ambush them when we want to amend it, when they have very little knowledge about what the Constitution of Uganda means to them, their prayer is that when we do amend this Constitution, let this Constitution be explained. Let civic education be done, let it be translated such that they do understand. 

Madam Speaker, I ended up being a consultant because they were not fully knowledgeable about what is at stake. Most people had heard only of the third term. That is what they had been told because that is the only thing that caught the eyes and the ears of so many people, and that is the message that has been going around. Their appeal to the Government is that the Constitution must be explained and translated to enable them to give their views.

The issue of land was a controversial, touchy issue not only in Kasilo County but also in the whole of Teso. The problems that most countries have faced and that have taken long to resolve are a result of the land issue. We can quote Israel, Palestine, Zimbabwe, in Kenya of recent the Masai are up in arms over the land, which was taken. Nigeria is another case in point. It is only when the market forces have failed that government should really come in to intervene. I do not know whether the market forces have failed to allocate land in this country. 

We are asking, has there been any problem, has government failed to acquire land for investment in this country? If there is any such case, can they state it that when government wanted land for investment it failed to acquire land? If there is no such case, the Constitution as regards that article that affects land should remain the way it is. Let the market forces determine the allocation of land in this country.

This issue of land even escalated further when some strange people appeared in Soroti County saying that they were surveying land. They were beaten and they were cut. We have even raised that issue here such that it is clarified upon, but no minister from the Ministry of Lands has come to clarify and yet these people, including the leaders in that county, are lying in Soroti Hospital nursing injuries. 

Madam Speaker, we still insist we need a statement. We need to be clarified. What project was this that these people were carrying out? What were they surveying land for without the knowledge of the leaders, without the knowledge of Members of Parliament? We were not informed, and we are not aware of it. So, when we were asked about it during the consultation, we did not know. We need a clarification on that.  

On movement from the Movement to the Multi-party System, we have joined the East African Community. The feeling is that we must harmonise the policies, including the political policies. To them this is a welcome idea that we move from the Movement to the Multi-party System such that we are at par with other countries that are in the East African Community.  

On the issue of the politics on harmonizing the policies as we move towards that, the same should apply to the term limits. Our sister countries, Kenya and Tanzania, have the term limits and have five-year term limits. They are of the view this must equally apply to Uganda if we are to move together with our colleagues, if we are to sustain the East African Community. And this is further strengthened by the committee’s preamble where they talk about considering the globalization that is happening in our region. So, they feel this is the time for us to harmonise all the policies.

On the issue of whether we should open up, that was their view. We have gone further to ask that have we tried this Article and it failed? How can we change something that we have not tried, which has not failed? So, the issue of the term limit should remain as it is. 

This was further aggravated by the statement that was in the press from hon. Muzoora when he did say that they must fight. There was a prophecy that power must remain in the West for the next 50 years. This worsened the debate on the issue of opening up. So, they are of the view that the term limit must remain the way it is in the Constitution. 

Of course there are somebody’s selfish interests - now if we leave things open-ended, do we have a chance of having you, Okupa Elijah, as our Member of Parliament now to be a President in future? Because there must be term limits such that there is room for us to also join in. So, these are selfish interests but of course which carry some weight.

When we refer to the Sempebwa Commission, it is only 38.4 percent who supported the opening up of the term limits - from the public hearing. From the memoranda that were submitted, it was only 37.7 –(Interruption) 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, the Government has been listening very carefully concerning the issue of compulsory acquisition of land by Government for investors, the one requiring the amendment of Article 26. Having listened to you carefully, we have dropped this matter. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it means that you need not belabour that matter anymore.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to seek clarification from the hon. Prime Minister. Can you assure this House and give us a guarantee that never again in future will the Government seek compulsory acquisition of land? We have been pursuing this matter for a very long time, so I hope that you are not doing it purely for Kisanja. Can you give us assurance that the Government will never again demand compulsory acquisition of land for investors?

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since this debate is all encompassing, could the Prime Minister now tell us areas that they have removed, so that we do not handle them in the debate anymore?

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, this is in support of what hon. Ben Wacha has just asked but in particular, besides the land issue, there have been very strong sentiments expressed on issues regarding resolution of Parliament and equal opportunities – yes, limited legislative powers for the President. I think the kisanja thing was a bit, I do not know. For those three, could the Prime Minister - since he has information - comment on those three? I thank you.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. How can I give a guarantee that the matter may never be raised again? I would be very unreasonable because these matters are contextual. We may arrive at a level of development when it may be necessary. So, I can never guarantee. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is one of my best friends; I cannot guarantee that. All I can say is that we have been listening to you and we reconciled this matter and dropped it.

As you know, I am not a walking dictionary to remember all the issues, but I want to pay tribute to hon. Oulanyah because the report was excellent. (Applause) The issue of dissolving Parliament, not only Parliament but also the Presidency, we have also accepted the proposal of the referendum. Initially the proposal was that if there is a matter of confidence and disagreement, then Parliament should be dissolved and also the presidency should be dissolved. But we listened carefully because the Oulanyah Report recommended that the matter can be put to the referendum and we have accepted that one. I am not in position to comment on other issues. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you Prime Minister for having listened to the voices of people on the issue of land to the extent that now you have withdrawn it. We are very grateful for that.

I am about to conclude. I was saying, on the issue of the term limit that from the public hearings cited in the Sempebwa Report, 38.4 percent were the ones who supported the lifting of the term limit. From the memoranda it is only 37.7 percent that supported the lifting of the term limits. Can we listen to the voices of the people? We are always saying, “The people have said this; and power belongs to the people”. Can we listen to the people as regards that Article? That is what is contained in the people’s report, which Sempebwa presented to this House. This is the one I am talking about. Madam Speaker, I do not know what is happening to the honourable member here, moreover he is even near me. I was saying on the term limit, this is what they said. I can refer you to the report.

When the right time comes for us to make amendments, I am going to move amendments to ask members here that we do include in our Constitution specific duties for the Deputy Speaker in the Constitution. I will give reasons at that time. Madam Speaker, I beg that I be given time to explain and give reasons why I am of that view that we put specific duties of the Deputy Speaker in the Constitution. 

The people of Teso also asked me, when the time comes to amend schedule I, to include and refer to the districts of Teso as the districts of “Soroti of Teso”, and not the way it is in the Constitution.

On the issue of dissolving the Parliament when they have disagreed or reached a deadlock with the President –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That has been resolved.

MR OKUPA: Members are in a hurry to put words in my mouth, but I had married it with the one saying that there should be an external body to determine the emoluments of this Parliament. I am happy that government has withdrawn the other part because this is what really measures the strength of independence of Members of Parliament, the political and economic independence. To come and say that they want to remove the political and economic independence, I am not supportive of that idea because that would mean everything would be gone.

On the death penalty, that must be scrapped. They say we must have life imprisonment. As Christians you know the commandments. Those are the views of the people of Kasilo. I am talking on their behalf. If hon. Tibarimbasa is insisting it should be there, these are my views.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR OKUPA: Finally, the time has run out. I must thank the committee. The people of Kasilo do agree with the recommendations of the committee on federo, cultural leaders, Kishwahili and dual citizenship. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.18
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I rise to support the motion and thank the committee for the work they did. Madam Speaker, the trend of the debate on this report has more or less been to give an account of what our people in various constituencies said when we consulted them. I will not follow that trend myself because I am still consulting. 

Our people have already been consulted on a number of times. Ugandans, if you wish to call them that, have met a number of times to discuss the destiny of this country before and after independence. Every time they sit down to discuss, they come out with something. No sooner have they come out with something than we, Ugandans again, sit and say, “This document or this decision they have made is wrong”. 

This exercise, which we underwent, took a lot of time. For over three years people were consulted, a commission was set up, went all over the country and consulted people. I was involved in the exercise of consulting people. People came up with views, and reports were made. Ugandans elected their representatives, they came here to Kampala to make a Constitution and indeed they did. They made this document, which we call our Constitution, and it was highly praised: “This is the document, this is the Constitution, the first of its kind in Uganda, made by Ugandans, by the people. Other Constitutions were not made by the people, but this one …”. 

Hardly ten years down the road, a parliamentary committee of the Seventh Parliament comes up with a report. Is it necessary to review this document made by the people? The answer is, yes. Why? This document is riddled with so many defects. This document suffers from several inadequacies -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me really appeal to you that unless it is maybe a point of order, allow others to submit. Members have only ten minutes.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, when a highly praised document like this, made by the people of this country, is found to be lacking in so many respects and is full of defects and inadequacies thus warranting Ugandans to again sit and do an overhaul - in fact what we are going to do is privileged. We are privileged that we are sitting here to overhaul the entire Constitution because when you read the report and see how many provisions, which need our attention, which need to be reviewed, then you wonder what happened to the Constituent Assembly Delegates who represented us in the Constituent Assembly. 

Nobody has come up to say, “No, we did a very wonderful job, do not touch it. We really took up the aspirations of the people and we made the peoples’ Constitution, why do you touch it? Do not touch it”. All of them are saying, “Overhaul the whole thing” and we are going to overhaul it.

This is not the first time Ugandans have sat and decided on certain things, which have been rendered useless thereafter. If we sit here and try to overhaul this Constitution, maybe we shall fall in the same pit. We could overhaul the Constitution and not long after people will again sit here and writing a report that they overhaul it as it is full of defects and inadequacies. Then one would ask, “What has happened?”  

Some of the honourable members who have contributed asked, “Why should we come here every time? Why should Uganda consider making a Constitution?”  Making a Constitution means that you are still looking at the destiny of your country afresh every time, so why this? There must be something wrong, and this committee has provided part of the answer to that problem. 

Members have said that in order to handle some of these considered very contentious issues, we need to have utmost good faith. In the absence of good faith, we cannot do much. “My people in the constituency have said”, yes, they have said but when we come here what do we do? Do we do what our people say? In most cases we do not. 

I was not a delegate but I hear that when we elected these CADs and they came here, they formed cliques, caucuses, groupings and adopted other interests upon which they made decisions hence the document we got, which is riddled with many defects and inadequacies –(Interjection)- -(Mr Eresu rose)- Madam Speaker, hon. Eresu at one time was a delegate and he moved a motion, I hear he moved a motion on federo and it failed. I am coming to that -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Thank you very much, hon. Kiwalabye for allowing me to give this information for the benefit the constitutional review process. The Constituent Assembly Delegates who wrote the Constitution out of the Odoki Draft Report were committed citizens of this country with good intentions to make sure that this country for once remains stable. That is the reason the Constitution was made and we have lived this long. 

Mindful of that, Madam Speaker, the Constituent Assembly Delegates left room open for this Constitution to be reviewed from time to time, taking into account the changes that would take place in this country that would demand a modification of the Constitution to suit those new changes. That is a good development for any society, which is progressive and any society, which accepts constitutionalism. If the Constitution remains static and the wishes of the people change, then the Constitution will be acting and the Constitution will be creating enabling laws, which are not in consonance with the wishes of the people.  

Finally, I would like to inform my dear colleague that he has alluded to the fact that I moved a motion on federo. Yes, I did on the 28th of March 1995 and unfortunately the motion collapsed not because I did not move it but because those who thought that they would be beneficiaries refused it. I had no power to command people to support my motion but only requested them to do so. If they rejected it, that was a democratic process by which the Constitution was being written. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kiwalabye, you have one minute.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, the information was for all of us, it was not for me. (Laughter) All that I am saying is that the issues, which dominated the conferences, the meetings, the assemblies, are the same issues that are at stake now. Why? Because we are lacking good faith when we are debating these issues. If the delegates, as he says, came here and formed cliques and resolved issues in part basing on the interests of the cliques and forgot the people who sent them, then the document they came up with could not be sustained hence the need to overhaul it.  

It is also reported that even the minister who was in charge of the process retorted that certain provisions were smuggled into the document. Another member here on this Floor of the Seventh Parliament acknowledged that certain contentious provisions were smuggled into the Constitution. Then you wonder whether there was good faith when people were sitting to make the Constitution? Even in this Seventh Parliament if we do not resolve issues in good faith we shall not do anything for the good of this country.  

The issue of federalism finally, it was there before independence and it dominated the London Conferences. In 1962 it was thought the matter was resolved because each constituent state opted for the relationship it would have with the central government. Some opted for a federo system of government, others semi-federal, while others unitary, and this was the situation. It went on nicely - to me - until 1967 when the pigeonhole Constitution was introduced. People signed it even without looking at it, in good faith.  

If Ugandans are now putting their faith in us and we decide to act the way our predecessors acted - not in good faith - we are wasting people’s time. We are wasting taxpayers’ money for nothing. We must resolve to act in good faith and we put in place – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have spoken for 15 minutes now.

MR KIWALABYE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.34
MR RICHARD MUKULA (Bunghoko County North, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank the committee for work well done. We are here today trying to make a review of our Constitution. We are reviewing our Constitution because conditions have demanded that we must review it. The public is looking at us and at the end of the day would like to see which type of Constitution we will have made.  

Here we are, there are very many contentious issues in this Constitution. There are very many contentious issues that the White Paper brought out, and there are very many contentious issues that we need to resolve. We should resolve them in the interest of the nation. If we do so then we shall stand and even our great grandsons and daughters shall stand to respect us. If we do it because of our selfish interests, if we do it because the majority have taken it and the minority have not accepted, Madam Speaker and honourable members, what we are going to do here would be a disservice to this nation.

I will start with the issue that most people have called contentious, the lifting of the presidential term limit. I will dwell on that because most people have considered that lifting the presidential term limit is the most contentious issue in this constitutional review process.

What do we need to ask ourselves? Will the lifting of the presidential term limit or maintaining it lead to the development, protection and security of this nation? The question of the day is not who wins but how do we end up? Even when the majority has won, the minority must accept. Otherwise, the minority might resist. There are people who think the lifting will cause problems and others who think not lifting the presidential term limit will lead to prosperity. We need to agree for the good of this nation.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, what do we need to do at this moment? We need to ask ourselves which institutions need putting right such that whether you lift the term limit or you do not lift the term limit we shall remain peaceful as Ugandans. (Applause). The issue of lifting it because our people have demanded lifting, we must really ask ourselves, if my people have demanded for lifting the presidential term limit, I accept that they have demanded for that. But what about those who are saying they do not need a presidential term limit lifted? We must accommodate them and look for a way out at the end of the day not because we have taken the day but they must accept that they have lost and accept it for the good of the nation. They should not accept for the good of all and then go and cause havoc, but we must come up with an amicable solution. Let us not sit here –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Kevin Scott said that one of the major and general concepts of management of society are as follows; “The situation analysis of the environment depends on where you came from, where you are and where you want to go.” What do we need as Ugandans today? Do we need to do a thorough job and we stay in peace? How do we co-exist in our environment, those who are opposing and those ones who are not opposing? What is the solution? 

The challenge is for us Members of Parliament, as hon. Kiwalabye has said, to co-exist. This is the way forward. We should be cautious, think twice and we come up with the best solution of this country for the development and governance of this country. Thank you. (Laughter).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are abusing the time of your colleagues. You are giving a solution but you made your submission on his time.

MR MUKULA: Thank you very much hon. Kakooza but you have not provided a way forward. Since the question is before us, I expect that honourable members must come up with a solution. Very many issues have been talked about but to me I prefer to spend most of my time to handle the so-called contentious matter. I call it contentious because everywhere it is what people are trying to debate.

On page 29 of the report where the committee reported, I quote; “There are consequently very serious reasons as to why this proposal needs to be revisited as its politically related implications are quite dire for the country. But there is also considerable potential for turmoil in the event that the measure is defeated in Parliament.”

While we are here we must ask ourselves, whoever is preparing to replace President Museveni must ask himself is President Museveni ready to be replaced? (Laughter) We must ask ourselves because those are the questions of the day whether in the Movement or from opposition. We should ask ourselves, as we prepare to replace him, is he ready to be replaced? Those are the questions for which we need solutions and answers. 

Otherwise, if we sit here and think we shall open the presidential term limit or close it without thinking and try to plan ahead, we are wasting our time. At the end of the day we will have done no work for this nation, and our people are waiting to see.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, in accordance with out Constitution, which is still guiding us and which is supreme until we have changed it, Article 1 says, “All power belongs to the people.” As if that were not enough, Article 20 of the same constitution says, “Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are inherent and are not granted by the State.” That means, among the fundamental rights mentioned is the right to contest government. 

Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to create an anthill, as if the man he is referring to is not fightable in law? Is that statement not taking us backwards in accordance to the constitutional provisions I have read? Is he in order to make such insinuations, which could even lead us into turmoil, when people know that there are no chances to contest government tomorrow? What is he talking about? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Lukyamuzi, the Constitution does not operate in a vacuum. The honourable member is analyzing the environment in which this Constitution is operating, and he is quite in order. You go ahead.

MR RICHARD MUKULA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will conclude. Honorable members, let us make a Constitution, let us listen to the views of the minority; that when the majority win at the end of the day, the minority must accept it. If we did that then we will have made a Constitution for Ugandans, not a Constitution for a party, not a Constitution because of selfish needs. I will conclude and thank all of you. For God and my country.

5.44
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to my colleagues’ and thank the committee for a well-written report. I am here to represent the views of the people of Adjumani District. My colleague, the Rt. Hon. Moses Ali and I consulted the people of Adjumani widely; I do not know whether ten minutes will be enough for me to represent their views but I will just present the most contentious and most important issues as far as far the people of Adjumani are concerned.  

First, the people of Adjumani agree with government on the issue of returning power to the people and making results of the referendum binding. In order to have this provision workable in this country, the people of Adjumani also request that Article 4 of the Constitution on the promotion of public awareness of the Constitution, translating the Constitution into local languages and teaching it widely, should be implemented. Therefore, the Constitution must be properly popularized in order to respect the people’s rights and empower them to protect their rights. This would enhance Article 29 on the protection of freedom of conscience and expression, and Article 36 on the rights of minorities among other provisions in the Constitution.

On the issue of term limits the people of Adjumani District say the term limits should be lifted. The people of Adjumani feel they are competent enough to make a wise decision during any election as they have done before. They should be free to make a decision by voting in and out, a president or any other leader, and those who think that people in Uganda or they in Adjumani are being manipulated during elections, are simply insulting them and their intelligence. They are intelligent enough to decide who should rule or govern them. 

The opposite would be an insult to their ability to rationalize issues during elections and that no amount of intimidation - for example the Reform Agenda during the 2001 elections tried to intimidate the people of Adjumani telling them that if President Museveni was voted again there would be an even more serious war in this country than the LRA war. Where is that war now? The Reform Agenda was a liar, and the people say they listened to the Reform Agenda but they voted wisely for the president of their interest.  

Therefore, I bring this issue because it is related to the term limit and the third term. Most of my colleagues who stood here to talk were referring to the issue of the third term and term limits. To many people the third term is related to a third term for President Museveni. 

Actually many people were asking me, “If we change the political system and we also lift the presidential term limit, will President Museveni stand again; because we still want him?” That is their view. Also, that many leaders have been elected in and out even after their first election. So if we lift the term limit people will decide in future for how many terms a president will rule them after President Museveni. That means to them, whether we lift the term limit or not, we must find a way for President Museveni to continue ruling this country.

On the issue of resignation of candidates -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you take clarification?

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, will you give me more time? If you will not, I beg to continue.

On the issue of resignation of candidates upon seeking nomination for political office, the majority of the people say they should resign if we go for the multi-party political system in this country, except for the civil servants whom we also consulted. The civil servants say that we should also think about them. If they resign and went into elections and lost, what will happen to them? We should think about that, Madam Speaker.

On the issue of Members of Parliament who are appointed as ministers to vacate their Parliamentary seats, the people said no to this. They want their Members of Parliament to continue serving even when they are appointed as ministers.

I want to talk about the issues in local governance. On the appointment of chief administrative officers, the people of Adjumani, by consensus, say these officers should be appointed by the district service commission. However, they raised some other views. 

First, they said they are well aware that district local councils unduly influence the appointments of chief administrative officers and other officers, and that chief administrative officers are easily corrupted by some district local councilors among other issues. But they are requesting Parliament to amend the Local Governments Act. 

Instead of having the chief administrative officers appointed by the center, the Local Governments Act should be modified. Clause 14(1)(e) of the Act should be amended so that we make the district service commission and the district local council more independent. We should revisit the excessive powers of the district local council chairman.

On regional governance or federalism, the people of Adjumani are not in favor of federalism. They are not in favor of regional governments either. They are contented with the decentralization system and they have asked me - and this appeal goes to the Baganda Members of Parliament – please, listen to what the people of Adjumani say. The people of Adjumani say –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, this is a national Parliament. It embodies diverse people and diverse views. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to overemphasize the Baganda as if they are the ones occupying this whole House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I believe the member was addressing the proponents of federo, who happen to be those people.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Are Baganda the only proponents of federo?

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Okay, this goes to the proponents of federalism, but mainly Buganda because we have heard from the press the Baganda urging for the federal system of governance and yet in the White Paper there is something to do with the regional tier. So they say, Buganda cannot and should be granted any special status whatsoever. We are a republic and a uniform system of governance is palatable for this country. We should not have different systems in one area, another system in another –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, we should be orderly. It is on record that some time back the Katikkiro of Buganda led a big group of people to come to town and introduce their views to the Sempebwa Commission. It is also on record in literature that in that submission there is nothing like a demand for federo for only the Baganda. 

The Baganda have been very open, they would like a federal arrangement, which accommodates all the regions of Buganda. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to put words in the mouth of the Katikkiro, who is not here to defend himself, or myself, a proponent of federalism in a very disorderly and faulty manner? Is she in order and is she a nationalist? I am perturbed and disappointed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, it is now your responsibility to convince hon. Eriyo about that good thing called federo. You convince her; it is your work now to convince her. Please, wind up.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Precisely, the next point I was going to say is that the people of Adjumani say they have not understood this issue. The proponents of federalism must explain to the country properly exactly what they want, because I am sure even in the House many people are still confused about this issue. We need to understand it.  

They even say having a regional government will increase administrative costs. In West Nile we have what we call the Mayan, an association of the chairpersons of the districts of West Nile, and the chair rotates from district to district. In their meetings they agree on issues related to the region and, therefore, they say that kind of arrangement should continue. If the rest of the country wants to borrow, they should borrow that kind of system.

The last point is on the issue of the death penalty. The issue of the death penalty was very contentious because as you know over 90 percent of my people are Catholics. In the Catholic faith we do not think that taking away anybody’s life is our duty. It is God who should take away the lives of people. The people who commit murder and some who are actually in prison who were convicted of murder are not necessarily killers. Some of them may not have killed, some of them are innocent and so this issue should have consideration. Thank you.

5.58
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the work they did in as far as presenting this good report is concerned. I would like to thank government for having submitted the White Paper, which helped us to reach out to the communities to gather the views, which colleagues have submitted elaborately for the last one and a half weeks.  

Allow me to also present the views from Kakuuto County. The people of Kakuuto have appreciated the views in the White Paper together with the views of the Sempebwa Report and as we conclude it with the committee report, I have a few issues to raise as far as some of the recommendations are concerned.

The very first one concerns the chief administrative officers. The Sempebwa Report recommends a combination of the local government, local district service commission, and the Public Service Commission to identify and jointly appoint the chief administrative officers. However, the Government rejects the position. But the recommendation the committee makes worries me. The committee recommends that Article 188(2) should be amended in the terms proposed by government. The main rationale of this is that the level of embezzlement - I would like to emphasize “the level of embezzlement”, and corruption at the district, is alarming. 

While the diagnosis may be correct, the proposed prescription is fundamentally and politically fraught with problems. This one confuses me a bit.  

The committee goes ahead to commend government’s position but it finds that the prescription is not a solution to the problem. If we are to continue to support the policy of decentralization, we need to devolve power to the local authorities. It would be very dangerous to pull back the appointment of the chief administrative officer when at the same time the accounting officers are to be appointed by the Ministry of Finance, the Resident District Commissioners (RDCS) are appointed from the center, and the DISOs are appointed from the center. Then the essence of decentralization would totally be lost. 

So, my people have sent me to emphasize that much as there are problems in decentralization, we need to improve the efficiency and the mechanism, which will improve on the monitoring and the strengthening of reprimanding the various officers who are appointed by the local authorities.

There were a number of crosscutting issues, which my voters sent me to present. Considering the time limit we were given to go and gather views vis-à-vis the time given for civic education, there was no deliberate policy to carry out civic education in this country. Other than what we call election education, there is no policy on civic education whereby the roles of a citizen are explained explicitly to the people. 

What are the roles of the various levels of leadership we have introduced in this country and the various national interests? How are we building national interest if there is no civic education? It came out as a prominent issue. We need to develop a system whereby civic education is not only done towards the election processes.

Then on the Constitution, this has not been translated into any language. I have with me here the World Commission Report of 1959, which I am about to consult; but it is in Luganda. Forty-six years ago we were able to translate some of the documents to the local languages, but we are not able to translate documents, even the laws we make here? I am glad I have been a beneficiary of the Land Act, which was translated into the various languages, but there is no deliberate national policy to ensure that all the laws are given the necessary translation such that the people are able to take informed decisions. 

Whenever people go against the law, they are just read to them in courts when they are culprits. So, translation of the national laws, especially of the Constitution, is the mandate of this country. It is enshrined in the Constitution itself, so we must implement that Act so that we are able to inform the people very well.  

On the aspect of moving from the Movement system of government to the multi-party system the people have told me, since you have already taken the decision in Kyankwanzi, why then go for a referendum? That is the question. Otherwise, they are willing although there are those who are hesitant. The Movement system of government has been good for the last 19 years and they were even questioning me that since you said multi-parties are bad, why then now are we going into multi-parties? 

I told them, “Yes, it is good. In a family when you are nurturing a child you seriously defend that child but when a child grows to 18 or 20 years, then you are free to marry off that child”. So, it is now right for this country to go multi-party. Having had all of us under the Movement system, we have learnt we can no longer go into tribal and religious issues, which were major issues during the multi-party system. 

So, the people of Kakuuto are very willing to go into the multi-party system. But they still have that fear of the past multi-party systems, which were cutting bananas and cutting up others. So we are being told, warned and cautioned that we must take a lot of care. We must be sincere and we must be accommodative.

On the issue of federo the people of Kakuuto have sent me to say that Buganda - even in the World Commission Report when you read it, it was very clear on the views from Ankole, the views from Toro and the views from the Madi and Acholi. They were very willing to offer a federal system of Government but there are some other areas, which objected and they opted for a unitary government. But for purposes of being accommodative, there are those who are very willing and they are ready to say that we go for the federo system of government -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR KASAMBA: I am winding up, Madam Speaker. As we debate the federo system, Buganda’s position in this country Uganda must not be totally thrown out. I request colleagues that Buganda is part of Uganda. If we are to forge a nation called Uganda, not a country Uganda, we need to be accommodative. We need to be flexible, we need to give views of those who can be accommodated, especially in Buganda. 

Buganda is at a disadvantage. The centrality of Buganda puts us in a dilemma vis-à-vis the other parts of the country. But colleagues, as we debate the federal issues, I would appeal for a sober and accommodative mechanism that can ensure that Buganda’s issues are well negotiated on a very friendly and not on a very negative aspect. 

Finally, on the aspects of the third term my voters have supported the continuity of their powers to be expressed through the vote. So they have requested me to ensure that as we go for the opening of the term limit, I am among those who support the opening up of the term limit. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

6.07
MRS ISANGA NAKADAMA (Woman Representative, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the good work well done. We consulted on the contentious issues. That is why some of the issues are not being talked about because we know when the Bill comes, that is when we shall talk about them.  

The people of Mayuge, on the issue of multi-partism, overwhelmingly disagreed with the proposal of the Government. They say during the time of parties they know what they went through so they do not want to be reminded about those old days of parties. They completely disagreed but since government has already taken its position, it went ahead at Kyankwanzi and decided that we should go into multi-partism; and even now it has gone ahead to register parties. So they have agreed, but it was not their intention that they should go back to parties.

Madam Speaker, on the lifting of the term limits, the people of Mayuge agree with the proposal of the Government. They are saying that they do not see why the President should be given limited terms yet other leaders are not being given limited terms. They are saying let the people use their vote to remove the President not the terms to limit the President. So, they are agreeing with the proposal of the Government.

On the issue of electing Members of Parliament, the LC V and the President on the same day, the people of Mayuge disagree with that proposal. According to their understanding, they say that it will bring confusion during that time and for them they want to do it as it has been done before. Let these people be elected on different days so that it can give them time not to lose their votes, but if we put them on the same day it will bring confusion and their votes will be wasted.

On the issue of appointing the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) from the centre, the people of Mayuge agree, they want this person to be elected from the centre. This is because according to how the chief administrative officers have been handling funds down there, they feel that they should be administered from the centre. Let these people be from the centre not from the district authorities or district service commissions.

On the issue of dissolving Parliament, they said they do not agree. They said since they are the ones who vote their Members of Parliament, it should be left to them to call back their Members of Parliament in case there are problems or if they are not satisfied with that person.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Government as the Prime Minister has told us that on the land issue, Government has already decided that it has taken its position, the people of Mayuge had disagreed with that. So, I have to talk about that here though the Prime Minister has cleared it because right now the people of Mayuge are suffering with land. Their land had been grabbed, that is the forest reserve, right now they are being called squatters yet this was their land, they are trying all means to see that their land is given back to them. So, on the issue of land I would like to thank Government for the position it has taken so that maybe in future, people do not get problems as those people from Mayuge.

Madam Speaker, those are some of the issues our people of Mayuge resolved. I thank you so much.

6.13
MRS CECILIA ATIM OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I do cherish democracy and its principles and practice I, therefore, cannot fail to appreciate the manner in which the Government has transparently dealt with the issue of the White Paper. It has laid bare matters of importance in the governance of this nation for these people to study and to give their views. In the same manner, Madam Speaker, I would like also to register appreciation to the committee for the analytical manner in which they dealt with the issues of the White Paper and made it easy for us to make a decision because of the manner in which they have reconciled the views presented by many stakeholders.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank your office for allowing religious leaders and other institutions to present their views as well. I want to comment on the views of two spiritual leaders and I hope it will serve as a prophetic guidance to us:

The first one was made by His Eminence, Metropolitan, Jonah Lwanga, on the 18 of November 2004 and in his contribution he said we would like to reiterate that Ugandans would like to see the three branches of government working together harmoniously. Parliament has the duty to ensure that the constitutional principle of separation of powers, which has served this country so well, is maintained zealously, safeguarded.  

Madam Speaker, the views His Grace, Henry Luke Orombi, made on the same day states, if I may quote: “However, every opportunity that is given to us comes with a cost. A leader, therefore, needs to make a choice based on objective evaluation of the potential benefits and cost. When you focus too much on succeeding only, you may run the risk of taking up any offer even from a dubious or compromising source.”  

Madam Speaker, in addition, Pastor Robert Kayanja gave us a word of counsel when we attended the function of dedicating the church in the presence of the President and the First Lady. He said prophetically that Uganda is at a sharp bend. We either move at a high speed and crush or we slow down and we all save our lives. Those are very important spiritual prophetic guidance, which I would like this House to be guided by.  

Madam Speaker, I just want to comment on two or three topics of importance to my people. The first one is on the issue of pitfalls and unfinished agenda in the process of constitutional making.  All these issues that have been highlighted in the White Paper, and have also been highlighted in the Constitutional Review Commission, were dealt with adequately in the Constituent Assembly. But, because of intransigence, we not willing to listen to the views of others, we were not able to dispose those matters of, and as a result they have re-emerged and we have to deal with them today. And I want to highlight a few of those. 

One of them, madam Speaker, is the issue of federalism. We did strongly oppose the motion tabled by Sam Kutesa on the dimming of regional cooperation. We opposed it in the Constituent Assembly. But some of our friends and colleagues chose to take the other way and dropped the question of federalism. We are now faced with it.  

Madam Speaker, we did warn the Constituent Assembly that the entrenchment of Article 269 would tantamount to violation of Article 75, which outlaws a one-party system in this country. But we have to wait for the Constitutional Court to make a ruling on that issue in order to accept that what we were saying in the Constituent Assembly was actually the truth. So, I am saying all this because I want all of us to be guided by the wisdom of God. When we are determining the issue of destiny of this country, I think it is very important that we should put the issue of peace and stability of this country far above our selfish interest.

So, Madam Speaker, I would like at this point to refer to page 1 of the report, and I would like to quote from the report. The committee advises that: “The setting up of the Constitutional Review Commission became necessary because experience had shown, from operating the current Uganda Constitution since it came into force in 1995, that it had several defects and several areas of inadequacy, which needed to be addressed in the interest of proper administration of the country.” 

 I feel very heavy-hearted that all the time we have to use the resources of this nation to prove lies and deception. We knew right from the start that there were discrepancies in the 1995 Constitution and that is why some of us did not sign the Constitution; and we knew that these challenges would follow us and it has happened. I am appealing to Members that, since we are now being given an opportunity to open this Constitution and deal with it again, I hope this time we will be guided by wisdom as advised by his Grace, the Archbishop Luke Orombi.  

The doctrine of separation of powers, which has already been emphasized before clearly shows, Madam Speaker, that whatever we are going to do this time round should strengthen this principle and not dilute it. It is, therefore, important that the issue of putting Parliament and the Executive in separate compartments becomes of great importance if we are to pursue the part of democracy. 

Why am I saying this? I think if Parliament is to police the Executive. You cannot be your own policeman, an accountant cannot be his own auditor, and it becomes strange for a judge to be a Member of Parliament or a Member of the Executive. Likewise, it is extremely important that we should allow ministers to do the work of implementing the policies, and Parliament to do the work of making the laws and ensuring that policies are implemented. Those are two separate roles and we need to keep them in separate compartments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have one minute.

MRS OGWAL: I beg your pardon?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One minute.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the issue of land has already been emphasized. I consider that highly inflammable and I consider that a provocation, and I want to thank God that the Government has withdrawn that position and we hope that it will remain withdrawn forever.

On the issue of third term, Madam Speaker, what the National Conference declared in March 2003 was completely different from what is being debated today. The National Conference did not talk about third term, but now people are opening up and tying it with third term. They talked about opening up so that political parties can now have a role to play in the politics of the country. 

Why the third term?  I consider this blackmail; people want to portray President Museveni as a very selfish, a very close-minded leader, who has ruled for 20 years and still wants to rule more or forever. I think that is blackmail. President Museveni, I think, is a sensible person; I do not think he really would intend to rule Uganda beyond 2006.  I consider this blackmail and I stand here to defend the name of our dear President; I do not think he can do a thing like that. 

I, therefore, call to order those who are campaigning for the third term, and also to let them know that the Constitution does not allow you to even imagine that you are about to break the law, because the Constitution does not allow third term. So, when you are campaigning for the President for the third term, you should know that you are violating the principles of the Constitution. 

I would like to wind up by saying, if a woman has been married for 20 years and has not produced a child, there is no way that you can go to the shrine and get a baby. You can only pray to God for a miracle, and I pray that all of us here should know that if a woman is barren, in my culture they allow the husband to marry another one so that the clan can continue, life beyond one individual. I want to thank you, Madam speaker.

6.25
MR FREDDIE RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are debating a matter of great national importance. Many of us here are builders, many of us here have homes and many of our homes in terms of people have foundations, in terms of structures also have foundations. Few of us keep changing the foundations of our homes meaning, for instance, when you are building and you have put in place a foundation, you have looked ahead and known that that foundation will take you for many years to come. I am not saying that we should not change our foundations, but I am saying that we should change our foundations when it is absolutely necessary to do so. Therefore, when we review our Constitution, we should bear in mind that we want it to stand the test of time so that in future we do not come back here and begin a few things.

Madam Speaker, yes, I did consult my people of Nakawa. I preside over a mini-Uganda; all tribes, all religions, all kinds of people live in Nakawa and, therefore, getting the feel of my people and giving you what they gave me to tell you is a challenging task but I will do my best.

They say that we should be careful in looking at the instrument we are putting in place. More often than not, they say that they hear some kind of misunderstanding, sovereignty of the people, supremacy of the Constitution, how are those issues for instance considered. 

Sovereignty of the people is not an issue even in our present Constitution; it resides in the people. What is sometimes an issue is the way sovereignty is emphasized. You can have direct democratic participation, for example, at LC I, people emphasize democracy directly, in referendum that is direct participation, through representatives that is representative participation, that is where the issue comes up but otherwise, there is no doubt, the people understand that sovereignty resides in the people but sovereignty also resides in the Constitution. 

And hear this, Madam Speaker; I am just going to give you an extract from the lead judgment of Justice Kanyeihamba in Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere and Others v. the Attorney General, Constitutional Appeal No.1 of 2002 in which he quoted a statement of Sir Owen Dickson, which he expressed in 1965 in the Law Quarterly Review 590 at 604.

“The law existing for a time being is supreme when it prescribes the conditions being fulfilled to make a law, but the question of what may be done by the law so made, Parliament is Supreme over the law.” But he went on in Maj. General Tinyefuza’s case as he then was, Constitutional Appeal No.1 of 1997 and said, “If Parliament is to successfully claim and protect its powers and internal procedures, it must act in accordance with the constitutional provision which determine its legislative capacity and the manner in which it must perform its functions.” 

He went on to say that Sir Owen, in the above case I quoted, was of course describing situations in countries such as United Kingdom where Parliament and Constitution used to be supreme. That in Uganda it is in the people and the Constitution that sovereignty presides and that is very important. This is the leading judgment of the Supreme Court on this matter. That even in the United Kingdom, before the creation of the EU, of which that country is a member, it was always emphasized that Parliament was obliged to obey the constitutional rules, which were prior to the exercise of its sovereignty. 

I thought, Madam Speaker, I would quote this particular statement in that leading judgment to emphasize the need to look at the Constitution, its supremacy and to know that the sovereignty of our nation also resides in it and also in the people.  

Madam Speaker, my people of Nakawa were very careful in analysing some of the sensitive areas of the Constitution, one of which is the popular third term. I was present when hon. Byabagambi was making a contribution on the Floor of this House because, he clearly made a distinction and said that what excites his people of Ibanda - apparently it looks the same to me in Nakawa - is the love they have for their President. There is no doubt that even in Nakawa there is great love and support for President Yoweri Museveni, and when I explained the proposal to lift term limits, they asked many questions. The most fundamental areas of concern were these: - 

They cited Article 1 clause (4) of the Constitution that people must be seen to exercise their will, but then there is also Article 105 (2). Madam Speaker, you are a lawyer, when two provisions of the Constitution conflict, which takes precedence over the other? Both are equally important and there are judgments that effect, yes, to choose your leader. But they say removal of term limits completely - you may cite the example of Great Britain, you may cite some countries, which do not have term limits, but have you also analysed those countries’ systems and institutions, the way they work, the way they perform - (Interjection) 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You have one minute.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, where you find that systems and institutions are not yet strong to check on individual personal interests, it may be difficult, they say for our country in times ahead to face the challenge of the complete removal of term limits in the Constitution. That is an argument from Nakawa. I was synchronizing; I did not use referendum to consult but I would see, I would watch, I would hear. 

At the end of the day, if you have got to look at third term, we should not even point at third term, we should look at the way of addressing the small transition from Movement system of government to a multiparty system of governance, whether with our President to shepherd us through or without him for as long as we are looking at a small transition. We need to build benchmarks, political structures; we need to ensure that there is fair competition when we come to multiparty elections. When are we going to build those structures?

Indeed like some of my colleagues argued, certainly it will be our President to shepherd us through this transition, and my people of Nakawa would support that position. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.37
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk. I would like to start my presentation by referring to what hon. Cecilia Ogwal said. She said that when a woman is barren for 20 years, the husband is allowed to look for another woman. I thought this was sexist because if a man is infertile, would a woman be allowed to marry another man so that she can perpetuate herself? I did not want to leave this on record because I promote non-discrimination. 

Madam Speaker, I did consult widely on the White Paper with the people of Mwenge County South and I got some interesting response, which I thought I would share with this House. I have about five of them.

First, on the change from Movement political system to multiparty political system: The people of Mwenge County South are strongly Movement and they found it very difficult to appreciate as to why we should move from the Movement system of governance to multiparty system, and their arguments are based on past history, on issues based on religion, issues based on differences of political affiliation. 

I would like to say that I was cautioned that a lot of civic education, a lot of explaining has to be done in order to change this mindset. The few I talked to did appreciate to some extent, but I was shocked when I went there on 26 January 2005 and amongst the songs they were singing to me, they told me that they do not want to move from Movement system to multiparty political system, and yet I had been on radio and to each and every parish that I have in my constituency. This is a challenge. 

The second issue is on the relationship between Arms of Government, that if there is a deadlock between the President and Parliament, what should we do? The people were very quick to say that, “Look, we elect you, we also elect the President, so if you have a problem you could come back to us.” But others were saying, “No, you do not have to come to us there should be a body appointed, agreed upon, which should resolve this.” Those who said “come to us” were of the view that they have the power, and those who talked about a body to resolve this were of the view that we should not waste so much money on referendum when we do not have a road, for example, from Kyegegwa to Kyenjojo. So, they said that could work on that road.

Number three, on parliamentary, presidential and LCV elections: They agreed with the statement that we should have these elections on the same day because they noted that there is a lot of wastage of time, there is voter fatigue and that there is sometimes interference. Therefore, they do not see why we should not vote on the same day since the photos of the various candidates would be there.

On the creation of regional governments, they noted that, for example, Kyenjojo District already has the Bunyoro-Toro kind of association, and they felt that maybe this could be strengthened to marshal more resources and promote efficient utilisation of facilities available to all the districts. Others were sceptical because they noted that this regional tier could drag the development of some model districts like Kyenjojo into being less developmental. So, these were the two positions.

On traditional leaders the key issue, which most of us did not appreciate, is that the Government was talking about a situation where the king violates the Constitution. On this I had two age groups with different responses: The young people said if the cultural leader violates the Constitution, he should be handled according to the law. To the elderly and the middle-aged, they maintained that cultural leaders make no mistakes and, therefore, they are infallible and such an issue would never arise anyway. They also said that traditional institutions have mechanisms on how to deal with all situations including such a situation, so it should be left to them. The majority in this case were the elderly and the middle-aged group.

On the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) appointment, the majority were in favour of the Government position that the CAO should be disciplined by the public service commission.  

On the presidential term limits, the people of Mwenge County South recommended that power should be given to them so that they can use this power to remove or elect the President, and this is in line with Article 1(4) of our Constitution. As I have already said, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo District is a Movement stronghold, they love the President and therefore they would vote Movement.

Madam Speaker, these are some of the issues that I collected from my people of Mwenge County South. I would like to raise some issues, which are of import to a group of people to which I belong and the rest of the Ugandans, and this is on the issue of age of marriage. I have noted with concern some Members of this House advocating for the age of marriage to be lowered to 16 years or below 18 years. First and foremost, I would like to inform this House that Uganda is signatory to the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women. We are signatory and we are obliged to adhere and uphold the principles in these international treaties and conventions. 18 years is, therefore, mandatory.

I do not even see why it should be brought in for debate because when you consider your 16-year-old girl, she is in senior one, is she economically in position to look after that baby? Is she physically able to look after that baby? The bones have not been fully formed. The fact that someone has breasts and hips does not mean that she can give birth to a child. 506 out of 100,000 women die because of maternal mortality. 

We have cases where uteruses rapture because of this underage pregnancy. We have cases where the birth canal and the anus are combined because of this kind of situation, and we have people amongst us who still insist that because a small girl has breasts and hips she can be a mother. It is unethical and Uganda as a model country, which supports women’s rights especially the Movement Government, which we support because of this position, should not debate this again, Madam Speaker. I am speaking very strongly we should not even tamper with this at all.

Finally, the Equal Opportunities Commission: The Equal Opportunities Commission was provided for in our Constitution to operationalise affirmative action. The Constitutional Review Commission (CRC) report is very clear, it says it should remain independent, and it says that if we do not have resources it should now be combined with the Human Rights Commission. 

I object to this, because I know that there are donors who are ready and willing to support the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission and I know that if you combine it with the Human Rights Commission it will not meets its objective. In wisdom of Constituent Assembly delegates, they decided to separate the Human Rights Commission and the Equal Opportunities Commission for serious reasons. 

For example, when you are talking about the national average standard that we need for service delivery in order to give equalisation grants, the Equal Opportunities Commission will be able to tell you that for example Karamoja does not have roads, Karamoja has no hospitals, therefore, equalize. Part of the strife we have been having in this country is because we do not share the national cake. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore this House and implore our government and tell them that if you remove Article 32 (2), you will be taking away affirmative action. I thank you.

6.49
MR NICHOLAS DAVIS GOLE (Budaka County, Pallisa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and I have to say this.  First of all, the people of Budaka are happy that we are going to amend the Constitution and the issue they had raised - I want to thank the Government that they have dropped the land issue because this has been a terrible problem down there.  

Madam Speaker, my people rejected the proposal to give the President powers to dissolve Parliament. They told me that they will be violating Article 1 because the President is not the one who elects us here. Therefore, he would be doing something wrong to ask for powers to dissolve Parliament.  
 
Madam Speaker, they agreed on the elections of the chairpersons, the President and the Members of Parliament to be held on one day. 

They also agreed that the death penalty be categorized because, sentencing the one who rapes together with that one who defiles to death is doing injustice on a human being.

When it came to the issue of third term or opening up term limits and going back to multiparty system, we had a problem. Actually, they had told us to come back and not to consult them because the Government had already decided. But we had to explain the circumstances under which Government came up with that recommendation and at the end of the day, they agreed with us.  

They went further to say that if we go multipartism, they see no reason why we put term limits because each party would be in position to look for the candidate who would really help their party to win elections. They said that if you restrict a candidate of a particular party, you would be doing a de-service to that particular party. So, on the condition that we are going under multiparty system, they requested that this House considers opening up of term limit so that they enable a particular candidate, they feel can help them, win a particular election.  

Madam Speaker, when it came to the issue of chief administrative officers, they all agreed that let the centre take up the responsibility of appointing the chief administrative officer, because in Pallisa District we have got a lot of problems with this issue of the chief administrative officer due to tribal matters. The Gweris want a chief administrative officer the Itesos want a chief administrative officer. So, they said it would be better if the centre appoints the chief administrative officer.

When it came to the issue of federo, our people do not know what federo is, so they said it is better you leave it to the people who understand it, if they want it, let them get it. But for them they think under decentralization they will get all the services and this even was reflected here when hon. Opange said that they want more districts than these regional tiers.

Madam Speaker, in the same consultations, the issue of graduated tax was raised. But I want to report that they were so happy when they heard that the Government is planning to postpone graduated tax for 10 years.  

Madam Speaker, their concern on the issue of going to multipartism came and they agreed that let us go to multipartism and they request that this House passes that government recommendation and we move forward but they caution that when we go to multipartism, let us not exercise that one of 1980s and far in 1960s. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this chance.

6.54
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE  (Nakifuma County, Mukono):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will also start off by thanking the committee for the good report. My colleagues have said a lot from their constituencies. I should inform the House of my constituency; it consists of people of all tribes in Uganda and all religions. So, their responses were neither tribal nor with religious sentiments.  Nakifuma has a population of just a little bit less than 200,000 people who are there from the recent census.

When I went for consultations, Madam Speaker, I had a White Paper on me, the Constitution, the Constitutional Review Commission report, and the proposals of the Buganda government to the Constitutional Review Commission. I also had a file with papers on federalism, one of them was by His Excellency, the President and another one Prof. Apolo Nsibambi’s A case of Federalism.

The method of work was, we would look at what is in the consultation, what was in the Constitutional Review Commission report and what is being proposed in the White Paper then they would make recommendations with reason. They would also request me to make comments because I was not a listening post they know I am exposed, I attend workshops and add quality to their arguments. And, Madam Speaker, most of these people have been listening to discussions on the FM radios. So, some of the arguments had been borrowed from others hence, we had to synchronize.

For example, on the issue of changing Article 1, in all the different meetings I had, they had different proposals. There were those who were against changing it, saying yes, all the powers should not be changed, if anything let their powers be exercised through Parliament. Those who were against it were saying no, all the power should be with them, they thought MPs were very few that we can easily be compromised because of what was happening at that time. They said no, you people can be compromised and agree on something that you are not interested in. 

So, the arguments were because of what was happening at that time. But definitely when it comes to the Bill, I am going to consult them because the report of the committee came after the first phase of the consultation, only that most of the things they have put in we had discussed them.

Madam Speaker, when it came to the lifting of the term limit, here there were very hot arguments and their proposals were not very different from what my colleagues have presented. There were those who were against and those who were for, and those who wanted just to give five more years to the incumbent President.  But I advised them not to cut their throats on this issue, and they should look at it with open minds because there are countries where there is only one term like Costa Rica, one term of four years and there are so many ex presidents who are there. 

We have also had cases where presidents have been moved here after only 68 days, not because their term had ended, but because of some other circumstance. Others have spent 11 months not because the term limit has come, but because of some other circumstance. Some have spent eight years, they have not been removed, because the term limit has ended. So, we should look at all these things in retrospective before we strangle each other, and there is no permanent situation.

I held ten meetings and in all different meetings they had different views. But the dominant view was, definitely I should say, those who were not bothered about opening up. Otherwise, I had about ten meetings of about 1,500 people out of the other population I told you, but these were the opinion leaders, representatives so I am sure they are also busy trying to propel that view.

The regional tier: They asked me where Government had got that idea from because from their proposals during the Constitutional Review Commission fieldwork period, they never presented that issue. But I told them how Parliament works, how proposals come to Parliament, but for them they were insisting on federo. But I told them that some of the ideas that they had proposed may not necessarily come out the way they presented them. 

Madam Speaker, most people here have been saying that they do not know much about federo. It is a bit unfortunate because we should be informed and we got the books. But that reminds me of a quotation from a certain Groucho Marx who said: “From the moment I picked up your book until I laid it down, I was convulsed with laughter. Some day I intend reading it.” Some people have got the books, but they have not read them.

On page 29 of this proposal for constitutional changes, they explain what federalism is about saying, “The most important aspect of a federal system is that, it recognizes that there are different types of political issues, which need different types of institutions to deal with them.  Some affect only local areas, others are more widespread in their scope. The institution of government should reflect this. The idea that government should be based solely on central institution is old fashioned and out of date.  Federalism makes it possible for various regions of the country to pursue national objectives together as a nation, yet sometimes address their peculiar regional interests, objectives, concerns, problems and challenges.”  

Maybe, Madam Speaker, I will lay this one on Table so that people can refer to it, for those who have not had chance to get reference on federalism. It is unfortunate for one to attack a system - recently I attended the JPA meeting, the procedure was that you contribute from an informed point of view; do not oppose something because you do not know it, neither should you support something without information. People should oppose what they know; people should not oppose what they do not know. This is why I will take trouble to lay this book on Table here so that people do not oppose what they do not know.  

As far as the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) is concerned, still it was divided.  There are people who think- not that they do not know, they are different. Madam Speaker, I held different meetings; it was not one meeting and we have not held a referendum otherwise, they were giving me ideas, which should assist me to debate when the Bill comes. We were just getting ideas and they were not final.

7.05
MRS JANE ALISEMERA BABIIHA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a job well done. It also made my work very easy in the constituency. I will go straight to the issues, which were raised by the people. 

One contentious issue was the land and the environment. The people of Bundibugyo do not support the compulsory acquisition of land by Government. In any case, they already have land problems. Over 80 per cent of Bundibugyo District is Government land so the little, which is remaining, if we say that Government should take it, it means there will be maybe - I do not know. So, that is their position  –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, the Government has abandoned that position; it is no longer there.

MS ALISEMERA: Okay, we had to emphasize this.  Thank you. Another one is on minerals. They did not like how the Government defined minerals to exclude oil, petroleum and yet petroleum is in Bundibugyo and they are saying, “We wait for Government to bring Bills.” How many times have we waited for Government to bring Bills to this Parliament?  Moreover, it is very difficult for a Member to bring a private member’s bill. And if we agreed that petroleum is not a mineral, then by the time the people of Bundibugyo wake up maybe the oil would be finished. Government can decide to bring the Bill when it is finished, so we would have lost. My people said this one should be part of oil and they were in support of the committee.

Another issue was on the size of Parliament. For them they are in support of even increasing the number because in the Sixth Parliament Bundibugyo was given another county, and they are very grateful to this august House, and that county has never had a Member of Parliament. So, they are saying please, add one more for the people of Bundibugyo, the Bugendela, which you gave the people of Bundibugyo in the next 8th Parliament they want to see a Member of Parliament representing those people. In Bundibugyo District we have a county, which is not yet represented. 

Then on the issue of return of power to the people on the referendum results: The people of Bundibugyo said that is what they want. If something is contentious here, it should go back to the people and if the people say that is what they want that should be binding for all sides.  

Then on change from Movement to multiparty system: They were saying that since government has already taken position, I think they have nothing to say.  Otherwise, they never wanted to leave the Movement system of government. 

On regional governments, for them they had said I should not even talk about it because, as far as they are concerned, they have had bad times in the regions. Even I will give you a simple example. We have some of the road equipment at the regional level Kabarole in Fort Portal, but when we get landslide, that road equipment to move from Kabarole to Bundibugyo it takes about 2 weeks. So, with regional they are really not in agreement and in any case we have had a bad experience during the time of kings. We were deprived of social services that is why you see the Bakonjo, the Bamba very few are educated because of those problems. So we do not want to repeat what happened to us. 

On dissolution of Parliament, on matter of confidence, they said they are the ones who elected the people. If a Member of Parliament has a problem they know how to remove that Member of Parliament. So, they do not want to give the President those powers to dissolve Parliament because we can have a bad leader who will continuously every year dissolve Parliament and that one will make it very expensive for this country. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, they said opening of term limit is obvious, let us open up and people enjoy the political space. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, before the Member for Ayivu speaks can I ask hon. Mugambe to formerly lay this important document on federal for the benefit of the Members?

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE: Madam Speaker, after realizing that there are several people who have not had access to information on the values of federal arrangement of government, I wish to lay this document entitled, “Proposals For constitutional changes submitted to the Uganda Constitution Review Commission by the Kingdom of Buganda.” Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

7.11
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Zoe Bakoko Bakoru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee and also Government on behalf of the people of Ayivu for the work, which has been well done. My people of Ayivu say that the constitutional review process and amendment is a mandate of Parliament and, therefore, they are urging Parliament to debate this important issue and avoid sentimentalism. They are also urging Parliament to appreciate that these are issues, which affect all of us even when we have different views.  

Madam Speaker, my people of Ayivu have asked me to tell this honourable House that they are very apprehensive because, there is a proposal that we should move from the Movement governance to multiparty system. 

My people had a terrible experience in 1980; the entire West-Nile and Arua District never voted, they went into exile some of us worked with them throughout that period and in spite of that, their votes were counted and they were told that they had given their votes to somebody unopposed and yet they were in exile. 

So, when I had not arrived - as Members know, I was sick for three months - and when I arrived many of you saw it in the papers how I was received. There was a very big relief because the people wanted their views to be represented in this House and they did not want to be misrepresented. (Mrs Angupale rose_). They said, therefore, that the support –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She has not yet yielded the Floor.

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: We are going for a party, honourable Member of Parliament, and I would like to go for the –(Interruption)

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of order. I do recall during the NSSF scandal, of which we are still waiting for the results to be presented on the Floor of this House, the honourable Member of Parliament from Ayivu County was on drip. Even the first plane almost left her because she could not fly for her treatment. 

Madam Speaker, putting in mind that representation in this House has got division, we have the Woman Member of Parliament who traverses the whole 36 sub-counties of Arua District, and we have other Members of Parliament who represent counties of only four sub-counties, others even two sub-counties, and keeping in mind that the Woman Member of Parliament traverses the whole district and me the Member of Parliament from Arua District, I had a sample - I did economics and I am a statistician and I want to be challenged on the Floor of this House. 

The recent report I got from Nyadri sub-county where the LC III Chairman was and the people were all there, 70 per cent of the people voted against tampering with Article 105(2); 20 per cent resisted and the balance said they needed to be civic educated, and the views of the people were represented before this House. 

We listened from other Members of Parliament, from Madi-Okolo, from Maracha, who were here presenting their issues. Is it now in order for the honourable Member of Parliament from Ayivu County, representing only one county in Arua District, to mislead this House that the people are saying they should not be misrepresented? Is really the minister in order, when everybody knew that she was on drip, she was not there when we were consulting the people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister prefaced her statement by saying that she was away because she was unwell, and that when she arrived her people were excited to see her and they said, “let us sit down and you take our views”, and she is the Member for Ayivu. So, she is bringing the views of Ayivu. Then let me appeal, honourable members, some of these things, which come from the village there, please do not bring them here.  (Applause)

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your very wise ruling. I did not doubt it.  The people of Ayivu have said and clearly, they should not be misrepresented and, therefore, as their Member of Parliament, I will never misrepresent them. So, the people of Ayivu have said that they were very apprehensive because they feared the multiparty system, which drove them into exile. But after explanation, they have said they want us to move to the multiparty system.

Madam Speaker, on opening up and lifting the term limit, the people of Ayivu have agreed that the term limit be lifted. Why did they say that? They are saying that because they have seen and they have heard debates on the FM radios, they have read in the newspapers, they have been receiving people talking to them about this particular Article and they are saying that they also know in some countries you do not have restriction for presidential terms. Therefore, they are saying power belongs to them, they are the ones who will exercise their power and right to elect their leaders and, therefore, this term limit restrict must be lifted, and the people of Ayivu have asked me to urge Parliament to support this. They want the term limit to be removed.

Madam Speaker, they have even gone further to say that all leaders must have equal opportunity. If the other leaders can contest for so many times, why not the President? They have even gone further to say that people should not tie the issue of lifting terms only with the current presidency because it will benefit everybody and, therefore, people should discuss this objectively, and that is what my people of Ayivu have said -(Interruption)

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much. As you all know, honourable colleagues, the people of Yumbe decided to spread all over West Nile due to the insecurity.  So, during my consultations, the Aringa community in Arua town, which falls under the municipality represented by hon. Saidi Okuti, gave me their views. They did say that ‘Oyukukuru lelutambaci’, in Aringa that means, if there is an old broom that must be kept because sometimes it sweeps very well, they were in for lifting the term. Thank you very much.

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: That even strengthens my position because actually the municipality is encircled by my constituency.  

Madam Speaker, on the issue of regional tier, for us we are republicans. We are republicans and we do not understand the issue of federalism. But the people of Ayivu have said they support the proposal by Government of regional tier, and so they hope that the House will discuss it along those lines.  

On elections to be held on the same day for the President, for the Members of Parliament and for the district chairperson, my people of Ayivu support that proposal because they say this is going to reduce the costs, at the same time it is going to reduce frictions because everybody will be fighting for their votes and there will be nobody following the other.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, I urge the House that we shall debate this important issue when the Bill comes and get to a successful conclusion. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have made some progress today. I was prepared to sit here until 10.00 p.m. but the Prime Minister tells me he is going to chair a cabinet meeting at 8.00 p.m. so I am obliged to stop. However, we have made some progress; 112 Members have so far contributed. So, we adjourn this matter to Monday at 2.00 O’clock. So, those who have not spoken today will speak on Monday. Tomorrow you are free.

Then, honourable members, there are two things: Tomorrow there is a celebration of the 10th Coronation Anniversary of His Royal Highness, Kyabazinga of Busoga, you are welcome. Do come to Kaliro tomorrow the whole day, the Kyabazinga will be happy to see you. Then on Saturday we shall be burying the remains of the late Shaban Nkutu, who was a minister in the Obote I Government and he was murdered 32 years ago, so those who are able to join us in Busesa on Saturday please do so.  

There will be a duwa starting at 10.00 a.m. and activities will go on until – he will be buried actually at 4.00 O’clock but if you could arrive in time for the prayers from 10.00 O’clock onwards, we would appreciate it. The place is Busesa in Bugweri; it is along the main road.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is His Excellency, the President who is going to chair Cabinet tonight not me. Thank you.  
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have also been informed that there is a Kyamucation in the Parliamentary Gardens, so for all those reasons I have been overpowered today. So, I will have to adjourn the House until Monday.

(The House rose at 6.22 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 14 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

