Thursday, 17 February 2005 

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received this communication.

“RE: Contribution to Special Olympics Uganda by MPs. Special Olympics Uganda is a charitable organization that locates and develops talents in children and adults with intellectual disability.  

It has been in operation since 1992 and now in 45 districts and spreading to cover all the 56 districts.  

Since 1995 the Special Olympics Uganda has been participating with very impressive medal harvests as follows: 1995- USA 10 medals 1999- USA 21 medals and 2003- Dublin & Ireland 22 medals.  

This year around the team is participating in Japan in Nagano City. These will be winter Olympics and for the first time in history Uganda is participating.  
The team leaves on the 18 February 2005 with a hockey team of 16 athletes, four coaches and three officials.  

The purpose of this letter, through you, is to request my Colleagues, MPs, to contribute a minimal fee of Ugshs20,000 each to enable the team represent us at this historical event in Nagano City, Japan. 

Being a charitable organization it depends on contributions and well wishers.  
Signed by Flight Captain George Michael Mukula.

MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)”  

This is an appeal, which I received in my office the other day.  It is clear and, therefore, he is making an appeal to you to make some contribution to enable our team travel or be sustained in Japan.  

2.30
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi county, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise on a point of national importance. I have received information from a number of districts of this country to the effect that despite the fact that Government increased salaries for civil servants in districts, this increment has not been reflected in the release by Ministry of Finance of unconditional grants. 

 I believe that the moment Government makes a commitment of this nature, it is obligatory upon Government to release the said monies in order to match the commitment of Government.

Mr Speaker, in the district like mine, the district of Kumi, civil servants have to Ugshs54 million - in fact, it is slightly more and that is up to December.  This is an appalling situation and it is causing anxiety among civil servants and uneasiness within the structures in the district. 

I would like to find out from Government particularly from the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service why these civil servants who still earn very little money, I believe, have not been paid to date, six months down the road they have not been paid.  This applies for Kumi as well as many other districts of this country.

Number two, Sir, sometime last week, my colleague hon. Odit who is a comrade Chair of the Agriculture committee raised a matter that is affecting a good part of this country and this was with regard to a strange disease that is affecting mangoes; the mango plant.  

Mango selling is an economic activity in the part of the world that I come from.  Besides, it is nutritive and provides vitamin C to the local population, these mangoes now are about to flower and yet there is a strange disease that is attacking them, not only in Kumi but also in the northern part of the country.  

Last week, Government committed itself to bring a report to Parliament by Tuesday, yesterday, on what the Ministry of Agriculture was doing to tame the problem. This has not come to Parliament.  

I would like to demand an explanation from Government why up to now, because I even do not see the Minister of Agriculture, it has not come with its report to Parliament.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, can the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs or the Prime Minister’s office tell us the position?

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE (PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS) (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Amuriat Oboi for the issue of salaries he has raised, how I wish he had put it as a formal question and it received a formal answer.  

But I am pleased to mention that the Minister of Finance is now here and the question in respect of the salaries that were recently increased, and they are yet not paid, if he is position to answer he will answer it, if he is not then he is going to work out with the Ministry of Public Service and he will come with a detailed answer.

Number two, Mr Speaker, the issue of the mango disease was raised on this Floor last week. It’s true the Ministry of Agriculture undertook to bring an answer, the Minister of Agriculture is still working on the answer and he will come to this House as soon as practicable, in any case not later than next week on Wednesday.  I thank you Sir.

2.35
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise on a point of concern from the Committee of Finance Planning and Economic Development.  

Following many negative press reports about divestiture process, and the subsequent decision by the Executive to lease Dairy Corporation to a Thai company, the committee got concerned and summoned the Minister of State for Finance (Privatisation) to explain specific issues of the concern to the committee.  The Minister cooperated and appeared before the committee on 16 February 2005.  

However, the information and documents the committee wanted for verification were not available and the Minister requested for more time to put the information together and all the necessary documents sought by the committee.  

All the stakeholders in the sector are concerned about the state of affairs within this strategic Government Corporation in the Dairy industry.  

In the view of the above concerns, Mr Speaker and honourable Members, the Committee of Finance Planning and Economic Development, which is mandated to oversee the sector wishes to proceed as follows. 

That the House moves that Government halts the leasing process until the Committee has completed its investigations and reported to this august House.  

The Minister concerned should exercise maximum cooperation so that the committee can expeditiously report its findings in the shortest possible time.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to move, and in order for the committee to appropriately inform this House, we need time.  I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Finance, honourable members, these are the only members who approached me before I came in that they had issues to raise, and in view of the decision, others will come tomorrow may be that is when we shall consider them.

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising this issue.  But I have this to say, may be before I say so, I should say I am taken by surprise because, first of all, I did not appear before the committee, my other Colleagues appeared. 

But coming to the proposals by honourable Rwamirama, the Chairperson of the Committee, if you say that you stop the process, on what grounds are you basing yourself?  

It is true and I know as a fact that a statement is being prepared, I can only undertaken to quicken the process so that it is delivered not only to this House, but also an explanation is done to the committee and this is an important venture. 

 If this august House was to stop it without getting the full facts before it, to me it would be really very, very unfair.  Why don’t you first wait until you get the information before you can move to decide whether you want to stop it or not. 

In any event, are you sure that there is any action you are still able to stop or you shall stop the leasing? Are you sure that the leasing has not taken place?  

To the best of my knowledge, the lease – well, I am only telling you to the best of my knowledge because, I am not in charge of the sector, but I know that the lease has already been signed.  So if the lease has already been signed, what are you stopping?  Why don’t you first get information from the Minister before you decide on what course of action to take?

MR BANYENZAKI:  The information I would like to give is that we were with honourable Kasenene and he told us that the lease has not been signed as yet.   So as far as the committee is concerned, the information that has been delivered to our committee is that the lease has not been signed.  

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Speaker, the committee is grossly concerned about this particular transaction.  When the Minister appeared before the Committee, the Minister was asked specifically to state whether what was being done was within the policy of divesture, he said no, and we said then under what law are you, therefore, doing what you are saying you are doing.  

He said, “I will give you information”.  We asked him whether this contract between the Thai investor, so-called and Government he had a copy, he said he did not and we asked him whether he knew of the terms of the contract, he said he did not.  We asked him whether in fact the Ministry responsible for drawing these contracts and perusing them and advising Government had actually done the work. He said they must have.  

Which means that the Minister responsible for the sector, now we are talking about the privatisation sector, was totally out of the question as far as this transaction was concerned, and for us we treat this as a serious matter; a matter which impinges on abuse of office.  

This is why we believe that the matter should be halted in the interest of Uganda so that committee investigates it and reports to this House before the Government can proceed. If the Minister responsible cannot answer questions from the committee, what do you expect the committee to do?   Thank you.

2.45
MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole):  Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that Parliament halts/stops a process when Parliament is convinced that somewhere somebody is not doing something in a straight forward manner, it is not strange; and the reasons on top of hon. Mwandha and hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Chairperson have put forward to the House may be, I will be a bit more brief and plain we think that the process of divesture not of sale because; it is not being sold you know that it is being given to this somebody from Thailand for $1 and for some conditions - the conditions which are in place actually the person who should appear in this House to defend any divesture process; who is the Minister in charge of Finance in particular in charge of Privatisation is not aware of what is going on.  

The Minister did claim ignorance on most of the things which we put to him and we thought for us to have this air cleared so that Uganda is not once again stripped off, we should halt the process get the information, we shall pronounce ourselves.  

Honourable Minister, your concern of- if the lease has been signed- for us as Parliament we shall pronounce ourselves.  For you as Executive, you may go ahead to do what you think is right like it has happened in the past but for us we want to convince ourselves of the fact and bring a report, an exhaustive report hon. members with all the figures and facts for you to debate and take a decision.  I thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, of course this Parliament has the mandate to take any decision it deems fit, but as hon. Kiraso said, a decision should only be taken on this House being satisfied that something wrong has taken place.  

This House, according to the submissions of Members, has not yet seen the documents to determine whether actually there was any wrongdoing.  On what grounds are you basing yourselves?  

Mr Speaker, if you are to stop this process?  I have said and I make an undertaking, that if I am given a date, even tomorrow, a statement will be made on the Floor of this House regarding that sale.  

I am only surprised and I do not want to look as if I am contradicting my colleague, that my colleague in charge of Privatisation, if it is true what honourable Mwandha is saying that the Minister said he is not conversant with the process, because I know he is conversant with the process.  He knows what took place –(Interruptions)- Why don’t you let me first finish my statement.

MS KIRASO: You are misleading the House, honourable.

MR RUKUTANA: I am properly leading the House.  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg you, let us first get full information, let us first get full disclosure of what actually transpired before we take a decision. 

Because now if we are to take a decision today and say, “Parliament is halting the sale” even if we said, “temporarily until it is satisfied of a, b, c, what signals are we sending to the investors?  Suppose it turned out that the investor is a very good investor?  If we stop a process today, what message are we sending to him?  We do not have the information upon which to base the decision.

MR MWANDHA:  For the information of the honourable Minister, this is not an investor, because we had asked the Minister, we said, “Mr Minister, if this man is going to give us $1, what is he gaining out of it?” and he said “nothing”.   He said, “he is getting nothing, all he is doing is to come to this country, organise the dairy sector for Uganda and then children will be able to drink milk at schools”.  Then we asked him –(Interruptions)

MS KIRASO: Just to add one more point to remind you, hon. Mwandha, the Minister also said, actually that the Government will be paying this man from Thailand Malye for his management services.  I just wanted you to put that into mind.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, there is adequate evidence to show that this particular transaction lacks transparency and needs to be investigated and a report brought to this House before any action is taken.  

We should be able to learn from our past, we lost money in Westmont, we lost money in other transactions; this Parliament should not allow any more money to be lost.  Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA:  Mr Speaker, I raise on a point of procedure.  Members here have said they do not have information on that transaction, is it procedurally right for honourable Mwandha to stand up before this House and say that the process is fraud up, when we do not have information?  We should not send contradictory messages.  

We are saying we want time to give information because you have asked for it. You have said members do not have information on this process.  You do not have any evidence on which to make a judgement that there was a fraud in the procedure of this process.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as of now we have got information from the Chairman of the Committee; that is the position.  Now if you want to move a motion, because there is no motion.  Therefore, we should follow the procedure that there is a substantive motion, according to our rules, so that we can really contribute on it.  

As I see, we are trying to contribute on something where there is no motion at all.  So if you drafted your motion- you do it and then we deal with it.  But otherwise, what are we going to pronounce ourselves on when there is no motion on the Floor?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Mr Speaker, this was to inform you of the state of affairs. On how to proceed, Mr Speaker, I would like to move a motion without notice that the House moves that the Government halts the leasing process.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Chairperson of the Committee and members have just told this august House that they interacted with the Minister in charge of the sector.  

Mr Speaker, this committee has not brought to this House a report.  Would it not be procedurally prudent, Sir, that his Committee brings the report, telling us their interaction with the Minister, then we can debate from an informed point of view and the Minister, therefore, will be given a chance to defend.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are saying it should be a procedure.  But honourable Ministers here, do you have anything to say?

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION)(Prof Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members.  

I am sorry I was not able to be here on time, but I am told that when I appeared before the committee yesterday, that I said I did not know anything about what was going.  Mr Speaker, that was not correct.  

Mr Speaker, whereas it is true that I was not able to produce some of the materials that were required of me because I asked for more time, it is not that I said that I did not know what was going on because I was involved.  

Mr Speaker, I am not exactly sure of what report was given, but I would like to inform the House that this deal which has caused problems, honourable members should know two facts about it.

One is that, it is only a three-year term deal.  It is not the divestiture in a normal sense that this new investor is going to take over the plant and keep it for a long period.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this intervention by the President was necessitated by two major considerations for the good of the suffering of young people and people of the North and the East and for the wider picture for the development of the economy of this country. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like the members to note that the divestiture process takes a long time.  It is a long process, which follows the PERD Statute and the divestiture –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister came at a most appropriate time. The honourable Minister is responding to a question pertaining to PERD Statute. 

Is it in order for the honourable Minister for Privatisation very familiar with the provision of PERD Statute to say that this facility is being leased when he knows very well under PERD Statute there is no provision for leasing?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have to get familiar with the PERD Statute. I cannot decide whether what you are saying is –(Interjection)- yes, you are quoting a law of which I do not have here. Is there a provision stopping leasing something, which is being privatised in the law; I do not have that statute?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I can quote from knowledge of the statute –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which section?

MR AWORI: Like I said, Mr Speaker, if there was a provision –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am asking you, which section so that we can crosscheck it?

MR AWORI: Of the PERD Statute? Mr speaker, if there was a provision I would quote it but there is no provision.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concerns of honourable members are legitimate and they should be responded to substantively rather than through technicality and things like this.  

Mr Speaker, therefore, people more authoritative than me will come but for the time being, I would advise, Sir, that the Minister should promise a substantive statement, which he will give. This off the cuff answers on legal matters is going to lead into difficulties. (Laughter).  

Mr Speaker, I beg to advise. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable Minister. Can you continue with your explanation then we decide?

PROF. KASENENE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I beg to agree with the advice of my senior colleague and promise that I will give a full statement and a full explanation of what transpired with your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: So, what we do is this. This matter from the reaction seems to be urgent, you will make your statement on Tuesday and then we re-visit this matter. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, then that means that no action should proceed on this matter until we have received the report from the Minister to be discussed by this House –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no motion, do not act like that. We shall revisit this matter on Tuesday.

MR MWANDHA: Are we saying that they can proceed? –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We shall deal with this matter on Tuesday.

MR MWANDHA: So, they should stop proceeding?

THE SPEAKER: There is no motion!  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.00
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Last week the media carried the story where Makerere University was proposing to increase fees beginning the coming academic year.  

Mr Speaker, since then the Ministry of Education has looked at the proposed structure of the school fees or the fees at Makerere University and advised on further study and analysis of the proposal of the fees structure. Then advised that the University should also engage –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I have no intentions of disrupting the good words of the Minister of Education, but the statement we are all waiting for has representatives of the people is very important. Could we be informed why we cannot have a written statement?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, can you answer the question.

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I was proceeding and I beg to proceed because, probably let me just conclude, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I had suggested that I would be giving a full statement on this matter today. But, after consultation with Makerere University staff and of course, led by the Vice Chancellor and then consultations with the Committee on Social Services, it was agreed that the University goes back and reviews the proposals and come back to the committee and to the Ministry with a revised statement, which would give guidance to the statement I have to make to the House.  

Right now, if I made any statement it would not have any substance which would help the House to internalise the issues involved and probably the necessary details- (Applause)  

So, Mr Speaker, the statement I am making now, I am only appealing to you and to the members through you, that I come back in two months time –(Interjections)- and give a comprehensive statement.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister has mentioned that this matter will go to the committee. Can we hear from the chairperson of the relevant committee?

3.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  

It is true as the honourable Minister of Education has indicated, we had some consultative meeting between the Committee of Social Services, the Minister of Education, Makerere University and National Council of Higher Education. 

This matter was quite a big concern both to Parliament and the public and when we interfaced, it was discovered that neither Ministry of Education and Sports and National Council for Higher Education and Parliament had been consulted as key stakeholders. That is why we came out with the proposal of two months so that all these stakeholders are consulted, because when we looked at the document and the work of the consultants, consultancy required a detailed study for us to come to an agreement. 

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I want to use this opportunity to remind Ministry of Finance that before Makerere talks of increasing fees, sometime back in June 2004 while we were debating the report on the strike of students in Makerere University and students of MUBS, we made a resolution here on the Floor that Ministry of Finance sets up special audit to investigate the utilization of funds given to these institutions from consolidated fund and the funds collected at source of these four Public Universities and the school. 

The four Public universities include: Makerere University, Kampala, Mbarara University, Makerere University of Business School, Nakawa, Kyambogo and Gulu. Hardly have we received that special audit and therefore, it sounds erroneous for us to begin debating the increase of funds before we know the utilization of the funds, which comes from Government and those collected at source. 

So, we would suggest that finance brings that special audit and Makerere University consults key stakeholders: National Council for Higher Education, Parliament, Ministry of Education and then we come back to the Floor. So, no fees increase as for now, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  So, the matter is being handled by our Committee. Did you discuss on the status quo?  What is the status quo now in view of the fact that you are handling this matter for two months? 

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, honourable members, these proposals were for fees increase next financial year.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MRS HYUHA: We put it to halt until further discussion, Mr Speaker and I beg to suggest so. 

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, alright.  So, they are not effective as of now –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Yes, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, as a matter of fact the Vice Chancellor of Makerere admitted belatedly that this information actually leaked out, it was not yet conclusive.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay. So, we have agreed on time frame of two months and therefore we know the position, nothing is going to happen. So, let us leave the Committee and other stakeholders to handle this matter before we can meaningfully debate it.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE STATE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY, TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Akaki Ayumu Jovino): Mr Speaker and the House, for a number of reasons I seek your indulgence in having the statement on the declining price of cotton presented at a later date. 

On Monday 7 February 2005, honourable John Arumadri, MP, Madi Okolo raised the problem of the declining cotton prices in this country. 

Honorable members will also recall that in December last year, the same subject was discussed when the Minister responsible for Agriculture made a presentation on the Floor of this House, which statement, Mr Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Honourable members, according to the Order Paper we are supposed to have Ministry of Tourism and Trade making statement, and according to our rules the Members of Parliament are entitled for a copy of the statement. So, we are wondering whether the Minister is reading his notes or he is making the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Minister are you making a statement or you are speaking from your own notes?

MR AKAKI: Mr Speaker, I am making a statement not to make a statement –(Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, there is no statement but you are making an explanation?

MR AKAKI AYUMU: Mr Speaker, I am giving the reasons why I cannot make a statement this afternoon. 

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, proceed.

MR AKAKI: Members will recall that in December last year the Minister of Agriculture made a statement on the subject of the declining cotton price and the statement was referred to the Sessional Committee of Agriculture- Of course the report is still being awaited.  

Two, when we started preparing a statement, we realized that what is actually required is the way forward. It is now common knowledge that the price of cotton is falling, but what is the Ministry and Government prepared to do about it? 

This calls for much more consultations than we anticipated at the beginning. We are making consultations with all stakeholders including cotton producers, this calls for more time.

We have realized that this may even call for some revision of our own policies in respect to commodity prices. This will require the participation and input from Cabinet. 

For that matter, Sir, I beg that we be given more time, in any case the report of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture might even feed into our presentation if it has got to carry some meaning. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. So, when are you likely to – 

MR AKAKI: I think in all fairness because of so many stakeholders, Cabinet and other people and even involving a report of the Sessional Committee here of this Parliament, I will be happy with three months -

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, this Parliament debated and passed a resolution on the development that arose from the decline in the price of cotton for this season. But there are many other items which were discussed and as a result, the committee had the opportunity to share the concern of Parliament with His Excellency the President. And negotiation enabled Government to raise ugshs6.7 billion extra in order to be able to raise the cotton price from Ugshs 300 then to Ugshs 350 and CDO had promised that with this money CDO would be able to raise 230,000 bales this season. 

But among other things Parliament resolved that our Committee of Agriculture looks into the cotton sector and review the statute and report back to this House within three months and these three months will expire at the end of March. 

So, we are in the process, we shall start conducting public hearing next week so that we can prepare our report for submission to the House. So, the three months, which the Minister is talking about is different from the three months that we are expected to submit our report Sir. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, it means he can also make a statement at the end of March. Okay?

MR ODIT: I presume so.

THE SPEAKER: Right. So we expect – if you have a problem then you come and report. But we expect the statement at the end of March. 

Honourable members, I want to interrupt the proceedings and say, on your behalf I welcome students from Premier High School, Kisaasi. That is Kawempe North of honourable Latif Sebaggala. You are welcome! (Applause)

3.14
MRS CECILIA ATIM OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for your ruling concerning the report on cotton. However, I want to bring to your attention and to the attention of the House that, this is this year’s cotton season and during this cotton season, so many stores were closed because of the confusion concerning the prices and the confusion that was generated by the ginners’ association disagreeing with the farmers. As I talk right now, in Busoga some stores are still closed with farmers’ cotton inside. In Lango, the same thing is happening. So, I would want a clarification, because if this cotton overstays in the stores and it gets damaged by rain or whatever, who is responsible? We would like the ministry to clarify on that one.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we are also aware that this House was very concerned about the illegal levy of Shs 50 per kilogramme, which has been levied on farmers for many years. We would like a clarification on that. We want to know who is holding that money and how soon will that money be given back to the cotton sector so that it can be put on cotton farming.

My concern is that Shs 6.5 billion, which the Government gave CDO for the purpose of developing seeds; CDO does not require that much money, CDO requires only about Shs 1 or 1.6 billion for seeds.  I am yet to know what happened to the rest of the money. We did the calculation during the debate and we came to realize that what CDO requires for seeds, does not amount to Shs 2.0 billion.
  
On top of that, Mr Speaker, smaller ginners and other commercial ginners are being asked to give seeds free of charge for the purpose of preparing the seeds. So, where does the money for seed go?  So, those are some of the pending issues that we would like to be clarified because farmers have continued to be exploited, and they really do not know what goes on as far as this pricing and whatever is concerned.

So, Mr Speaker, the purpose of standing at this point, is to let you know that we have a crisis outside there although the ministry is asking for three months and the committee is not likely to submit the report until the end of March. But as of now, farmers are stuck with cotton in their stores, as of now, the issue of distribution of seeds remains a mystery, we do not know how we are going to handle the matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You want to respond?

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE & ANTIQUITIES (Mr Jovino Ayumu Akaki): Mr Speaker, there are a number of power centres in respect to cotton. I can only promise to undertake to find out why the stores were closed, who closed them, for what reason and ensure that the cotton is sold. On Tuesday I will be bringing to you a report on why those stores were closed.

On the issue of illegal levy and exploitation, I think that could be a very good subject of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, which is handling this issue. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I raised this matter on cotton prices, I made it clear that what Government will come up with will determine whether my people will plant cotton the next season. It should not be lost or the minister to delay this matter so that it overlaps with the next planting season. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Guidance on the Order Paper, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, we had a very heated debate on the matter of loans and I note that this particular item is coming on as item number nine and yet, deriving from yesterday’s heated debate, I would imagine that this matter is extremely urgent. I am just wondering, can you use your discretionary powers to bring it forward to make it immediately after number three?

THE SPEAKER: There is a consensus that we re-adjust the Order Paper so that after this statement, we deal with the loans because we can do that then later we can go back to UPDF. But on UPDF, honourable Minister, we have found out from our records that the considerations of clauses from 192 to 198 were stood over. But yesterday we only dealt with 195. So, it would be necessary to also clear those provisions. So, I think the Order Paper is accordingly adjusted so that we go straight with the loans. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW FROM EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK FOR FINANCING APEX IV PRIVATE INVESTMENT LOAN FACILITY

3.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nathan Mafabi Nandala): Mr Speaker, the Committee on National Economy has a report to present on the loan request for financing Apex IV, that is a private sector global loan and that is a facility, for which the committee is presenting the report to the House.

Mr Speaker, this loan request for Apex IV, was committed to the Committee on National Economy for a detailed analysis and for the committee to report to the House of its findings and recommendations. The loan offer is from the European Investment Bank and it is worth 30 million Euros. 

This loan facility is in line with the Contonou Agreement that was signed in June 2002 between the African, Caribbean and Pacific group of nations on one hand and European Union on the other hand. It will be channelled through the European Investment Bank and passed to the central bank.

So far, the European Investment Bank has extended three lines of credit for the Apex scheme; that is, Apex I, which was released in 1995 for 15 million Euros, Apex II in 1997 for 25 million Euros, Apex III in 2001 for 40 million Euros. The total funds already disbursed under this Apex is 80 million Euros, which is approximately US$160 million. 

The committee held meetings with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and its technical team, Bank of Uganda, Uganda Manufacturers Association, Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Uganda Bankers Association, National Planning Authority.
  
The committee also organized a public hearing in which all the interested parties where invited.  The following documents – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, would it do us any harm if you tell us the conclusion since Members have got copies?

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I should go through some of these then I give you the conclusion because it would be ideal that the whole House understands and the public. 
 
Mr Speaker, the following documents were reviewed:

• The brief from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

• The participation letter for the approved financial institutions.

• The previous resolutions on Apex I, II and III.

• The legal opinion of the Attorney General on the previous Apex I, II and III.

• The finance contract between the Government of Uganda and the European Investment Bank.
 
• The list of beneficiaries of Apex I, II, III. This list is attached at the back of the report.

The following information is still pending:

The evaluation report of the impact of the previous credit, that is, I and III and the tax performance of the firms that benefited from Apex I to III. 

The account on, which the funds, which were repaid was put.  

The roll out of repayment plans and is yet to be submitted to the committee.

Objectives of Apex facility:

The objective is about development of a long-term capital market to benefit and promote private sector as an engine for growth.
 
To enable the private sector enterprises to access financing on competitive terms.

Promoting and facilitating new investment and growth of the private sectors of the economy.

Promoting and supporting the development of small and medium-scale and especially “start-up” ventures in the economy. 

The areas to benefit are: 

• Agro-processing industry, 
• Manufacturing, 
• Horticultural projects,
• Mining, 
• Tourism and related services,
• Education, 
• Health.

The terms and conditions of the loan:

Interest rate of 1 percent with a maturity period of 12 years and a grace period of five years. 

The loan is supposed to be administered through Bank of Uganda, through the Approved Financial Institutions (AFI) mechanism. These AFI are: Stanbic Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, Centenary Rural Development Bank, DFCU Bank, Barclays and Bank of Baroda.  

An observation here is that this loan does not follow under the agreed terms of the debt strategy, which should be concessionary with interest rate of 0.7 per cent to 1 per cent, grace period of 10 years and repayment period of 30 years.

Observations:

• The total number of firms that benefited from Apex I were 35, Apex II, 55, Apex III 88.

• Majority of these firms are around Kampala and Jinja and I have the percentages. Kampala Apex I got 65 per cent, Jinja 23 per cent, other areas got 12 per cent.  Apex II Kampala got 65 per cent, Jinja got 11 per cent, Fort-portal got 8 per cent, Masaka got I per cent and other parts of the country got 11 per cent. Apex III Kampala got 82 percent, Jinja 9 per cent, other areas got 9 percent. 

• Majority of the firms that benefited from these funds are engaged in manufacturing and tourism. This is good for Uganda, but Uganda is an agricultural economy, 80 per cent of the Ugandans live on subsistence agriculture.  

• The committee was informed that the loan recovery during Apex I, II and III was satisfactory. However, some firms have been liquidated or declared bankrupt, as it was found out that Bank of Uganda recovers the on-lent funds on the various approved financial institutions by charging it on their accounts directly. What it means here, Bank of Uganda passes money to the financial institutions then the financial institutions pass the money to the borrowers. When the money falls due, Bank of Uganda just debts the accounts of the financial institutions. So, the obligation of looking for money from borrowers is by the financial institutions.  

• There is however a high degree of non-payment as the end result AIF go down to attach and auction properties of the beneficiaries who do not meet their obligations. 

• The interest charged by the Approved Financial Institutions is between 9.6 percent to 17.8 percent per annum, depending on the project while Bank of Uganda charges AFIs 6 to 8 per cent. I have attached for you also Bank of Uganda climbing rates to commercial banks on monthly basis at the back you will it there. Given the rate of interest of one percent from European Investment Bank, Members observed that charging 17.9 per cent is inequitable for the end user of this credit. 

• The issue of interest rate charged by Bank of Uganda affects the rate charged by AIFs. Members noted that this rate charged by Bank of Uganda is too high compared to the administrative activities it is supposed to cover. 

• The committee was informed that the conditional ties attached to the funds do not favour small-scale investors. This contradicts the fight against poverty by empowering small-scale farmers and entrepreneurs. Members of the National Chamber of Commerce complained of not being considered by AIFs in accessing the Apex funds. 

• This loan request is not in line with Uganda’s debt strategy given that it is a medium term facility that does not allow long-term interventions given its high interest rate.

• Members of the public were of the view that due to the lack of other long-term interventions, Apex facility should reviewed.  

• The continued channelling of these funds through commercial financial institutions will exacerbate the problem of high interest rates.  The promise by Government to revitalize Uganda Development Bank has not taken place. Otherwise, it is only developments banks that can intervene in long-term lending and at reasonable rates.  

• The component of foreign firms accessing these funds remains high. These funds are supposed to empower the local enterprises and promote the development of small and medium term enterprises. The committee however noted that even multinational companies are accessing these funds. The concern is what would a foreign investor bring in if she or he is being availed money by Government.

• The payment by beneficiaries cannot be identified as this could have been rolled back in the economy for the period of 12 years.  This is to say that since the total loan is US$160 million and the repayment period is 12 years, yearly basis collection from the people who borrowed money is about US$13.4 million per year and the interest charged at an average of 10 per cent would come to 16 million per annum, thus, the total collection in a year from the end users is about US$30 million per year which should have been available for roll over to new beneficiaries on yearly basis instead of continuing to borrow.

Recommendations:

• Government should undertake to channel the Apex funds through development banks like UDB in order to reduce on high interest rates and promote a long-term facility for long-term investments.

• The transfer of Development Finance Department of Bank of Uganda to UDB should be effected as per the budget speech of 2004/05.

• The issue of interest rates should be urgently addressed and the committee proposes to fix it at 6 percent for the end user since the development banks are to charge lower interest rates. This is when it can be meaningful for the development of small and medium scale undertakings.

• The credit should be renegotiated to provide at least 30 years of maturity in order to benefit long-term investment.

• Government should undertake to provide these loans to upcountry undertakings at lower interest rates for effective development. You can see it is about 10 percent for upcountry.

• Government should roll back the repayments for wider coverage of the activities and the area in the country.

• Agro-processing industry should be promoted to encourage linkages with the predominantly agricultural sector.

• The charge by the Bank of Uganda should be minimized to lower the cost of money to the end user.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the administrative arrangements to address many of the committee’s concerns for the output of Apex IV, have not been provided and as you can see from above there is information we have asked. The committee is not in position to advice the House on the success of the Apex IV countrywide until the loan is able to address the above concerns. The committee stays its approval of this loan request.   I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the report and the conclusion, any debate?

3.34
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would like to thank the committee for having come up with this report so quickly not withstanding yesterday’s concerns and apprehensions. Some of the points raised in this report are especially negative ones and they need to be addressed very quickly.

Number one, I can point out, Mr Speaker, that more than 35 per cent of the loans are going to foreign investors. This is of major concern to us! We are told among other things that foreign investors are bringing money to this country. Are they consultants who come here and workout what to invest and then they come and borrow money locally?  

Mr Speaker, I call upon the Ministry of Finance to come up with a bill, as part of our investment policy, that no foreign investor shall access local credit until after two years. You cannot come here with a briefcase and then you access money, which we have borrowed from abroad for our local investors; show us that you are bringing in your own money to qualify as a foreign investor. After two years of performance, then you can access our local money whether we have borrowed it from abroad or not.

Two, I note with great concern again, among the so-called foreign investors who have accessed these moneys, is a company like COOPER Motors, which deals in vehicles. That kind of service industry should not access scarce capital like this one. Car industries are making huge profits on our back. Again to take the money, which should have gone to a local farmer in Busia, in Kitgum is not fair.

I have noted from this report that there have been a number of defaulters who cannot pay back and, therefore, their properties, factories and industries are being repossessed and auctioned.  Mr Speaker, not all cases of non-payment or poor payment are due to poor management; some of them are due to what we call the “vagrancy” of weather and world markets. Take for instance – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In fact, I would like to bring to the attention of the House and specifically hon. Aggrey Awori, that the competition between the local and foreign firms is taking another shape. We are likely not to have Apex V, what is happening now is that the international banks like Barclays, Stanbic are now negotiating with the European Investment Bank to have the credit channelled directly to their banks. That means that now it will be only foreign related companies to access these moneys through these banks directly, which means if we do not address this now, the so-called 30 per cent is going to become 100 per cent.

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for this information. But in addition to what I was saying or to elaborate on my concern, Mr Speaker, as I said there could be vagrancy of weather or vagrancy of the world market. What do I mean? One, people in floriculture, for instance, I know of two, three indigenous companies that went into this delicate industry of floriculture. They went bankrupt because they had borrowed in foreign exchange and the rate changed suddenly from the dollar to a shilling. So, they were shouldered with extra money due to foreign exchange factor.

Two, one of the companies actually did not get sufficient advice, which should have come from the bank. The type of flowers they were about to send to Europe suddenly the bottom gave out on that type of flowers. So, the whole crop was nearly - half a million dollars went down to the drain. If the bank had come up with some kind of advisory services that indeed you want to borrow this money but these are things that you have to be on a look out for - this is what most European banks do! Why do we leave this to our own people who do not have access to such consulting services?  

Mr Speaker, in the so-called first world, contrary to the third world, whenever you borrow money in a difficult industry you take off a certain percentage for insurance that in case of difficulties, you are actually backed by insurance; the bottom does not give out and you have no place to go. I note with great concern that there is no such provision for us. It does not mean that it shall become difficult in making our repayments, it simply means that in the event of difficulties, which are not of your own making there must be a fall back position. That is how the world develops.  In Europe, for instance, even in the United States, if you buy a house on a mortgage, they always compel you to take 2 per cent insurance policy so that in case the breadwinner who applied for that loan dies suddenly, then there is somebody, an institution to pick up -(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry for interfering with our honourable senior colleague but I am constrained to put hon. Aggrey Awori to order. Is he in order to mislead this House that insurance is actually such a fashionable and profitable business, yet the trend today in very many big sectors of insurance industry is that, everybody is carrying out in house insurance? Is he in order to start saying that it is very fashionable that Government should go - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think he was saying that as another additional security, they encourage you to take insurance; in case there is a catastrophe then something has to be done. I think that is what he meant.

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, thank you so much and I hope my honourable colleague you are back on track.  

Mr Speaker, other concerns again in this money borrowing industry, I note with great concern again that most of this money according to the percentage- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can we curtail your contribution so that others contribute too?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just thought that this is so important and I have known of so many indigenous Ugandans who have gone under and who have been victims of this kind of loophole in our borrowing system. I hate to see, if I can go back to my old argument, money coming here through the main door and then it goes out through window II back to Europe. Why do you give money to Cooper Motors and others? Why do you give money go Garden whatever; it is on Kitante road- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  I think you have said that before.

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker -(Mr Rukutana rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Since you are going to reply anyway why do you not leave him to –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Aggrey Awori for giving way. The examples of foreigners investing in this country, that hon. Awori is giving, do not apply in this circumstance. Here we are dealing with companies. The attachment to the report only indicates the Director’s nationality and it gives a firm name and it says the Director’s nationality is foreign. That is totally different from a foreign company. These companies are registered and they are Ugandan companies. It is immaterial whether the directors or the promoters are foreign or indigenous. If they are resident here, if they are carrying on business here, all the benefits accrue to this country because -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: The statement raised by the honourable Minister in charge of Finance in this regard should be taken very seriously. Is he is trying to suggest that although these companies are registered in Uganda, they are resident in Uganda but the nationalities of the Directors are foreign, are subsidiaries of some other companies outside this country? So that the directors being foreign, but resident in Uganda, he is simply meaning that these are affiliate companies or subsidiary companies of parent firms or parent companies outside this country.

THE SPEAKER:  Is that what it means?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I was going ahead to explain. What I mean is that the majority of these companies are Ugandan companies with foreign owners. In other words, by citizenship, the majority of them as companies are companies of this country. A company registered in this country under our laws is a citizen of this country; it does not matter whether the owners are foreigners. It does not matter because if it is registered here, and it is resident here and it is carrying on business here, all the promoters can take out are the profits but the total sum of the benefits will accrue to this country. They will pay our corporation tax, they will use our utilities, they will employ people here, the majority of them do not bring people from their -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Minister, for your information, thank you my honourable colleague. My honourable colleague, what you are trying to elaborate is not- you are actually just meandering, beating about the bush. The fact remains that Mr Johnson, who owns the majority shareholding in Cooper Motors, at the end of the year he will go to Bank of Uganda and say, “I have earned so much money I have to repatriate my dividends” and those profits were made on money he borrowed locally.  There is no company in this country -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Under the Double Taxation Agreement, these companies which are owned by foreigners, which are incorporated in Uganda and they are operating here under this arrangement, they are free to repatriate not only the profits but also to pay their taxes in their parent countries.

MR AWORI: As you can see, Mr Speaker and my honourable colleague, the situation is getting worse and worse. Not only do these people get investment incentives, but they are also getting money, which the little Awori in Kitgum should be enjoying and then they take it back.

Now, to go back to the issue of the rate of interest, these are actually exorbitant. I think the Minister of Finance should revise the terms in various categories of industries. Number one, the service industries especially in the social services like health, like schools or education, you cannot charge them the same rate of interest as industries or manufacturing.  The rate of return on a social service industry like a school, like a hospital, is very low. As a matter of fact, you would be very lucky in a hospital or a school if you can get more than 15 per cent on your return of investment. So, therefore, there should be categories that if you are in a social service, like I see Citizen High School which has applied for a loan here, why do you charge it 18 per cent when they cannot manage even to get 17 per cent?  

These schools are now deceiving themselves by borrowing money from EAB, EAI and then put up beautiful schools, but within five years, 15 years they are going to be caught up with this money tied up infrastructure whose returns in terms of investment are lower than the rate of interest. So, Mr Speaker, I am calling upon the Ministry of Finance to review their rate of interest in charges, manufacturing industry, you can really has a higher return; social service, you cannot.

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, the matter of UDB.  UDB should be brought back into business as quickly as possible to handle all these loans we are getting from abroad. For us to channel these loans through commercial banks, which are not used to industries except business and trade, is not fair.  Mr Speaker, I call upon the ministry to revise their terms especially the interest rates.  I thank you.

3.50
MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad the committee has come up on the interest rates in this country. I remember, when I was an MBA student, there was one of my colleagues, Mr Malinga, who works with Bank of Uganda, he did a research on why interest rates are high in Uganda. Actually, in his research he established that because banks were operating at a very inefficient financial level.  

At the time, particularly during the 1980s, a lot of banks were giving out political loans, which were unlikely to be recovered at that time. There were a lot of other risks involved at the time.  But today as we are speaking, the banks have no reasons why they should charge high rates because most of them are privatized. In fact, all of them have been privatized. So, they have no excuse to operate inefficiently; they have to operate in efficient manner so that the interest rates come down.

The current banks in Uganda are relying heavily on treasury bills. 70 per cent of their investment is to Government and they are getting those interests from Government, so they do not even care about interest rates to ordinary people who are borrowing from the banks. So, those are some of the major weaknesses that are going on and Government should do something to reduce on the treasury bills investment by these banks because they are depending heavily on Government and, therefore, ignoring the private market.

Private sector funding in our country Uganda today: The investment from the banks constitute only 6 per cent, according to the World Bank report. Only 6 per cent of our entire investment, money is benefiting the private sector. That explains why our private sector is very weak, coupled with high interest rates, which they cannot afford and many of them like the service industry, honourable Awori, mentioned. Kampala Parents School was lost to Sudhir because of high interest rates and these are indigenous people losing out their investment because of high interest rates. All those are part of the consequences.

High interest rates plays negatively against our indigenous investors, Ugandan investors. I give, an example. During privatisation, when most of the state-owned industries were being sold, who bought them? Mostly foreign investors! Why? Because they could access capital at a very low interest rate from abroad, from their countries at 3 to 4 per cent, buy off our industries and yet our local investors here, if they are to access such funds, they are charged not less than 15 per cent, putting them at a very terribly disadvantageous position and definitely that works against us. And in some sectors, there is even deliberate sabotage by foreign investors against our own indigenous investors, through levying and unfair rates and making it difficult for them to move further.
  
So, our interest rates currently are only favourable for trade, for this Dubai business. You buy something, then sell the next door to make a quick difference. It is not favourable for long-term investment. We are now suffering, we cannot even get private sector to invest in generation of power in our country. We do not have the capacity because the rates are too high that our private sector has not developed that capacity to even marshal funds to invest in heavy industries and heavy power generation sector.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I think we need to really get to the bottom of this concept of interest rates. We have done research, and the problem of interest rates is not the commercial banks. The problem of high interest rate in this country is public expenditure, budget deficit. It forces Bank of Uganda to sell treasury bills at a very high rate and that is what attracts the commercial banks. If Bank of Uganda was selling treasury bills at a low rate, automatically the commercial banks would also go down in terms of their interest rates. 

So, the problem is not commercial banks, the problem is us, public administration, budget deficit which forces Bank of Uganda to look for money, how to finance public administration. Tomorrow, if Bank of Uganda decides to sell treasury bills at a low rate, all the rates in all commercial banks will go down. Thank you, that is the information I wanted to give you.

MR ONEK: Thank you very much. In fact, I was going to come to that. What is the way forward, Minister of Finance? We must have a deliberate policy.  Government must have a deliberate policy to promote our indigenous investors by giving them the favourable conditions. One of them has already been mentioned by honourable Ekanya as a point of information. Government should deliberately bring down the interest on treasury bills to 3 or 4 per cent to force banks to come down to 5 or 6 per cent to private sector.

In many countries, government set the maximum level of interest to be charged on loans. Do we have such a policy here? We must have a policy also to limit how much these private banks should charge so that they can work very hard to improve efficiency –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, the determination of interest rates is a function of so many things:  One, the efficiency by which the banks work. Two, the risk perception, this is the way you perceive that the loans you extend are going to be repaid. And the third is what hon. Ekanya has brought; clearing the government deficit has a bearing on the rate of interest on treasury bills. It is a combination of all these that makes it practically unadvisable to put ceilings on the interest rates.  This is the information I wanted to give to the honourable Member.

MR ONEK: Thank you. Well, those factors are relevant particularly their risk element, but Uganda at least during the last 19 years has been relatively stable and there is investor confidence, so they would not worry very much about losing their investment. The government financial policies are very favourable to anybody who brings in money to take out whatever they want. So, those risks have been limited over the years. I would wish that the ministry develops more favourable terms for our local investors. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.57
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me first of all to congratulate my colleague honourable, Professor, for the maiden speech. (Laughter). Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, is hon. Kikungwe in order to suggest that the professor is making a maiden speech yet he has been speaking here many times on this Floor and it is in the Hansard? Is he in order really to suggest this? 

THE SPEAKER:  Maybe you are saying so because the professor has just returned from EU/ACP. (Laughter)

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. The committee has been very clear there was Apex I, Apex II, Apex III and now we are moving on to another one Apex IV. This money is given for quite a long period of time; the one under consideration today is for 30 years. But when these commercial banks are giving out this money, the maximum period they are giving to the people who borrow is like 7 years. 

The implication, Mr Speaker, is that after Apex I, II and III we should have generated capacity to use the very money that was in Apex I, II, and III and then lend that very money to other borrowers. It is unfortunate that what is happening is that the trend is continuing maybe after 6 months we are bound to be faced with another request of Apex V. What has happened to this money they have recovered from projects, which got this money? Let us use this money to give out to have a multiplier effect otherwise we are going to have a problem. The first one we got was in 1995; since 1995 up to today it is a long time so, we have a lot of money in stock. That is the implication. 

Mr Speaker, a lot has been said about interest rates, but I would like to add that unless interest rates are checked, we are only sitting here to look for work for NPART. Let us look at interest rates that are going to be reasonable, that are going to be affordable –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have merits but have we not dealt with this issue of interest rates? Are there no other issues in the report so that we also concentrate on other issues? But you are free to continue with that issue.

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I only talked about it because I just wanted to alert this House that if we do not or if we overlook it we are going to have a problem.  

Then there is another issue of treasury bills, Mr Speaker. Some approach has been used when talking about the treasury bills. Mine is that, honourable Minister, we should find a way of discouraging commercial banks to trade in treasury bills. We should find a way - I am just calling upon the minister because, what is happening, commercial banks have the money to lend out to the general public, but because they imagine that treasury bills are risk free, they go for that and the amount of money that should have been rent out to the general public is tied up in treasury bills. 

We should find or look at this situation and find how we can avert it. Bank of Uganda should get out of trading. This business of charging 6 per cent on all these loans to commercial banks it is one way of again loading more costs on the end user. Why do we not channel this money direct to say, development banks, instead of it having it go through Bank of Uganda? 

There is in this report that Apex I, II, and III, the money has not been fully utilized we still have some amount unutilised. If you add some other amount that they have recovered in form of loan recoveries, we should be able to generate enough money and lend it out instead of acquiring another loan Apex IV. We are highly indebted and, therefore, I support the position of the committee.  I thank you, Mr speaker.

4.05
MR HENRY MUTEBI KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very unfortunate for this country not to have an effective development bank because these moneys we are talking about should have been in the development bank, and if the development bank is not operational, how do you expect a middle businessman to be able to develop with the commercial banks, which are cutthroat? 

These days we see commercial banks saying they have made profit of Shs 300 billion. The Shs 300 billion is what they have squeezed out of Ugandans through many channels of how they recover the money. Many of us have got some accounts in banks but when you look at your bill at the end of day of book adjustment, of ledger books, of what, you will see that you are not below 200,000 a month. 

So, I urge the Minister of Finance to operationalise the Uganda Development Bank as soon as possible. That is a business bank and a peoples’ bank, because the interest rates are always affordable. 

The Americans say it is only a fool who will use his savings to do business, because when you use your savings to do business and your business collapses, you also collapse with it. They normally use money from the bank supported by insurances so that your savings are for you and your family and for your future. But in this country, we are using our savings, and that is why many people burn their fingers. I think this is not a good trend, neither is it healthy for business in Uganda.

My friend the new Minister of Trade has a problem now in Kampala. This is the influx of Chinese, Pakistanees and everybody from outside Uganda, who are doing business in Kampala as hawkers. How can we have hawkers who are not Ugandans to come in Kampala and take away business from our fellow Ugandans? Many of them are doing very petty businesses and I do not know how they get work permits. I do not know how they get their immigration papers to swam Kampala and do petty businesses. This must also be checked. How are we going to support –(Interruption)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you my colleague for giving way. For your information, these Pakistanees or businessmen from outside Uganda have gone upcountry. They are not only in Kampala; they are even in Fort Portal, Mbarara and other places selling chapattis, and doing other kinds of businesses.

MR MUTEBI KITYO: Uganda is the only country where you can pack your bag and come for a holiday and do business the way you want. This is not possible in other countries, and I think we have to restrict them and give a chance to Ugandans to be able to do business; it is very tight. If any of us walked through Nakivubo and Luwum Street and talked to these businessmen, they will tell you that they are being pushed out of business everyday. And how are we going to sustain our economy when our fellow Ugandans are being pushed out of business everyday?

I am very happy about this APEX fund because it has provided very good schools around Kampala and throughout the country. Most of the upcoming schools you see have been constructed using these funds. What I do not know is the mechanics of interest rates and their capacity to pay for the loans. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.09
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I also rise to thank the Members of the committee for their findings. But Mr Speaker, I am also worried especially when they say on one of the pages that “There is high degree of non-payment by the end users as the AFI go down to attach and auction the properties of the beneficiaries who do not meet their obligations.” 

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether when they are looking for these loans, they actually look at all the aspects of our society today. Right now, as you have seen the list, agro-processing, service industries and the rest - Do they take into account the issue of the electricity we have in this country now? Why am I bringing out this electricity thing? It is going to affect most of these businesses and even the loans. People outside there are complaining about load shedding. 

Take a company like Mukwano; they work in shifts. At around 6.00 p.m. or 7.00 p.m. there is load shedding and the power comes back at around midnight, and to switch on the machine takes about 4 hours when the machines have laboured, and you come and borrow this money! I am not surprised that businesses are winding up because of these loans we are getting. Add to that the fake investors and the high interest rates. Chairperson of the committee, even if you took this to the whole of Uganda where all our population is based, they cannot afford these loans. 

Yes, cottage industries are suffering; people who are adding value to maize just making flour, even as I am talking now, are idle. Who is going to afford this? This is going to benefit only the foreign companies and at the end of the day, they are going to pack up and go and leave us with these loans and when they has not had any impact at all. If we do not address issues of electricity and others like they have mentioned above, we are not going to do anything.

Mr Speaker, you remember we had the issue of cotton here and one of the reasons for instance the ginners were saying the high costs of ginning cotton came from the power. They are using generators and loading it to the farmers. That is why even the poverty levels have gone up to 38 percent. 

I was reading a newspaper and they were saying that by 2014, it would be over 40 percent. Therefore if we do not address most of these issues, we are borrowing these monies for the foreigners who will repatriate it later and then we are going to pay for nothing. That is my area of concern. Unless the Ministry of Trade and Industry and that of Finance come in to address all this, we are just giving this money decorum without it having any impact in our society. I thank you. 

4.12
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I have two major concerns, but before I raise them, I would like to thank my friend, hon. Nandala Mafabi for bringing this report and the committee. 

When you turn to page 2 of this report, the committee has observed that they requested for some information, for example, an evaluation report of the previous lines of credit and tax performance of the firms that benefited from APEX I to III, but the information was not availed. My concern is, who was supposed to provide this information? And if it is a minister, our ministers all take Oaths before they start performing their ministerial roles. 

Even our Constitution is very, very clear in Article 118. It says, “Parliament may, by resolution supported by more than half of all Members of Parliament, pass a vote of censure on a minister on any of the following grounds – 

(a) abuse of office and willful violation of the allegiance of oath of office…” 

This is a committee of Parliament mandated to carry out the functions of Parliament. They come to a minister to ask for information and the minister does not provide the information. What would you expect the committee to do, and Mr minister, what do you expect us to do as Parliament? 

My last concern Mr Speaker, is on page 6. We are told that most of the projects were within Kampala and Jinja. This is a loan that is supposed to be paid by all Ugandans, 26 million people. You give 80 percent of the money to only 2 million people in Kampala. I do not know if our ministers who have made this plan have taken chance to reach upcountry. 

I have had a privilege to go to Kanungu, Kabale, Kibaale, Mayuge, and Sironko where hon. Mafabi comes from. How will our people receive the information that we borrow loans that they will pay and yet the money is spent by the people of Kampala alone? And worse still, how would the people of Kapelebyong receive this information that we borrow money to give to the foreigners and we pay the loans?

Mr Speaker, I would like to concur with the committee; unless I am convinced by the Minister that they will undertake to provide the loans to upcountry dwellers and I would like to suggest that before we approve this loan, we would get from the minister the proposed Work plan –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do they just give or you apply for the loan? I think what we are saying is that the information should be passed on that there is money, but you have to apply for a loan.  Nobody will take a loan to you, honestly.

MR MALINGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I will never apply for a loan, which I do not know that it exists in our country. So, Mr Speaker, I would like to get to know from the Minister, how do the people in the country know that these loans exist so that they apply for them? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Workers Representative and then the honourable from Rukungiri. This is how we proceed, but we have got two resolutions and then the other business.

4.17
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We must learn to give credit where it is due. I think this administration is making efforts to facilitate development in our country among others. But, reading this report, I come to a conclusion, without any difficulty, that either they do not know how investment can be promoted in this country or they are just incapable of doing this task.

Mr Speaker, one of the biggest impediments to trade and investment in this country is high interest rates. Now, here is a government that says that it would like to promote trade and investment, it borrows money at 1 percent and channels development funds through a commercial bank. They lend to these commercial banks at about six/seven percent, the commercial banks go to lend out this money to our people to up to 17.9 percent. Why can the –(Interruption)- just by simple common sense –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is actually not only this loan that has been borrowed – at least this one has been offered to the public at less than 10 percent, but there is a loan, which we approved here for Rural Micro Finance Support programme schemes, which we borrowed at 0.75 percent and we were passing it to rural people to pass it to the end users and the Government is giving it between 15 and 19 percent.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member on the Floor that we should be careful about the issue of frightening investors. (Laughter).  Why?  Because he is a member of Parliament representing Workers and I am worried that the investors who have brought in equipment for processing raw materials, which are coming from overseas are going to shift to Mombasa, because the cost of moving things and holding things at Mombasa is prohibitive and the time it takes to move any raw material from Mombasa, even spare parts to Kampala is two months. With bureaucracy and inefficiency we have –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order.  Arising from the statement by hon. Gagawala from Bulamogi that the rate of interest must therefore, be high because we should not frighten the investors in this country, is he in order to misunderstand the very concept of the interest rate and financial improvement for that matter and confuse this House, knowing very well that, the banks, which charge the rate of interest actually have no relation with investors who come and are not even signatories when investors are coming to this country?

THE SPEAKER: I think what he should have done, is to educate him by giving information. But why he is not out of order is because he is misunderstanding something. (Laughter)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Engineer Gagawala has a right to speak, but I think it is not for me to reply to what he has said. Mr Speaker, the point that I was making is that, why should simple logic elude Government? I saw the Minister here speaking very strongly as if the issues that are being raised do not make economic sense. You borrow money at one percent and you are unable to put in place a mechanism to lend this money to people at 5/6 percent. 

In the Budget Speech for 2004/05, Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development promised that the Uganda Development Bank was going to be revitalized and it is on account of that information that we are requesting the government to make sure that this money is not channelled to investors through commercial banks, because the reason why commercial banks exist, is to make money. This is the only country where the leadership thinks that commercial banks can handle development issues. 

I have been, by the way, at the World Bank Institute on issues of labour market policies. So, I speak with authority on some of these things. Mr Speaker, I have looked at the schedule of those who have borrowed and I have seen Fontana Auto Parts selling spare parts and the directors are foreign nationals. Now, of what significance to our development are spare parts, that Ugandans should borrow money to lend to someone to sell spare parts and run a garage in Uganda? Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ERESU:  Information.

MR WANDERA:  Mr Speaker, just one minute.

MR ERESU: It will help you. I want to give in respect to Fontana, it is here indicated that Fontana is a manufacturer. We would like to know, what manufacturing does Fontana Auto Parts produce in this country?

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much honourable Eresu.  I now move to the responsibility of Parliament. Mr Speaker, any balance sheet without liabilities and assets would be fraudulent, and if we are going to be fair to this country, this Parliament must re-examine itself, because these loans cannot pass without us. It is us who passed APEX I, II and III.  

Under Article 159(2) of our Constitution, no money can be borrowed by Government without us approving and it is therefore, not proper for us to come here and talk like we do not have any responsibility in this mess. When I was thinking about this matter last night, I just felt whether it is not prudent for us as Parliament to apologize to Ugandans, because we have been aiding Government in borrowing bogus loans.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg to support the proposal by the committee that this loan should not be approved. There is a tendency in this House that anything that the Government brings should be supported because the majority of the Members are Movement, but the Constitution tells us to make laws and policies for development (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, aren’t you alienating others? Just make your case without diving the House.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. So, we have a responsibility to make laws and policies for the development of this country and when I review this loan, it is not certainly in the interest of the development of our country. So, I urge all Members, as advised by Mr Speaker, to oppose the approval of this loan. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.32
MRS WINFRED MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to re-discuss the report from the committee. I only wish that as a country we would be able to refrain from loans. I only hope that time will come when we shall be able to generate our own income and run without having to go through these loans, the borrowing and all its outcomes.  

Mr Speaker, it is true we have to go through this now and we have to borrow this money for specific reasons, and I think we should look at it with a sober mind. If you look at the objectives, I have failed completely to reconcile some of the recommendations of the committee with the objectives of the APEX facility. 

I would like to put it clear that we should bear in mind that this is a loan not a grant, and when you look at the objectives of the APEX facility that were put in place by the Government and against which, I think the negotiations took place, one of them is the development of a long term capital market to benefit and promote private sector as an engine for growth. 

(ii) Enabling the private enterprise to access financing on competitive terms.

(iii) Promoting and facilitating new investment and growth in the productive sectors of the economy.

(iv) Promoting and supporting the development of small and medium scale enterprises especially start up ventures in the economy.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommended, which really I think would be the ideal, that Government should undertake to provide these loans to upcountry undertaking through rates for equitable development.

Mr Speaker, I think this is not in line with the objectives of the APEX. Maybe we should change these objectives to suit what we actually want or focus on some other loans to bring about the equitable development by considering the rural and urban and giving concessions to some programmes and others because – (Interjections)

MR MWANDHA: Point of information.

MRS MASIKO: I will take it later.  What I wanted to put across is that if you say, for instance, the objective is to encourage competitiveness, for heavens sake, how do you think you are going to put an industry in a rural area where the market, the capital and the skilled labour might not even exist? You will certainly find that it is very convenient to put it in the urban centre. Therefore, I think Mr Speaker where we erred is when we set up these objectives. 

Nevertheless, I do not think this was an error, it must have been another sector that looked at these as needs and established these objectives and I am sure that if you look at the other loans that we have borrowed in the past, they have addressed some of these rural inequalities in regard to development.  

Therefore, I think that the committee though some of the recommendations are good there are some which I do think are not ideal. Mr Speaker, it is very unfair for the committee to stand here and say - (Interruption) 

MR MAFABI: Could you help the Committee and tell which recommendations are hopeless so that see how to deal with them?

MRS MASIKO: Mr Speaker, I have not allowed any clarification and I think honestly as Members of Parliament, we should respect the rules of procedure. We are not in a market place and for a chairperson to react like that, I think he owes me an apology as somebody holding the Floor.

Mr Speaker, I have not said hopeless, I have said some recommendations do not tally with the objectives and I have given my reasons as to why I think it is like that. If you look at some of the comments, we have said on the Floor of Parliament that our people do not know about the loan. I think we should never repeat such statements here because we sit and discuss, and it is our duty, that is why we represent constituencies, to take back this information and inform as many people who would like to join some of these enterprises to be involved. Therefore, I think we should realize that it is us who have got to take this information to our constituencies to help them become competitive and also get involved in these things. 

Mr Speaker, I think the committee should withdraw the statement that we throw out this, let us look at it objectively and we support it for our development, I thank you.

4.32
MS BIRUNGI KIRASO (Woman Representative Kabarole): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and my colleagues who have already contributed on this loan, which I think should be very important for the economy. But Mr Speaker, when we are discussing the usefulness this loan, look at the objectives along side the money which we have already got from APEX I and II and III.  If we do not put this into context and we look at APEX 1V in isolation then I think we are missing the point. 

It is true that there are objectives, which are lined up here, but it is also not true that this is not the first APEX loan, which Uganda is accessing. The first one came ten years ago, so to put this in context, look at what the APEX loans have done since 1995. And honourable members, I would like to invite you to look at the schedule, which the committee has attached for us in terms of the beneficiaries of this loan. It would also be very important if the hon. Minister threw more light on the contribution to the economy from companies like the ones here on paper. I think it is very important to put things into context. 

Mr Speaker, you did rule that a lot of people who have contributed have talked about interest rate but allow me to say that if you are in charge of an economy, there are only two key areas that you will look at; the monetary policy and the fiscal policy. And if you are discussing the monetary policy of an economy, there is no way you are going to discuss that and you do not talk about the interest rate; it is a very important component. I will not labour to – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When I talked about interest I was saying that the point has been delivered, are there other issues? That was the purpose; I was not saying it is not important.

MS KIRASO: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that, but I would like my Colleagues to look at this scenario where the government or the bank gets this loan at “x” amount of interest.  The bank makes a profit, keeps the profit, the commercial bank makes a profit and keeps it, the people who have taken the loan, Apex I, II and III, according to the report, I think they got information from the Government, they say the repayment has been satisfactory. 

Now, from the budget point of view, I would like the Minister to inform this House when repayment has been done on Apex I, II and III where has these monies gone?  Because – (Interjection) – Let me finish just this sentence. The repayment period is 30 years, we started borrowing these monies 10 years ago when the money is paid back to the government, does it go as budget support? Is it put in some special fund? If not, what is that fund meant to do, if we are going to continue borrowing and we are not told of how this money, which has been repaid, is being used? (Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you for giving way. The information, I want to give is that these loans, Apex I, II and III and probably Apex IV is actually recycling in the same group of people because when you look at the schedule of the beneficiaries you find they are the same people. For instance, Rwenzori Beverages 1, Rwenzori Beverages 2, then there is Rwenzori Beverages 3. So, it is likely that even APEX IV, there will be Rwenzori Beverages 4, 5 et cetera. It is repetitive; the same people are benefiting. 

Another information which I would like to pass on that colleagues had remarked that the value of the foreign component is actually 75 percent of the total value while the local people are getting just 25 percent of the money. 

MR AWORI: In the first tranche of the loan eight years ago, there was a company in this country that took the money from this loan at 18 percent, put it in the open market at 22 percent, went back to the bank paid them off 18 percent and pocketed the difference, no development.

MR EKANYA: The committee was constrained to state that the loan recovery was satisfactory. According to the information we got from Uganda Revenue Authority regarding APEX I and II, none of the companies has ever remitted corporate tax, what does that show? That none of them declared profit, all of them said that they were not making profit and the record is there from Uganda Revenue Authority.  So, these people have been evading taxes and we keep on borrowing to give them more money.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I am interested to know from the committee or from the Minister, which these approved financial institutions are? Why? Because this one will answer the question of equitability.  You know, honourable Members that there are some of our areas, which lack commercial banking services. So if a loan is being handled by Barclays Bank, for example, and I think honourable Johnson Malinga said he is from Kapelebyong, I do not know how many banks are in Kapelebyong. I know where it is, but I do not know whether the people there, even if they actually wanted to access funding, even if they had what it takes, whether they have got financial services which are near them. 

So I think it would also be important to look at the approved financial institutions so that if we are to target a wider section of the population, some of these financial institutions which have got a wider branch coverage are used to pass on these kinds of funds. Before some of this is answered, really I will also find it very constrained to support the passing of APEX IV.

4.41
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): I thank you Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report but I have reservations on their recommendations.

First of all, as a matter of principle, when you are borrowing money in running public finance for investment, for industrialization and infrastructural development, it is a positive development. The results do not come immediately, but eventually you see the results and that is good. So, for that matter, I support the initiate of government borrowing.

Secondly, my colleague hon. Kiraso has just said that when we are looking at APEX IV, we need to look back at APEX I, II and III. The committee has been very helpful and they have given us appendices listing the several investments, which are visible on the ground. For instance, nobody here will say that there is no house in his constituency roofed by the products of Roofings. Everybody all over the country is taking Rwenzori Mineral water from Rwenzori Beverages. So the visibility of the impact of these monies is evident, these programmes, these enterprises, this corporations are there – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mamba Point 1, Mamba Point 2, they sell spaghetti and muchomo only in Nakasero.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, if we look at the biggest taxpayers in this country are the petrol companies, the beverage processors, that is the breweries, these are all listed as some of the borrowers. These types of enterprises are actually beefing up the Ministry of Finance because actually the Ministry of Finance up to today has not got enough people to collect revenue or to be able to produce products, which people can purchase.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t we have a mechanism in our laws where government should be periodically reporting on these loans? 

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, there is a provision in the Budget Act that at the time of presenting the Budget, or any time just before the 15th of June in each financial year the President shall lay before Parliament the total indebtedness of the state. I must commend the ministry because they have done that since the Budget Act was operationalised and we have been presenting a report on the loan performance.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, there has never been a forensic audit of the performance of loans and their performance in this country, I can challenge the honourable minister to produce any forensic audit on any loan we have ever borrowed.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, as my colleague has reported, the President provides this information, but here we are faced with a situation where the minister, on page 2, is withholding information, which the committee needs in order to be able to assess the performance of previous loans. Therefore, for this new loan they have requested for information, which is given in the middle of that page. Has the ministry evaluated these loans, have they monitored them? They have refused to give the answer, may be they are not even monitoring them. Where is this money located –(Mr Rukutana rose_) I am giving information, Mr Speaker, I cannot be giving information and then receive information. (Interjections) No, you can clarify when I have finished.  

Mr Speaker, the minister can clarify, - unless he does not know the rules of the House. I am giving information. They have asked for simple information -(Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: Thank you for the information, hon. Mwandha – (Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, now that you have said there is a law under which they should be reporting on these loans periodically, I think we have to find our own mechanism of cross-checking what they have reported so that when they report, we scrutinize and make a report. 

MR BANYENZAKI: When we asked the minister about the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am not talking about this one in particular; I am talking generally.

MR BANYENZAKI: On several loans that we have asked the performance and evaluation report, in most cases the minister has always been saying that the evaluation report is not there. Even in this loan today, the minister testified that there is no evaluation report on the past loans. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. This morning, I personally appeared before the Committee on the National Economy. I told the committee on the national economy that government through Bank of Uganda commissioned a monitoring exercise for these particular loans; APEX I, II and III and that we had a draft report. I even showed the committee a copy of the draft report, which I have here, which I can lay on the Table. 

I also told the committee that we are compiling the report and in due course, we would submit the report to the committee. Is it in order  for honourable Banyenzaki who was present in the committee to mislead this House by saying that when I was asked about the report, I said that we did not have an evaluation report, when I actually showed the committee a copy of the draft report?  

THE SPEAKER: Is it a fact hon Banyenzaki that the report was shown to you?  

MR BANYENZAKI:  Mr Speaker, a monitoring report is different from an evaluation report. What you are talking about is of a monitoring; we are talking of an evaluation report, evaluation of Apex I -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Address the Chair please too.

MR BANYENZAKI: Obliged, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: No, I think let him finish then - because you will speak.

MR KIZIGE:  Mr Speaker, back to my point. I want to emphasize that the products of Apex I, II and II are visible and there is no question about that.  As to the technical evaluation, it is good the minister has said that there is a report that will be presented to this House and we are waiting for it and on the basis of that, for me I would support the loan.

I want to look at the issue of interest rates.  Honourable Prof. Kamuntu has explained the reasons that are considered in fixing interest rates. I just want to emphasize the point of risk – the level of risk-(Interjections)- I wish I could just contribute and then –(Interruption)

MR KITYO MUTEBI: I want to be clarified. Mr Speaker, the loan in question will be paid by Ugandans may be after 30 years.  May I know whether it is human to get a loan at 0.75 and make Ugandans pay between 18 and 22 per cent?
 
MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that my colleague hon Kityo came in when I was just starting to explain the issue of interest rates.  Mr Speaker, risk is a very big factor in determining interest rate. If I could use our practical example, if the prime lending rates in the country today is 21 percent to 23 percent, Centenary Bank would not hesitate to give a salary loan to a Member of Parliament at 14 percent / 13 percent because Centenary Bank is assured of recovery at any time. Therefore, the level of risk is minimized. So it is because of such factors the level of risk in recovery that a bank will fix a rate taking into consideration all those factors.  But the principle here is, how does somebody come to a decision to borrow in the first instance?  

There should be a proper feasibility study done by technical people knowledgeable in this area and then they are advised whether that project is feasible or not. If the project is not feasible then somebody should never undertake it. You are told the interest rate at the very beginning and then you make a decision whether to take the loan or not. These enterprises that have taken these APEX loans we are told are doing very well. (Interruption)

MS MUGERWA:  Point of information, Mr Speaker.  

MR KIZIGE: I will not take it; let me develop my point.

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am sorry to take the Floor to make a point of order in this respect because I think that this is a very important subject, a subject which concern everybody in the country because it concerns our economy. But is it really in order for hon Kizige to think that actually people do not do a feasibility study before they apply for these loans? Did we really anticipate the bottlenecks in electricity which has failed people to function fully so that actually they pay for these loans.  A lot of industries and factories are not functioning because of the failure of government to provide the infrastructure, to provide the necessary power. Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You see, we understand things differently, but I think if you have the point of order and point of information, the priority should be on order. But if you fail to get the Floor because somebody has resisted, then you cannot immediately find a point of order. Let us not misuse these interventions, honourable members.

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, just to help my colleague, -(Interruptions)

MS KIRASO: Thank you very much, hon. Kizige. These APEX funds have a lower risk than the money, which was already available in the commercial banks. When the approved financial institutions got access to the APEX funds, because they were already lending their own money at a higher rate and the central bank tried to make them lend out this money on behalf of this programme at a lower rate. This money ended up being kept somewhere and not lent out because the banks felt they were going to lose out. Imagine you are giving me something to sell on your behalf, which is cheaper, but I am also dealing in the same product. So that is what happened and –(Interruptions)

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Speaker, I want to be clarified. When any customer or applicant wants to use the APEX loans, he applies through that bank directly to Bank of Uganda. Then if that money comes, when the applicant knows that he has qualified to have the money from Bank of Uganda, an APEX loan, how come a commercial bank can keep it? I am surprised!  Can I be clarified?

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think let me help my colleague. Bank of Uganda is the one, which gets the money from the European Investment Bank. For anybody to access the money, he has to go to the a commercial bank and it is the commercial bank, which evaluates that person, then sends it to Bank of Uganda. Bank of Uganda passes the money and says “I am giving you this ten million dollars, at an interest rate of 8 percent, it is up to you to loan what you want”.  

So when it becomes due for payment, that commercial bank which got money for those customers will be debited in Bank of Uganda, just direct without asking them that you took our one million dollars, here it is, we have debited.  It is up to the responsibility of the bank, which disbursed the funds to look for that borrower. So that is where the complication is, Bank of Uganda loans, the commercial bank loans and of course that makes the thing big.

MR LWANGA MUTEKANGA: Mr Speaker and my learned colleague, as an accountant, actually he is trying to give information, but the information he has given is a bit distorted.  What really happens is, the commercial bank evaluates the risk, the Central Bank evaluates the project.  Thank you.

MR KIZIGE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to conclude my contribution.  The point I am making –(Interruptions)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, as hon. Kiraso has mentioned, for the economy as a whole, we stand to benefit by getting this loan, because if you look at page 3, the amount of the loan is 30 million Euros, the interest rate is one percent, the maturity period is 12 years with five years of grace. You cannot get this money on a commercial market, and it is because of the nature of its cheapness that for the whole economy to get it, we would stand to benefit. Therefore in our debate and decision our greatest difficulty is internal implementation arrangements. So we should get the money, but we should ask the Minister to re-examine the internal implementation arrangements for the economy to benefit. But for us to refuse the loan, we stand to lose. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KIZIGE: Now Mr Speaker, I just want to finish with two points. Honourable members, there is this issue of distribution across the country.  Between October 2002 and February 2003, I had the privilege to lead a team of consultants from Business Energies and Uganda Manufacturers Association Consulting and Information Services. We were doing some work for the DANIDA Private Sector Development Programme. They wanted the team of consultants to identify 100 enterprises outside Kampala, which qualify for funding; not loans, but grants for funding to develop their businesses and then thereafter, be linked with DANISH Enterprises.  

Mr Speaker, for four months, we went across the country and we were only able to identify four companies out of the 100 they required. We went to every district, because the opportunities for investment are around Kampala here and that is a fact. You invest where you will have returns within a particular time. It is unfortunate, but that is a fact, which has to be addressed differently. But you cannot make it a condition for approving a loan.

Lastly, when we talk of foreigners being directors in enterprises, the volume of direct foreign investments is a consideration for growth and development of an economy. When you have foreigners coming to incorporate companies in this country and then they invest here, it is a sign for growth for the country, for development. So I see nothing wrong with that. For that matter, I want to support the Minister and have this loan approved and the committee’s report rejected. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. chairperson, are we competent to grant this loan with conditions for its administration? Can we do that? Isn’t it possible?

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, to begin with, the Minister of Finance, true, came to the committee and he said the report is not yet ready. I agree with him, he talked of a draft, that one I cannot deny.  But what is important, Mr Speaker, is that the committee believes this loan is meant for development and the people who should benefit are the local enterprises so that they are able to lead what we call, “national-led development” rather than “Foreign-led development”. That is the reason why we had asked the ministry to come up with an affirmative action on: 

1. Interest rate; 

2. Other parts of the country are going to be developed; 

3. How they are going to administer the money. It is true we had believed that if this money went through a development bank, it would be better than going through a commercial bank.

THE SPEAKER: So, my question was, are we competent to approve the loan with conditions that we do this and the other.

MR MAFABI: No, Mr Speaker; that will not work. If the Minister can go back and come up with that, then it can be done.

MR MWANDHA: For me, borrowing is good and I want to agree with hon. Masiko that we wish we were not borrowing. But the only occasion when we shall recover from borrowing is when we utilize the money borrowed effectively. I think in my view it will be wrong for this Parliament to approve this loan without asking the minister to provide the information the committee requested in the first instance. Therefore, the way forward would be for the minister to provide the answers to what the committee has requested. These answers are not impossible, if the minister really cares to co-operate with the committee. If we simply pass this loan without the committee getting answers to these questions, we will be undermining our own committee. 

Therefore, I want the minister to be humble enough and answer the questions that have been put to him by the committee so that they can then submit to us a proposal; and I will then support the approval of this loan.

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the members who have contributed to this debate on this loan. First of all, the objective and intentions of this loan have been properly captured by the report and the various members who debated. None of the members who debated is saying that we do not need the money. We need the money. The concern is that there are some shortcomings in the implementation of the project. I concede that there are a few shortcomings. 

That notwithstanding I have to say that all the loans that we have obtained Apex I, Apex II and Apex III have been very successful. As a result of the success of Apex I, Apex II and Apex III, this money we are going to borrow for the information of honourable members, is money that was meant for other countries, which after assessment by the lenders were found incompetent. This amount of money was –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us get the explanation.

MR RUKUTANA: This amount of money we are trying to borrow now was money meant for other countries, which could not access it because after assessment the lenders found that the countries had not properly utilised the money. So the lenders chose to give the money to Uganda. That is a vote of confidence! On the performance of Apex I, Apex II and Apex III, one of the main objectives was to create jobs. 
Honorable members, I want to tell you as I told the committee this morning that the impact of those phases is widely seen on the ground. For example, in terms of employment, which is the main purposes why we are borrowing this money, Apex I and Apex II created 9,200 jobs; Apex III created eleven thousand one hundred -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable minister, we are trying to get a way forward and I asked you to respond to hon. James Mwandha’s suggestion. There are two other members, hon. Ben Wacha and hon. Nkuuhe, who I think are proposing a way forward to see how we handle this matter in view of the fact that we actually need the money but we also need to improve the administration of this loan. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I entirely agree with you. There are aspects that I can – that we shall approve. For example, I concede that it is not proper for this money to be administered by commercial banks. Government has already said that the Department of Development Finance will shift from Bank of Uganda to Uganda Development Bank.  

I have told the committee, and I want to assure honorable members that a process of restructuring Uganda Development Bank to be able to offer long-term financing is underway. Soon Uganda Development Bank will be restructured and will be able to take over this portfolio from Bank of Uganda. When it does, most of the concerns of honorable members will be answered in that way. 

I appeal to members since we need this money, you may put a condition that until that department is shifted we do not disburse. But saying that we do not go ahead to obtain the loan would be like a dying person saying that you will not eat the food because it is not properly cooked. We need the money, we appreciate the shortcomings that there are and we are working hard to make sure that we streamline the whole implementation process. So why do we not go ahead, get the money, you impose whatever conditions you want and we shall oblige? But at least we should do not miss out on this required money.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The contributions should be on the way forward.

5.09
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I can see that much as there is a lot of argument when you look at the conclusion we are not far from each other’s positions. The committee says the negotiated credit will definitely trigger regional development and its associated benefits. So the committee is not opposed to the loan per se it is just the conditions. 

If this report, and also the committee, could also try to go for a win-win situation, that is part of negotiation and part of bargaining. If the minister could give that report to the committee, for instance would a week be enough, because I understand there are people who are here and all that. Would a week be enough for everybody so that we can then harmonise our positions? The minister could give the committee a draft report, a draft report many times is as good as the final report itself, so that they have about three to five days to study it and then we move ahead. I thank you.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, the pending information that the committee is asking for is one of the issues that should be tackled. But I think the more serious matter is where this money is going to be based. I see a problem if we go ahead and pass this loan today and then the minister is talking about pending restructuring of UDB. Where is this money going to be based? Thank you.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt the way forward process but I think it is very good to be honest to Parliament. As far as we know the restructuring process of Uganda Development Bank started in the year 2000 –(Interjection)- wait a minute, that is when we moved the UDB portfolio to NPART. Remember when we amended the NPART Statute? The NPART had been set up specifically for Uganda Commercial Bank. So, the non-performing portfolio was transferred to NPART as part of the restructuring process of Uganda Development Bank. 

Last year when the Uganda Development Bank restructuring process was completed, Uganda Development Bank was put up for sale. The minister knows very well that they were looking for a core investor. So to supplement what honourable Wacha is saying, what restructuring, honourable minister, are you talking about?

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is common knowledge that a report like an evaluation report will determine the benefits and the challenges which were faced by the previous programme. It is on that basis that you are able to determine how you address the challenges, which took place in the previous programme. It would not be ideally proper for us to go ahead when we have Apex IV, but we know very well that Apex I to Apex III have got challenges.

As much as we have talked about benefits, which should be first be addressed, how will Apex IV be able to answer those challenges, which took place? That is one of the reasons. Even in the Budget Speech of the minister himself, of 2004, he said the Development Finance Department is going to move, this financial year, from Bank of Uganda to UDB. And that is the department, which has been handling the Apex funds. Does it take a year to carry a department from one place to another?

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker you see that we have a problem, a very big one. In the absence of clear information as to who is going to manage this money, we run the risk of having the same problems, which were faced under Apex I to III resurfacing. It is not good for this Parliament to act as if we are sitting on an island. We see that there are problems, which these loans are facing. Today if you are banking in these commercial banks, it is as if you are being penalized for every activity you do. You go and open an account, you are charged; you deposit, you are charged; you withdraw, you are charged and this is a fact, which every Ugandan is facing and government is looking at it. 

Sir, we are tying the hands of our people, our children and our grandchildren by passing these loans. Surely we should come out clearly and say, Mr Minister, this is not fair, you are not even telling us the truth about UDB. Why are you hiding the facts from representatives of the people? All this is tantamount to saying somebody is not being frank. Something is being hidden from us and what is that something? Parliament should look and say, “Look! –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When most of you when you were making contributions you said, “Let it go to UDB”, as if the position was that UDB is there. But then some of you had information that they are disposing of it. Can we not, under these circumstances, say the money of this loan can be deposited in Bank of Uganda for a relevant department to –(Interruption) 

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I had not finished, I am about to finish –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, I was talking about the UDB –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: I am grateful for that information because I was coming to it. The unfortunate part about depositing this money in the Bank of Uganda is that Parliament does not control Bank of Uganda’s activities. You do not control this money once it goes to Bank of Uganda. The only control we now have over this loan is now: either we pass it or we do not. If we do not, we still have control over it. If we pass it, we lose control over it. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Ben Wacha. I just want to give information Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Kiraso has created then impression that if government intends to sale UDB; that is not correct. On the contrary, UDB is being restructured. The restructuring will be in such a way that government will remain the majority shareholder and actually the owner. The restructuring will entail getting somebody to give him some persuasive shareholding and a management agreement, but the majority of the shares will remain in government. And as I said, the process is almost near completion. That is point No. 1.

Point No. 2, honourable members, this loan is not indefinite. It has a period. We have extended it two times. If we do not approve it today, then we loose it –(Interjection)- then we loose it. So, we have to choose. We have to choose whether we want the money; and I have conceded that I am ready to accept that we pass the loan subject to some conditions. 

MR MWANDHA: Point of order –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I suggest that we give the minister and the committee one week. They should report back by Thursday and tell us where they have reached so that this matter can be finalized then. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Since you are a member of the committee you will be –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: You said you are going to give me opportunity –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, since you are a member of the committee, I have said the minister should go to the committee between now and Thursday, then report back. (Applause).

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for that reconciliatory ruling. However, I have to say that we take this decision knowing its consequences -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Let us try it.

MR RUKUTANA: There is a team from our development –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Point of order, Mr Speaker.

MR RUKUTANA: From our development partners that is supposed, among other things –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Order!

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, we are trying to get a way forward and we have given you time between now and Thursday. This matter should close and we handle another matter.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE US $5.2 MILLION FOR THE ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY IN UGANDA

5.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Mr Speaker, the Committee on National Economy –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed with it the way it is.

MR MAFABI: The committee has a report on a Government of Uganda guarantee on the loan request from the Islamic Development Bank for the construction of the student’s hostels in Islamic University in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the request for the Government of Uganda to guarantee the loan from Islamic Development Bank (IDB) of equivalent of US $5,214,000 million for the construction of the students’ hostels at the Islamic University in Uganda (IUIU), was laid on the Table on 13 October 2004.

The committee considered the request to guarantee the loan from the IDB and wishes to report its findings and recommendations.

The committee held meetings to consider the request and reviewed the submission by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee did not review the project documents because these are private undertakings and what was required of it was to consider the need for government’s guarantee. You recall that yesterday there were some documents about this loan request, which were still in the hands of one colleague of ours.  

The committee was informed that for the IDB to give such loans, the Government of the host country must give its guarantee to the financing operation. The terms and conditions of the credit; the total amount requested for is US $5,214,000 million and has been treated in two different ways. 

The ordinary loan of US $4,300,000 million, which is 82 percent, will be repaid in 25 years at a fee of 2.5 percent per annum and this is supposed to be paid in two yearly installments. The balance of 18 percent will be paid in 30 years at a fee of 0.75 percent per annum.

These are the observations:

When government guarantees a loan it should be in line with its debt strategy, which should be concessional. This loan request is not concessional and, therefore, guaranteeing it would mean that in case of default, government would pay the funds procured out of the Government’s debt strategy.

Currently there are over 15 private universities in Uganda. If the Government sets the precedent of guaranteeing such a loan, there will be a problem with refusing to guarantee other private universities’ loans, if the situation arises. This situation may not be manageable in case such institutions fail to manage their obligations.

There are various other sources of long-term financing in the development institutions and the central bank, especially the Apex facility that has been ongoing in three tranches.

Recommendations:

One, government should desist from guaranteeing these loans acquired by the private sector but rather establish a strong long-term financing facility to help the private sector access the funds for long-term investments.

Two, the Islamic University in Uganda should procure funds using its own status since it has the integrity to do so and can procure from any other source.

Three, government should not guarantee this loan that is not done concessionary and may not be serviced properly.

In conclusion, of course the committee appreciates the role played by the private sector but it strongly advises the Government not to set a precedent, which may not be addressed equally across the board. The committee thanks you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much.

5.23
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to find out information from the chairman, it appears from the little I have heard from his speech or introduction that there is certain basic information that I think is lacking. Much as there are 15 private universities here, this one is not, strictly speaking, a private university. So, the committee probably is doing injustice to the Islamic University by failing to apply natural justice. 

I appeal to the committee to give audience to the members of the Islamic University to come and explain and possibly allay their fears. They might allay their fears, and the committee also should be informed that this university was created by an Act of Parliament. Uganda contributes five members to the council of 16 people. Uganda is a member of OIC, that is, Organization of Islamic Conference, of about 54 to 56 members throughout the world. Uganda became a member of this organization in 1974 and even the decision of that university was taken then because of our problems in the country. It took time, until I think in 1988, when it was finally set up in Mbale. And the Act establishing the Islamic University became effective on 7 December 1999. 

So, perhaps instead of dubbing this university a private university - I do not blame the committee chairman because this is proof of lack of co-ordination between the members of the Islamic University and his own members. So, if he has given chance to members to produce – yes, but unfortunately he never even went there for that matter. I appeal to the chairman to go to Mbale as well and talk to these people directly about what is wrong. 

This decision the chairman and his committee have taken is based on lack of facts. It is going to hurt Uganda more than otherwise. And in fact this is even against Article 126(e) of the Constitution. You have just based this on a technicality; the substance of the matter you have overlooked. So, I appeal to – of course the substantive minister will come and appeal finally but as a Member of the Council of the Islamic University, I appeal for more time so that I will lead a team personally to meet the committee’s members and appeal to them to come out with a different recommendation. They should take into account the wider implications and advantages this university is giving to this country. Thank you.

5.25
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have heard from one of the members representing the Islamic University, one of the members who sit on the Uganda Islamic University Council, hon. Maj. Gen. Moses Ali.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: I object very seriously to the honourable member demoting me in this House. My proper rank, and the Minister of Defence can confirm it, is Lt Gen. (Retired). Let it get into his mind from today so that he does not offend me again. (Laughter) Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you so much. I will never offend you. I believe that I have apologized to the retired Lt General. The Islamic University in Uganda has contributed greatly to the education of many Ugandans and we know that the Islamic University was created or was established by an Act of Parliament. We believe that Uganda being a member of the Organization of Islamic Conference, accepted to host the Islamic University in Uganda. Uganda contributed over 300 acres of land and currently the university is being housed in a former secondary school owned by this government. 

I believe by the Government guaranteeing this loan, it will go along way in solving many problems of the university, especially accommodation. Mr Speaker, it has been ably said by the First Deputy Prime Minister that Uganda as a government has a stake in this university. The idea the committee was suggesting was that giving Islamic University in Uganda or guaranteeing it to get this loan when we have so many other private universities would not augur well with other universities, I think cannot hold any water.  

When you look at the method of work by this committee, in paragraph 2 the committee did not review the project documents because, they are private undertakings. There is a contradiction. 

The first report the committee presented had only two concerns and those two concerns were that the university never presented the project appraisal of how they are going to pay; and their cash flow. Mr Speaker, at that time when the chairman presented that report they had only two concerns, and now in their second report they are saying that there was no need of looking at the documents? I believe it is a contradiction. There is no need of looking at the documents –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Please, go on with your report. The report is clear, no, let him finish. Please, let him finish.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I believe allowing the IUIU to get access to this important loan would be really fostering prosperity, especially in terms of education.  

Finally, Uganda as a member of the Organization of Islamic Conference has accessed various loans from the Islamic Development Bank. There are so many projects that have been funded by IDB as a result of our membership to the OIC. I believe when this House authorizes the Government to guarantee this loan, we would be getting more loans. And what honourable members should know, loans from the Islamic Development Bank are interest free and I believe that we will get so many chances of accessing these loans as a result of Uganda being the host country of this university. We also know that there are so many universities under OIC. Mr Speaker, I beg this House to authorise the Government to borrow this money.

5.31
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I wish right from the word go to disagree by the position taken by the committee. (Applause) I want to urge this august House to make sure that we approve this loan. If the committee is advancing the idea that this is a private university, the students who go to the Islamic University of Uganda are not private. They are our own sons and daughters and if you looked at the statistics of the students so far those, who have graduated with diplomas and degrees at least 50 percent are our own sons and daughters of Uganda. 

I agree with the retired General that the committee should have given audience to members of the University council and staff of the Islamic University of Uganda to understand the background and why they should support the Government to –(Interruption) (Mr Ekanya rose-)

THE SPEAKER: You know what the rules are: the person holding the Floor is the one to give you permission. If she has declined, so be it.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, I want to agree that the committee should give them audience, as the retired General has requested. Why I am advancing this position is that while we were debating the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, we would have made the wrong decision as members of the Social Services Committee had we not invited the staff and the Council of the Islamic University in Uganda. This university was established under special conditions, it was established by an Act of Parliament in 1990 –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the member to say that the Committee on National Economy did not invite the stakeholders in this Islamic University when actually when we are considering any loan the person we invite is the minister? It is up to the Minister of Finance to come with –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: In the first place she was talking about the work done by her committee. So, she was not talking about what you did. She says they had to invite them.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I was still developing my order point –(Interjection)– let me have the Floor and develop my point. The committee is being accused that it did invite the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, please listen. Her account is of when she was dealing with a law, which we passed. She said they would have made a mistake if they had not invited them. So, we are not talking about what happened with you. She is talking about what happened with her committee’s work in the past.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I am talking of the experience of a very important law, which we passed in this august House. Had we not to make wide consultations we would also have taken an arbitrary decision. I am saying that we interacted with the Ministry of Education over the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Bill, and we were trying to take a decision of repealing the laws, which had established the existing universities: Makerere University, Mbarara and the Islamic University in Uganda.

We were repealing them but for this university we could not repeal the law because it was established under special conditions. When we took a decision to invite them we had wider consultations. We saw sense and saved the law in the University and other Tertiary Universities Act, whereas we repealed the existing law, which had established Makerere University.  

So in the same vein I am in support of the retired Lt. General’s decision that we need to involve this university so that if the committee – because even in their submission I do not see anywhere where they indicated that the staff and the university council were involved, in the work methods. They only involved the Ministry of finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Islamic University in Uganda, much as we say it is private, some of us who come from the East - and I am disappointed that the Chairperson, National Economy Committee who is from Mbale and who knows the difficulty of the poverty there, could not advise otherwise.

He should have known that whereas people around Makerere can establish private hostels, people in the East are poor and, therefore, they need support. Mr Speaker, I pray that this august House supports to guarantee this loan.  

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I beg to move the following motion, under rule 40(1). After a very eloquent presentation by the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services, I beg to move that the question be put to this motion.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is at the back of your Order Paper, for which I am going to put the question. The motion is that we should pass a resolution to authorize the Government to guarantee US $5.2 million, for the Islamic University in Uganda. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAFABI: I want your indulgence on this matter. I want to be happy that we have passed this, but I want to correct an impression. Mr Speaker, you can see for yourself that the way information comes to the House is so limited and we can assure you that the committee had no information on which to base our decision. Yesterday –(Interjection)– give me a chance and let me develop my point. 

We said yesterday that it was in Parliament’s interest that we should come up with whatever loan according to whatever information we had. This loan had nothing and I just got a phone call yesterday that they would be delivering the information. Mr Speaker, you have decided and that is very good. In my view as a person who comes from Bugisu, there was no need for us to guarantee the loan. We should have given the Islamic University money free, as we have done with other universities –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, a decision has been made by you, the matter is closed. So we move on to another item –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I am not trying to re-invent the wheel or to go back to what has been decided. However, for future purposes on loan application of this nature on government guarantees, I would appreciate if the relevant committee analyzed the policy of government in respect to guaranteeing loans. It should look at the relevant law on the subject and see whether the application falls within that policy and law, and then that should also be in the report that we discuss in this House.

Mr speaker, there are some areas – I do not want to reopen the debate - which really some of us who were standing up to speak could not have the chance to explore. I was of course in favor of the university getting the money but the evaluation was short of the necessary parameters. Mr Speaker, for future purposes you do that.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in conclusion the committee is not against any loan request. In fact the Islamic University of Uganda in Mbale should benefit like Makerere. There is no reason why it should not be given money from government coffers, even if it means government borrowing on its behalf and giving it, other than guaranteeing, because in short –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your business on this issue was concluded. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UPDF BILL, 2003

THE SPEAKER: I do not know really if we should proceed with this matter. I think we should adjourn. No, even if we start now tomorrow you have a retreat somewhere. With this we come to the end –(Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_) yes?

5.44
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking the indulgence of the House because as you know, the Democratic Republic of Congo took a case against Uganda in the International Court of Justice and the case has been fixed for hearing. Next week we are going to have the lawyers’ meeting and the final preparation to present Uganda’s defence. 

I am happy to inform you, Mr Speaker, that hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the Minister of State for Defence, happily delivered a baby girl. (Applause). Therefore, she is on maternity leave. So, I thought that what remained of the UPDF Bill, which has really taken long as you observed the other day, was something that we could finish relatively quickly. I want to seek your indulgence that even if we take another 30 minutes, we should go through the Bill and we finish it so that then I can be free to go and do the other duty next week. Otherwise, since I am not here and the Minister of State is not here -(Interjections)- it would be the week after.

THE SPEAKER: As you recall yesterday we dealt with just two clauses: 80, which had a slight amendment, and 95. We have checked in our records and found that we did not deal with 82(2), 192(2), and 198 and yesterday we had indications that there are people who want to recommit a number of clauses, about five of them. Then we had to deal with interpretation, that is clause 2.  

Taking into account the experience we have had with this particular Bill, definitely in 30 minutes - even an hour - we shall not be able to do a good job with this particular Bill. I rather say that what we can do is wait, we come back week after next, complete it and also members peruse through the Bill, examine it and then prepare themselves so that when we come back we spend the 30 minutes and dispose of this Bill. As I see things now, I think members are definitely tired and may not really give the due consideration to this important Bill. 

Please, bear with us. I quite appreciate the other assignments we have and I quite appreciate that the hon. Minister of State for Defence is not here, but I imagine that when you are going away you will find another colleague to run the affairs of your ministry, and therefore, we shall deal with him.

MR AWORI: I am seeking guidance, Mr Speaker, on the procedure of the august House. From time to time the work of the House has been held back by the absence of certain relevant ministers. Quite often they are never here on time and we cannot accomplish our work. Is it really in order? Can you guide me why the Executive branch of the state continues to cajole, manipulate our rules, and do all kinds of things to hold us back? Really, guide me. How far can we bend backwards?  

THE SPEAKER: To say they cajole would be imputing an improper motive on them. He is going away but we can find, among his colleagues, a minister to hold the portfolio and we shall be able to deal with him. I think that is the solution.  

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.49 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)
 

