Thursday, 13 February 2003   

Parliament met at 2. 30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.  
                                                                                                                                   
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I want to introduce to you our visitors in the Strangers Gallery, and these are our children from Kampala High School, Central Division. You are most welcome. (Applause)  

Honourable members, today we shall sit up to about a half past three or four because I understand a big number of Members of Parliament from one region have an important meeting, which they have to attend to.  

Yesterday, I was requested by hon. Omara Atubo to avail to you the communication I had received from the Attorney General in respect of hon. Birimumaaso, and I have found it necessary to give you the copies. Some of you have got it because I have seen that it continued even outside the Chambers and people were talking about his conviction.  The Constitution does not use conviction; the Constitution is only concerned with length and the type of sentence, so it is not conviction. 

I wish to remind you that in the past, there were a number of members who had convictions, but because the sentence was not envisaged under the Constitution, they continued to sit as Members of Parliament. And now I want to read to you the letter from the Attorney General addressed to me on the subject. 

“LEGAL OPINION REGARDING THE STATUS OF HON. MULINDWA BIRIMUMAASO AS MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR BUKOTO WEST CONSTITUENCY:
   
Following press reports about my recent comments on the effects of the pardon granted by His Excellency the President to hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso, Member of Parliament for Bukoto West Constituency, as a result of his conviction and sentence, they sought my opinion on his fate as a Member of Parliament and in particular: 
(i) Whether hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso can retain his seat after the pardon of His Excellency the President; 
(ii) The effect of his further appeal to the Court of Appeal against the conviction and sentence. 

Under the Constitution, a Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament if such circumstances arise that if that person were not a Member of Parliament would cause that person to be disqualified for election as a Member of Parliament under Article 80 of the Constitution.  

According to Article 83(i)(b) and of Article 80 (2)(e) of the Constitution: A person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person is under a sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months without an option of a fine.” 

Hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso was convicted and sentenced to 12 months imprisonment by the Chief Magistrate’s Court, Buganda Road Kampala, and therefore by the provision of Article 80 and 83 of the Constitution, he at that point loses his Parliamentary seat.  

However, when he subsequently appealed to the High Court against the conviction and sentence, the provisions of Articles 80 and 83 of the Constitution did not apply in view of the provisions of Section 94(1)(c) of Parliamentary Elections Act (No.8), 2001 which provides that: “When a Member of Parliament is sentenced to a term of imprisonment in terms of paragraph (e) of Clause 2 of Article 80 of the Constitution, the seat of that Member of Parliament shall not become vacant until the expiry of the time within which an appeal maybe lodged and where an appeal has been lodged until the appeal is fully disposed of or withdrawn.” 

Therefore, following his appeal to the High Court, he remained a Member of Parliament in view of the above foregoing provisions of the Constitution and Parliamentary Elections Act.  However, since his appeal was dismissed and a conviction and sentence upheld by a court, this means that he again loses his seat by virtue of the aforesaid provision of the Constitution.  

It would appear hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso has again appealed to the Court of Appeal, which will mean that he will retain his seat until his appeal is finally disposed of or withdrawn.

On the question whether hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso can retain his seat after the pardon by His Excellency the President, Article 121(4)(a) of the Constitution empowers the President on the advise of the Committee on prerogative of mercy established under Article 121(4) (a): “grant to any person convicted of an offence, a pardon either free or subject to lawful condition.” 

As stated earlier, hon. Birimumaaso was tried for the offence of embezzlement, convicted and sentenced to 12 months of imprisonment by the Magistrate’s Court at Buganda Road. He subsequently appealed to the High Court against both convictions and sentence. The High Court dismissed the appeal and upheld the conviction and sentence.  

While hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso was serving his sentence, an application of pardon was made to a Committee of Prerogative of Mercy. On advice of the committee, the President granted a free pardon to hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso in terms of Article 121(4)(a) of the Constitution. The effect of the free pardon clears hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso from all the consequences of the offence for which he was granted and for all statutory or other disqualifications following his conviction.  

However, this does not mean that the conviction was removed, and presumably, that is why hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso has lodged a second appeal against conviction in the Court of Appeal.  

In view of the foregoing, hon. Birimumaaso retains his Parliamentary seat as a Member of Parliament for Bukoto West.” (Applause)  

So, honourable members, this clears the point. I do not think you have to go to radio when the matter has been dealt with, because this is a legal interpretation we should adhere to it.  

As far as hon. Ekemu is concerned, I had to consult about this.  Hon. Ekemu lost his seat after he had lost his appeal to the Court of Appeal and he did not appeal to another High Court. That is the position. Thank you very much.

MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable Minister of Finance. Of recent we have heard press reports concerning Lotto Uganda Limited.  Mr Speaker, that company intends to dish out Shs180 million to Ugandans. I would like to get clarification from the honourable minister, how Ugandans are going to benefit from that company. The Minister should also tell us how Ugandans benefited from the Jada business that was introduced sometime back.  

We know that our people are very poor and definitely have to run in so quickly by paying Shs1,000. Mr Speaker, don’t you think these people may use that chance to exploit the poor oppressed Ugandans? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, although honourable member you have put the question, I think this should have been a formal question. Issues that are expected after communication are not of that type; but anyway the minister has heard, and I hope he will give you the answer.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Arising from yesterday’s proceedings, in the course of the motion to honour one of our former colleagues, the deceased, an honourable member of this August House and Minister of State in the Prime Minister’s Office (General Duties) Prof. Kagonyera, made a remark which in my opinion, Mr Speaker, caused opprobrium to this August House.  His statement was to deprecate the honourable colleagues’ record implying, among other things, that he got into this House under very dubious academic qualifications.  

Mr Speaker, it is in African tradition never to condemn the dead no matter how. Regardless of the record of the deceased, you do not use this August House to say such despicable words and for a matter that cannot be proved.  

I am requesting the honourable colleague to stand up and tender an apology, first to this House, and then to the family of the deceased. I am referring categorically to the hon. Kagonyera to apologise to the deceased’s family and also to the August House for bringing opprobrium to the August House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you remember yesterday when we were dealing with the issue of the unfortunate demise of Mr Tana, the honourable minister stood up and made some remarks, but I told him to stop. I said that it is not part of our record and we cannot act on rumours. The minister, I think was contented and never continued with it. So I think the matter was disposed of; we need not reopen it. 

MR WESONGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to proceed under Rule 40 (k). The matter is a matter of emergency. I wish once again to report to this House that three days ago –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Wait a minute, please. You said 40(k)?

MR WESONGA: 40(k), Mr Speaker. Thank you very much. I wish, as I had stated earlier, to once again report –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, would you like to read the rule?

MR WESONGA: Mr Speaker, Rule 40 (k) states that: “any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency”. And, Mr Speaker that is why I wanted to state it before you certified; and by permitting me to say something, it means you have certified.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think it is better if you had this motion in mind to have let me know about it.  You know the Speaker should never be surprised.  Can’t we deal with it next week? Well, let me hear it.

MR WESONGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Three days ago, my constituents again suffered a very heavy storm and Bugolola High School had its roofs blown off. This country almost lost four citizens, all students of senior two, and as I speak, they are hospitalised.  

Mr Speaker, two weeks ago, a similar incident took place again in my constituency at Buta Primary School and eight classrooms had its roof blown off.  

Mr Speaker, history in this House has it that about the Middle of September last year, 16 schools had all their roofs put down. I took efforts to inform and invite the Office of the Prime Minister, and the Office of the Minister responsible for Education and Government at large, given the position that primary schools are under the Universal Primary Education. The attitude that people have is that education is for free – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a telephone exchange with you?

MR WESONGA: Sorry, Mr Speaker. That situation seems to have frustrated the parents and the students who study under trees. Even the few desks, which were provided by this Government seem to be rotting as the rain has now started. What shocks my life, again, is that – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Member, what is the emergency aspect of your account?

MR WESONGA: Mr Speaker, I wish to – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to be unkind. You said three days. Are you talking about what happened three days ago, or you are talking about what happened a month ago? Because I would imagine that things which happened three months ago could have been dealt with. What happened three days ago is different. But would you like to put – (Interruption)

MR WESONGA: Mr Speaker, I am talking about what has just happened, but to assist me get to the point, I am using history. The attitude that I have received from Government so far - the frustrations seem to be mounting and no one pays attention to it. Now that the leader of Government Business is around, may I know whether – (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: No, hold on. So, what do you want to know from the Government?  Put it.

MR WESONGA: Allow me to drive my point, honourable Members of Parliament. I wanted to find out from the honourable Prime Minister whether Bubulo West was not provided for? If we are part of this country, what else do we as people of Bubulo West require, and in which way can we satisfy you so that the Government can take steps in alleviating the problems that are now facing the constituency? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is no longer under 40(k), it is no longer a motion but a question. I think at an appropriate time, I will allow whoever is supposed to answer this question to answer. So, it is not a motion.

MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Following what we were building on yesterday, and talking about things that happened during the recess, I would like to draw the attention of the House to the developments in the area bordering Karamoja region.  

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, we the neighbours have had a resurgence - something like an increase of incidents of cattle rustling in the region. One thing is true: Cattle rustling in the region has assumed a new dimension and we are witnessing something which looks like a failure of the disarmament process. 

Sometime back, the disarmament process was launched and the Leader of Government Business assured this House that there would be continuous updates, that we would be told what is happening and how things are progressing, that as neighbours to Karamoja we would be having a review. But as of now, it looks like we are not getting the updates and things are getting offhand.  Intertribal clashes are worsening in Karamoja and the effect is being borne by neighbours.  

One thing is happening. Once clashes occur in Karamoja, animals cross over to Teso and then their owners pursue them. That is very dangerous because the people in the neighbouring areas are not armed, and the people who are following their animals come with arms. 

Another thing that has happened is that the LDUs that were initially recruited have been moved away from this border area and so the neighbours remain very vulnerable. 

I would like to find out from the Leader of Government Business when he intends to let this House know the progress of the disarmament process? And whether he actually does not think disarmament has become a failure and we need to revise our strategy?

Secondly, during recess, we the people who border Lake Kyoga witnessed a new development. The people are asking as to whether the lake has been privatised. They have been chased away and they do not fish. They are wondering whether somebody has acquired rights to authorise and not to authorise them? But what seems to be true is that some people who carry guns, and probably are Wembley - they call themselves Wembley team or whatever - are now in charge of the lake and denying people the opportunity to fish. They are terrorising people, they are taking the nets from the people and the local people are now gripped with fear.  

Towards the end of last year, a boat capsized and killed about 24 people. We asked Government to ensure that patrols on Lake Kyoga are put in place so that – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you hon. Alice Alaso. The information I want to give regards the Wembley on Lake Kyoga. During the Christmas season when we were at home, two people were arrested by this so-called Wembley group, and the parents of these boys are asking us where these boys are kept. We have tried to trace them but we have not got them. They are Ekuju George and Elobu Moses.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much for that information. I think it basically serves to tell us how the situation has deteriorated as some unknown persons take over the duties that would rightfully be done by the Police patrolling the waters of Lake Kyoga. The problem is so bad and we urge Government to see that the patrols on Lake Kyoga are done by the Police rather than the so-called Wembley people.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I do not wish to re-open the debate of yesterday. But I only want to say that following the arrests that also took place in Teso, one statement was made – (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, Lake Kyoga is inside Uganda.  As far as I know, if it is the Uganda Revenue Protection Unit, it protects Uganda revenue collection around the borders. If it is Wembley, they would be looking for criminals who are marauding on the lake or any other place around it, or pirates. I would like to seek clarification from the responsible Minister or Leader of Government Business whether in the first place there is any patrol unit on Lake Kyoga.

Secondly, for what purpose – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But really, we are prolonging this issue. This was a communication. It was a brief matter, but now you are developing a very long subject. If you have a substantive question, why don’t you put it to the Minister? 

MR LUBOWA: Mr Speaker, I also come from the lakeside but I have personally failed to evaluate the impact of Operation Wembley whether positive or negative. Now and again on radio, we are getting information that some leaders are asking for Wembley to go to their places and others are condemning the actions of Wembley. 

One time, the NPC said here that he has got interested in the activities of Wembley and that he would report to this House.  So, I do not know whether the NPC is now in position to tell us whether Wembley is of any use to this country.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just on my final point. I had stated that I would not wish so much to re-open the debate of yesterday. But I thought I would take this opportunity to let this House know that following the arrests of some people in Teso and particularly Soroti District, we heard a statement, when these people were being charged, that there are rebel camps in Teso. I want to let us know that that statement to the people of Teso, is like spelling doom on them. It has caused a lot of fear, panic, and uncertainty and I thought the responsible leadership would try to pin the problem to where it is supposed to be rather than generalising and saying there are rebel camps in Teso.  

We the people of Teso are really scared. We think somebody wants to take advantage of the situation and try to lash out on us just because one or two or three people may or may not be in the wrong. We would rather that Government owns up to this statement and probably show the leaders the camps, or actually say there are no camps and charge the people whether they are rebels or not.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, but definitely we had a listed business. Does this again follow the communication I made? What is it? Is it a very urgent matter that has cropped up?

MR JACK SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, when one Member of Parliament was answering a number of queries raised by the honourable members, he cited me and one other Member of Parliament for having gone to Kinkiizi to de-campaign him, and that when I found that he had big support in the area, I had to come back. This was stated by hon. Amama Mbabazi. 

I would like to correct the impression created by hon. Mbabazi on the Floor of Parliament. I do not belong to that constituency. I come from Rukiga County and I represent the people of Rukiga County. I therefore, could not have gone to interfere in hon. Mbabazi’s election campaign.  I would like, however, to state that it is true I never supported him just like other Ugandans, because I felt that the person he was competing with would have done a better job in this Parliament. (Laughter)
 
Secondly, Mr Speaker, I have many relatives in Kinkiizi and Kanungu District, and I normally visit them. When I passed through that constituency long before elections, I actually discovered that the honourable Member had no much support in that area.  (Laughter) Therefore, I want to correct the impression created by Amama Mbabazi that I went there and ran away from that constituency because he had massive support. (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of procedure and I need your advice. This is the second time we are deliberating since we returned from the holiday.  We have had a tradition where almost every Thursday we have a provision for question time.  The people we represent speak through question time. So, question time is an important component of parliamentary democracy all over the world.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to bring it to your attention that a number of ministers have already received the questions we put to them but they are reluctant to answer them because they have no answers. So unfortunate is a question related to the tariffs, which are unfair to the consumers of electric power in Uganda. My question has not featured since last year. Why don’t we do something about these ministers, if they do not have the capacity to act?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, we shall dig up this question if it is a year so that we require the Minister to answer it.

MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for having given me this chance to put on record a few of the things that have emerged arising from the communication that you made yesterday, and the responses which were given to this House by the front bench. (Interjections) 

I have been asked who I am. I am Kassiano Wadri Ezati, Member of Parliament representing the people of Terego and also wearing the hat of the Chairman of the DP Parliamentary Caucus, if you wanted to hear that. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I have stood here on what I consider to be very, very urgent in that any further delay and waiting for an appropriate time to raise it might be to the detriment of the people on whose behalf I talk. We all know that there are two road construction firms opening up the roads from Pakwach to Nebbi and from Nebbi to Arua. As I talk now, the people of Nyaravuru trading centre are in a very sorrowful state. Many have had their houses broken down without compensation. I have documents to that effect, which at a latter time I will be more than willing to lay on the Table.  

There are people who have had their buildings broken down and are being promised compensation of Shs 20,000. Mr Speaker, I have worked long in the Civil Service, and I know the procedures of compensating people who have been affected by Government showing interest in the land they had settled on.  

There should have been a comprehensive valuation report, which report should have taken into account the value of the premises that would be broken down, plus the edible fruit like oranges and mangoes, let alone the burial grounds that are now being turned into roads.  

Mr Speaker, hon. Okumu Ringa - I wish he was here - these are people who voted for him.  He should have actually been on the forefront to bring this issue but because as a human being, he knows the side of the bread that is better buttered, he cannot come and talk about these issues.  These are issues which are affecting the people. There is no point, Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I hear someone talking about rumour mongering; I do not rumour monger. I state facts as they are, Mr Speaker, and that is what I do all the time. 

The honourable Member recognises that we are all bona fide representatives of the people who elected us and that includes hon. Okumu Ringa. Is he in order to stand up in this House and undermine his colleague by stating that he is not capable of representing the interests of his people?  

Mr Speaker, the honourable Member has even given the reason that hon. Okumu Ringa knows on which side his bread is buttered, meaning that those who butter his bread are not the people who elected him and he represents. Can hon. Wadri demonstrate to this House how he can be more representative of the people of hon. Ringa’s constituency?  Is he in order to undermine a fellow Member of Parliament in pursuance of cheap popularity? Is he in order?  

THE SPEAKER: I think what you are saying, honourable Member is imputing an improper motive. Can you substantiate what you mean? Maybe you have recalled.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me an opportunity to make myself clearer so that my brother Prof. Kagonyera, whom I have even taken all the way from Rubabo up to Terego, can be able to appreciate what I am explaining.  

Mr Speaker, I had no ill intentions against my colleague, hon. Okumu Ringa. There is a common saying that, if you lose a relative, you who is closer to the relative, should even be able to touch the dead body where other people fear to touch. All I am saying is, this is a situation happening under the nose and the eyes of my colleague, hon. Okumu Ringa; and that even if he were here, he would be able to appreciate the point that I am underscoring. That is all that I wanted to say.  

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Member, a member does not only work by addressing the House here. He is a Minister; maybe he is working on it with others. So you have to substantiate. You do not have to talk here to be effective.  He may be effective by – this is the scenario.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, as I said earlier on, I am not in any way imputing that hon. Okumu Ringa is not doing his job.  All I am saying right now is even known to him and probably by now he would have brought this to the attention of this House. But because of the element of collective responsibility, he –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable Member, this House can listen and listen but there is a more effective way of getting compensation. That is to approach people who pay, namely, the ministry and so forth.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Wadri.  The information I would like to give is that the issue of valuation of the properties along the road between Pakwach-Nebbi-Arua has actually been presented to the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications and that of Lands, because the valuers come from Lands. Even the consultants present their reports through the Chief Valuer of Government. So we have these reports and Members of Parliament from West Nile region have actually been part and parcel. 

I also believe that hon. Okumu Ringa is one of those people who have actually contributed to this report that we got.  So this is being worked on. As I talk now, the controversies regarding the completion of the evaluation are being sorted out. So the compensation is actually going on.  Those areas which have not yet been tackled, are yet to be handled. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry if the way in which I presented it has not gone on well. I am sorry for that. (Applause)  

Having said that, there is yet a second issue on which I would like to seek some clarification. A few weeks back, the Government daily newspaper carried an opinion emanating from the Ministry of Education saying that sooner than later, universal primary education, under which there are failures and no passes, when you join primary one, you automatically go through to primary seven regardless of your performance, is also going to be extended to secondary.  

I get a little bit upset. Much as we have scored so well in terms of large numbers of children being enrolled, but if we extend it to the secondary school level, I am afraid the quality of education that we have been proud of in this region may be greatly undermined and watered down. I will at an appropriate time expect a response from the responsible Minister or Leader of Government business as to whether that is the official position, as far as education is concerned.

Number three- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, we have limited time. This is just arising from my communication but you are taking all the time. Make a few points and let others say something since this was not an item on the Order Paper. 

MR KASSIANO: I think, Mr Speaker, I will get an appropriate time when I will be able to talk at length as I would have wished to.  Thank you very much.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, mine is a very brief matter of house keeping.  This afternoon, I read a circular signed by one Barinda Gahakwa Godfrey who has been our Deputy Clerk. This passionate letter tells us of his retirement. I was only requesting the Parliamentary Commission or the Business Committee to get an appropriate moment so that as a House we can recognise the services of Mr Barinda.

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of personal image. I am very mindful that you are handling the tractor dispute, but I would like to allow -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, if you have a personal statement to make, I will accord you an opportunity to do so as I have done to hon. Omara Atubo. You will come and requisition it and even show me the statement, then I will give you time to make your statement.

MR SITENDA SEBALU: I oblige, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much.

MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukholi South, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will take this opportunity to thank the Members of this Parliament for the support and to congratulate you upon being elected. You remember it is my first time to talk in this Parliament ever since we were elected. 

I have taken a lot to do a number of things but I have stood to supplement on what the honourable Member has just talked about - the issue of roads and possibly about the lives of our people on the waters.  

We have a road which stretches from Malaba to Bugiri, and branches to Busia. As we speak today, this road has not been commissioned but the parts that have been completed have started developing potholes. The whole section from Bugiri to Tororo is worse than it used to be. I would like to hear a statement on what is happening and when this road will be commissioned.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of our people on the waters, I have heard the honourable members talk about Lake Kyoga and everywhere, but this problem is protracted. The situation of our people on the waters is really bad and it has reached a very complicated state. I have been there several times. Security agencies have now focussed their mind on the waters. They are intimidating people and burning their nets. Many engines have been confiscated. Many boats have been destroyed. We have tried several times to seek support from elsewhere, from the Government but you only get a very, very complicated and astonishing response. Mr Speaker, this issue needs critical and urgent attention. We have more but I will not talk about it today. 

I have a letter where they have requested quite a big number of members to come and we finalize the paper and we will bring it here as soon as possible.

Allow me to also thank everybody who has been with us for a period of time and I thank you, Mr speaker, for everything. I am back in this -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Point of information -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we started this procedure of allowing members to say a few things after the communication. The intention was that there may be a very serious matter which has arisen and a Member cannot give notice and yet it is very, very important that the matter is addressed. These are issues that should be covered during this period after the communication, but not this general debate about roads, because roads have been there for months. Something should have been done about it. 

But since it was a maiden speech as you said – actually yesterday I mentioned it to the members here that you won the petition and we welcome you to Parliament. Now we should act without fear and favour. But next time please, when you want to utilize this chance, let it be on emergency matters rather than on general matters.

MR MICHEAL MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, when the honourable Minister of Defence was responding to some of the issues raised by a few of us, he hinted that I am one of the Members of Parliament who did not support him and that I went to Kanungu under concealment and I had to be flushed out.

Mr Speaker, it is important that I clarify the impression to other Members of Parliament that could have been created. It is true that I went to Kanungu for four days. You are aware that I am a leader in the Uganda Young Democrats. I went to Kanungu for four days not to de-campaign the honourable Minister of Defence but to organise the young democrats (Laughter). It was only a coincidence that during my four days’ visit to Kanungu, the honourable Minister of Defence was also campaigning.

Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that while I was in Kanungu, paramilitary agents kept on hounding me from one hotel to another. The first night I entered Kanungu, paramilitary agents were sent by none other than the honourable Minister of Defence to chase me from Kanungu. However, being the courageous man that I am – (Laughter) – I resisted all forms of intimidation and I stayed under these circumstances for four good days. 

It is also true, Mr Speaker, that while in Kanungu, I learnt -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, to be fair really, yesterday you made a contribution. Other Members did not make contributions and today you are also making another contribution. I think it is unfair. You raised a point -(Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: By way of winding up, Mr Speaker, I stood to clarify the fact that I was not in Kanungu to decampaign the honourable Minister of Defence despite the fact that I did not have him in mind as an appropriate candidate for that parliamentary seat.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: But in any case campaigns start after nominations. So what campaigns were there?

PERSONAL STATEMENT

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for according me this opportunity to make a personal statement under Rule 36 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. The subject matter is the human tragedy in Otuke.  

Mr Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to clearly inform my honourable colleagues on the prevailing situation of insecurity in Otuke and the social and economic consequences arising from the double invasion by Kony rebels and Karimojong herdsmen.  

This Parliament has the supreme duty to oversee the welfare of every Ugandan, and also as the highest political organ, to hear the cries of those aggrieved so as to direct for necessary remedies from Government and other institutions. 

As part of the greater Lango sub-region, the people of Otuke under my courageous and principled leadership, totally rejected and vehemently denounced rebellion and rebel activities right from 1987 and have maintained that principled position up to now.  

It is, however, most disappointing that despite our open and genuine rejection of rebellion, the Government has failed to protect us against rebels. In view of the numerous attacks and destruction by rebels, as well as due to open mocking by rebels, the motive of the Government must be questioned.  

It has become a monotonous and repetitive chorus by the President and his Ministers to thank the Langi for being good and foresighted people for rejecting rebellion; yet in return what appreciation do we receive? - Nothing but insecurity, instability, poverty, poor social services, low standard of education, and distrust and disrespect for the political leaders of Lango.

Honourable members might have heard of the narrow escape of your four colleagues in Otuke on the 30th of November last year. These are hon. Margaret Ateng Otim, woman representative for Lira District, hon. Dr Okot Alex, Member for the neighbouring Moroto County, hon. Charles Gutomoi, Erute North, which is bordering Pader and is also suffering a lot, and myself. It was indeed a narrow escape. 

Mr Speaker, I want to refer you to what you have read already. This is a two-paged statement but with 15 pages of appendices. 

Mr Speaker, I want to refer you to page 14 of the appendix, which appeared in the New Vision newspaper of 9th December last year, “Omara Atubo escapes Lira LRA rebel attack.” In this respect, let me tender for information and record of this House three documents, namely; the resolutions of the people of Otuke of 30th November last year, which is attached to the 15-page appendix. It is on page 11 and it consists of 15 resolutions, I will not bother to read them but I will only read two, which are very important.

The first one is to urge Government to take all necessary measures to protect our lives and properties, especially through effective, strategic and adequate deployment of soldiers.  

Two - and we have foreseen this, that the Government must take appropriate measures to forestall and stop attacks by Karimojong warriors and cattle rustlers.  

Three; to condemn and reject each and every act that causes instability and rebellion or undermines peace and security.

Mr Speaker, following that visit, the deputy Resident District Commissioner (RDC), in his own wisdom, wrote another letter dated 6th December last year, which I appended here too as pages 3 to 5. I did reply to that letter dated 16 December 2002. But let me just read a paragraph from that reply of mine. It will show you the problem that your colleagues from Lango and in the North face.  

Mr Speaker, on page 8, I had this to write: “By my letter of 18 November 2002, a copy of which is attached hereto, the RDC was reminded of the meeting and requested to ensure that specific security officials do attend.  The fact that all of these important security fellows absented themselves leaves a lot of room for imagination on their motives. Furthermore, no security was provided for the Members of Parliament and the high-ranking district leaders who attended the meeting.  Well aware that Otuke is an insecure and rebel-infested area, was such a failure accidental or deliberate? Supposing we were attacked, injured, killed or abducted, would the Deputy RDC, UPDF and other security organs have been happy? What sort of rebels were these who knew of our meeting and wanted to come and freely disrupt it yet those responsible for our security never warned us nor advised us not to proceed with the meeting?”  

Mr Speaker, because of its geographical location, which makes it very vulnerable to rebel attacks from Acholi in the North and cattle rustlers from Karamoja in the East, peace and security in Otuke can only be maintained by permanent, adequate and strategic deployment of soldiers.

Happily, this was the position until February last year when suddenly all the soldiers were withdrawn, not only from Otuke but also from all the borders of Lango and Acholi as well as Karamoja. 

This created a very dangerous security vacuum. An open corridor was created for rebels and cattle rustlers to enter Lango and destroy, steal, loot and rustle at will.

Despite our numerous reports – that is Lango Parliamentary Group and others - appeals, meetings and prayers, including the visit by the President to Lira on 27 October 2002, and the promises he personally made, the situation continues to worsen especially at the border areas.

As if the attack by Kony rebels were not enough tragedy, the situation has now been compounded by the recent influx of Karimojong herdsmen. The Government made a military attack on the Karimojong herdsmen in Otuke on 27 January 2003, in order to drive them out. In the process of the military operation, Karimojong lost many cattle. The worst part of the operation was for the army to attack the Karimojong herdsmen, remove their cattle and withdrawing without protecting civilians. Was it deliberate? 

The military attack simply provoked the Karimojong to kill, loot, destroy and rustle at will. At least 20 people are officially reported killed by the Karimojong, but the local people put the number as high as 50. The villages are totally insecure thereby forcing thousands to being displaced. 

The restocking exercise, on which Government and individuals spent billions of shillings, has been thoroughly undermined and destroyed. The Karimojong have vowed to revenge by again stealing all the cattle from Lango thereby provoking the bitter memories of the past, which were slowly healing and being forgotten.

As of now, Otuke is in a state of human tragedy. There is total displacement. About 60 percent of the population has fled to safer areas outside the county. The remaining population is displaced to trading centers, schools, Gombolola headquarters and churches. There are no health services; and all schools are closed. No humanitarian assistance has been received in Otuke for the last one month and during the peak of this crisis. 

It is therefore absolutely urgent that the following action be taken immediately, to arrest and avert further tragedy in Otuke and other areas of Lira and Lango. These are areas like Koromo, Oburu, Otwal and Apara and Omoro in Moroto:

1. Government must deploy enough soldiers to effectively deal with acts of insecurity and lawlessness.

2. Government must rush humanitarian assistance to the people of Otuke, especially food, drugs and clothing.

3.Government should sink boreholes to supply water.

4. Government must resettle the massively displaced persons.

5. Government should address the problem of education, and schools.

Finally, unless Government takes immediate action, the situation of human catastrophe will befall Otuke and this Parliament will not escape responsibility. 

I say all this for God and my country, as well as for the suffering people of Otuke and Lango. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $150 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) FOR BUDGET SUPPORT UNDER POVERTY REDUCTION SUPPORT CREDIT (PRSP II)

(Debate continued.)

MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start off by thanking the Committee for the report –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are still dealing with what we were dealing with yesterday.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you. I will start off by thanking the Committee for the report. However, I will need a few clarifications on the report. With the background given by the Committee on page one –(Interruption)-

THE SPEAKER: Is the Chairperson of the Committee on Economy here? Please come to the front bench.

MR MUGAMBE: With the background given by the Committee on page one of the report, this loan is a second batch from US$600 million credit, which is released annually in series of US$150 million each. We are told the first batch was released last year. This makes this exercise seem like a routine matter. However, I am of the view that the Committee should have given us a more detailed report to enlighten us about why we should pass this loan. 

I think the report should be self-contained, without referring to issues that are not with us. The report does not tell us whether we can recommend changes in emphasis of the purpose of the loan, and it actually makes it difficult for me to explain to the people of Nakifuma why we would pass this loan on the basis of this report. 

The last paragraph on page two tells us - I think this paragraph is redundant and I want us to withdraw it from this report. We passed this Bill and I am sure it was assented to in December. On page three, bullet two, the report tells us that the credit should be used to fund development and not recurrent expenditure. I want to know how this could be possible when this loan is a budget support loan. Were there no conditionalities under this budget support? 

Are there conditionalities concerning areas and percentages? Are we in position to change the conditionalities at this stage? 

Then on page four, the second bullet tells us about the payment period of 40 years. I need some clarification here. You know, we are operating a cash budget. I suppose then that it is difficult to make long-term plans in spite of the long-term commitments. Is there any analysis of the effects of these loans on the economy as a whole? I might need some clarification on this from either the minister or the chairperson of the Committee. 

Perhaps I should now request that the economists and stasticians tell us about the effects of borrowing.

I support the request by the Committee that we pass this loan. However, I request that when the next sum is brought here for approval, we get more details. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a few observations about this request. 

My first concern is about our debt as a nation. We have had very disturbing reports to the effect that sometimes Government borrows even without the consent of Parliament. So, we do not know exactly to what figure Uganda is indebted. I look at this request as one way of mortgaging this country. Our Government has failed to prove its capacity to supervise these loans. 

When you look around, the richest men in town are those who have had the opportunity to head projects benefiting from these funds. Anybody who heads a project has becomes a big man in town. So, the supervising capacity by our Government is still lacking. 

When you look at the tax base, most of our investors have turned out to be revenue collectors. They go on collecting VAT, remit it to Government, and pose as taxpayers. I think it is high time our Government became more serious about expanding the tax base. They should start taxing the investors other than continuing to be revenue collectors.

I think it is also important that we get to know who is putting in place these priorities. The National Planning Authority has failed to take off and it looks like Government makes its own list; they draw up what they term priorities. How do we know that this loan will not end up being diverted like the 23 or so percent that was recently cut from the budget? 

We should be able to see this money get down to our people. On the contrary, what is happening is that even when this money comes around, the way it is given out leaves out a lot to be desired. Most of this money is given out on criterion that is really absurd. It is, “what did so and so do”? Yet it is supposed to alleviate poverty. I am of the view that all these things must be put out very clearly.  

Corruption is still very high. Mr Speaker, unless we put certain things right, we should desist from further borrowing. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion, and seek for Parliament’s say in how the funds, which are to be borrowed, would be used. The reasons might be inadequate to some of you but I just want to put three reasons across. I beg my colleagues not to take this as a mere contribution, but as reasons making it worth denying Government the capacity to borrow such money.  

One, the Government’s capacity to be trusted with public funds is a contested debate as of now, and I stick to my words. I have all indicators, and I can even write a paper on this. This particular law enforcing authority called Government is so slippery that it cannot be entrusted with public funds.  

Mr Speaker, the facts are clear and the writing on the wall speaks for itself. Two months ago we passed about Shs 3 billion to go to Operation Iron Fist, which was accompanied by about 25 percent cut in expenditure in other departments, to help the operation run.

If success is to be measured by the degree of money available, then we should have gone a long way. What happened is that after one week, Government offered only Shs 20 million of the three billion by putting price tags on the heads of the wanted people. If something would defeat the gallant Government forces with all the ammunition, what would an ordinary civilian do because of the love of Shs 20 million?  

Recently, there was a World Bank report, which I came across, and there are two indicators there. One, they have found that ordinary Ugandans would carry out transactions with money constituting more than half of the national reserves, without involving any financial institution.  

Someone in Natete will carry over Shs 80 million in the pocket to just go and buy land. Usually in a civilised society where the civilians have capacity to monitor Government spending, all transactions are carried out through the bank.

Recently I saw a man being arrested in London because he was in a supermarket carrying out a transaction with more than 1,000 pounds. It looks peculiar to them because money circulating in the public is easily monitored through credit cards. But the situation in Uganda is different. A simple accident happens and you hear that Shs 60 million was lost in that particular accident. This shows the level of distrust that ordinary civilians have in any Government institution, whether bank or not.  

With all due respect, we note that banks are properly regulated by Governments. However, Ugandans have seen things that have never happened before. Even the sovereignty of people’s financial security has been closed, let alone the shock and inconvenience. The point I am trying to put across is that the level of trust in what is called Government is really degenerating. 

On the last page, the committee recommendation clearly states that the repayment period is 40 years. We should not behave like those who are in the evening of their lives. Mr Speaker, I have a belief I will be there. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am very keen and I have been trying to follow the argument of the honourable member holding the Floor. However, I would like to seek clarification from him. 

Does the Government of this country own banks? He is trying to elaborate on his allegation that the Ugandan populace has lost confidence in this Government, and he is giving details concerning private institutions being managed and handled privately. He is talking of individuals who wish to hold their money in any way they want. When they want to go and buy land or go and drink, they can. There is liberalisation, and you know that privatisation is the order and policy of managing this country. What is he telling us? 

Where is the confidence lost in Government through banking? Do we own any bank? Is it really proper to bring elementary academics here? These days people are studying at Makerere and they are pumped with all this book material, and they come here - I am seeking clarification as to whether this country owns banks. Can he go back to proper arguments?

MR JAMES MWANDHA: The honourable member made one very serious statement. He said that Government cannot be trusted with public funds. I do not know whether he has an alternative. If we cannot trust Government with public funds, is he offering an alternative? This is a serious matter and I think it is better that he explains what he means.

THE SPEAKER: But you can tender for people to manage your business.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been trained not to argue over facts. Anyway, I commend the Minister in charge of Ethics for honouring good days like Valentine’s day. (Laughter) I commend her attire. 

It is beyond debate in Uganda whether Government owns banks or not. However, it is Government that forms economic policies to regulate banks. You put your money there only to find that Government is regulating on how it should be closed.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Mondo Kagonyera): Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of information to the honourable member holding the Floor. One of the indices of confidence in banks is the amount of money they hold on people’s behalf. I would like to give an exercise to the honourable member to find out for himself how much private money is held by the banks in this country, before he can make the false statement that people have lost confidence in banks. It is an exercise for him.

MR OTTO: Thank you very much for that information. I would instead take the argument to the level of how many people own that money in the bank. It is now a public secret that a handful of people are richer than 20 million Ugandans. So, whatever amount of money the banks have, its ownership still remains a question of debate. 

Not to be diverted from my course, my colleague asked what alternative we would have if people have lost trust in the institutions of the banks that are to be regulated by Government.  

Mr Speaker, I understand that the scientific management of any society is always handled in a competitive manner. There was a public lecture in which one person said that if Government is failing to run this country let them privatise it to Coca Cola or Shell. That shows the extreme to which ordinary people in a particular country lack trust in its institutions. 

The alternative I suggest is that we need more open structures; we need to have institutions in place. For example, we have the Ministry of Finance but we have the same ordinary voters making special appeals to these particular ministries on the fate of their banks. I really see a big irony there. 

To emphasize and support my argument of opposing the motion to borrow this money, my second point would be that the committee gave clear recommendations that Government should bring to Parliament all support credits for approval before incorporating such in the budget, to avoid problems in case such a request is rejected. I suggest that the committee should have put this as a caveat emptier; a pre-condition. 

We also need to take home, in our briefcases, accountability for the money borrowed. We have not just to say, “We borrowed money”, where is the money going? The honourable minister was talking about privatisation. It is not a bad policy per se, but where is the money going?  Where is the money going from these sales? So, I stand on behalf of the people of Aruu County and on my own behalf, to oppose this motion.

Even the repayment period of 40 years - some of us might be the few people laughing at how this country will be sold to a few individuals. Let us behave responsibly. The money disappearing from URA and all other institutions can really help. It does not make sense to dig one hole and use the sand from that to cover the second one up. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS OLIVER WONEKHA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the committee’s report asking Parliament to endorse the borrowing of the US $150 million –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to interrupt the honourable member, but I want to inform you, as I did before, that we will shortly adjourn. I want to complete this matter, so you should be brief because there are a number of members who are supposed to be somewhere shortly. 

MS WONEKHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will be brief.  Mine is to emphasize further the contributions of our colleagues who have mentioned the supervisory role of Government in as far as the utilisation of these funds is concerned.  

Yesterday the Minister of State in charge of Primary Education did clarify the sources of money that support the UPE programme. On the issue of the supervisory role of Government, I know that with decentralisation, ministries are telling us that the mandate has changed.  












But the ministries have taken it in such a way that they leave too much to the decentralised governments. For example, quoting hon. Bitamazire herself, she has been out in the field to look at what is happening in schools. In UPE schools where you have enrolment of 100 children in a class, she has found 30 actually there in the classroom. When she has asked for the 70, she has been told, “Madam, are you not aware that there is a market just next door?” 

So, what is happening all along in these schools? The enrolment is for 100 but the actual number of students in the classroom is 30. So, has Government relinquished the supervisory role totally to the decentralised governments? 

We have been reading and following the proceedings in the Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament. We have been reading and learning of the shoddy work, which is going on. We are borrowing this money but where is Government? Is it leaving the whole issue to the decentralised governments? 

All they do is withhold funds. Let us say if a district is not LGDP compliant, the best we can do is to withhold funds. Is that enough? These loans we are getting, we are told they are going for programmes like UPE, PMA, health sector strategic plan. We would like as Parliament to be given the specifics. We are concerned with the issues on the ground.  

We are just coming back from recess, Mr Speaker. There are referral hospitals like Mbale, which was mentioned here a number of times. You tell me that the money we have borrowed is actually buying generators for Mbale Hospital and I will understand, rather than telling me about the Health Sector Strategic Plan when in actual fact Mbale Hospital is suffering. It is a referral hospital.  We have heard about the lack of trauma centres. 

So, we want to hear these specifics as people who are coming from constituencies with fellows who are being directly affected. 

When you talk of cholera, it is around with us. Is this money addressing cholera at all? We are every time fire fighting. The sugar canes are being grown where there is cholera. Are these loans reaching the specifics like addressing cholera and people eating sugarcanes from such infected areas?  

Mr Speaker, my query is on the supervisory role of Government. Where is it? Where does it stop? Have they lifted off their hands to tell us theirs is to make policies and an enabling environment? Is that all, Mr Speaker? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said we have to wind up shortly. I think we should allow the minister to reply because some members are going.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on the procedure. I do appreciate your ruling or advice that a number of our colleagues are going for other commitments. I do not know the number of those members who are going out. I was just seeking either your guidance or assistance that we continue. Let them go and we continue.  I do not know how many they are, whether they are 20 or 100.  But I would prefer, unless you are accompanying them, Mr Speaker, we relieve them. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I will not be accompanying them.  But the problem I see is that if they go, I will not be able to make a decision. If it had to continue as a general debate, yes we could continue. But as you will appreciate, we have a lot of work to deal with. 

Next week we have a very important report to deal with and today we were supposed to start another report. So, we may not be able to deal with the work, which we want to deal with. My fear is that if they go, and I know they are many, we will have a problem of making a decision. We should complete this issue today.

MR AWORI: That is why I would request you, Mr Speaker, that we suffer your indulgence to continue with the general debate. 

THE SPEAKER: When are you going to decide on this?  We were supposed to start on UCB today. We cannot start until we complete this work.  Next week we are dealing with the election violence report.  So, when are we going to deal with these matters? This is the problem.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with a lot of humility, unlike the motions you have just talked about, this motion has a lot of impact on the taxes the people we represent pay. So it is important for us to debate it in a manner, which makes us responsible Parliamentarians. On the strength of that, I support what hon. Aggrey Awori has said. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Lubaga South, I entirely agree with you. But one matter, which you should appreciate, is that we have already approved the budget and this was part and parcel of that particular budget. So, I would really have thought we should deal with this matter and pass it formally, because we had already committed ourselves and we are counting on this money. So, I think we should move the motion.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, in light of your advice, I beg to move that you put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think it is meaningful to start on any other business.  Because of what I have said, I think this is the appropriate time to adjourn the House so that our friends can attend to the meeting they are supposed to attend to.

MS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, considering that there were very many observations and clarifications sought by members, and the hon. Minister of Finance had hinted that he was about to respond to some of these issues, do we expect an opportunity when the hon. Minister will answer them?

THE SPEAKER: I can inform the member that there will be a report on the performance of the Budget shortly. I think that will be the appropriate opportunity for us and for the ministry to allude to some of the points that were made here, including the timing of bringing this resolution to us. 

Since the Minister of Finance is here, you should prepare your response to the queries that were raised here when we deal with the performance of the Budget, which is coming very soon. 

The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.06 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 18 February 2003 at 2.00p.m.)

 







