Tuesday, 10 February 2009

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you but in a special way, I want to welcome back the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, who has not been with us since we returned from the recess. You are most welcome! (Applause) 

Hon. Members, at the same time I have sad news; the father of hon. Chris Baryomunsi has died and burial will be in Kanungu. I understand other details will be given but this is the news that I received as I came in. I think it is proper that we observe a minute of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: The other issue is that the Clerk to Parliament, Mr Aeneas Tandekwire, fell sick over the weekend but he is undergoing treatment at Kampala International Hospital where he is admitted. He underwent an operation which was successful. I was able to visit him yesterday and I was able to hold conversation with him. Therefore, it means that he is making progress. Please, consider him in your prayers, if you say prayers. 

2.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on behalf of my colleagues to express the fact that we were informed of the illness of the Clerk to Parliament and the operation that he underwent and we can only, based on your information, wish him a very speedy recovery. 

Secondly, last week we appointed shadow ministers and amongst one of the appointments was an acting position. I would like to say that the issue of acting has been resolved and we want to, at an appropriate time inform you of the substantive person. 

THE SPEAKER: You can tell us if you have the name.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Before that last appointment, hon. Erias Lukwago was the substantive Shadow Attorney-General and Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. In our process of compiling the changes, there were internal matters to resolve because these are positions we share with the other parties in the Opposition. So we were not able to resolve on the representation of DP at that time in the shadow cabinet except for the previous two. We discussed this matter and it was amicably resolved that hon. Erias Lukwago continues to serve as the Shadow Attorney-General. 

Hon. Erias Lukwago is seated at the Back Bench at the moment, so we would like him to come and occupy his rightful place.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, congratulations hon. Lukwago and I wish you the very best. 

Hon. Members, this morning the Business Committee sat to consider the business we have, because we will be sitting up to April when Parliament normally is prorogued. We considered the business that we had and we realized that there is a lot of business still pending in the committees. This was discussed as we were going for recess; we had agreed to give some time to the committees to clear some of the business they had. 

The reports we received then were that there was a lot of absenteeism in the committees; some committees would barely form quorum. The Business Committee was not happy with this and we think Members should attend committee business. Rules are being made to make sure that Members attend committees and we shall be receiving regular reports from the chairpersons of these committees as to the attendance of Members. We will even hear the names of some Members who have not been attending and it will even go on record. This is not good, but the rules require us to do that. So I appeal to you hon. Members that from today, you attend committee work so that you do not fall victim to this. 

We also realized that a number of questions remain unanswered. At the time we went to recess, we had 35 questions that had been asked and the ministers had not answered. Again, we want to look at the rules to the effect that when a question is sent to a minister who is supposed to answer in two or three weeks as the case may be, if we do not get a feedback on the given date, the question will be on the Order Paper. So it will be up to the minister to answer or to explain. That is what we are going to do in order to clear the backlog. 

Therefore, in order to facilitate the committees to clear the work pending with them, we have decided that we give the committees full time from tomorrow, including next week, to clear business that has not been cleared for some time. Therefore, Members will be expected to sit in those proceedings.

We also realised that our friends from this side, especially FDC, have got an important meeting to start tomorrow. So when they do not attend the committee meeting, we shall know, otherwise they are also expected to attend to committee work. 

Otherwise, we have identified the business we shall start with: we have a number of Bills that have been completed including the Mortgage Bill, Land (Amendment), Duo-citizenship, Partnership Contract and many others. So prepare for them.

We also realised that a number of reports had been tabled here, especially the Public Accounts Committee, Local Government Committee – but Members take them and then forget to bring them when the dates are due. As you may notice, it is our practice to issue two Order Papers. On Friday we issue the Order Paper which shows you the business of the week to follow, and then we also issue you with a daily Order Paper. So please, between now and when we resume, check your Order Papers to see if you have these reports which are going to be considered so that when a date is given, you are able to participate in the debate. 

We have also realised that there was an assignment given to some Members of a committee, in respect to a Public Accounts Committee report on land allocation around Luzira, Butabika. I wanted these Members to consider the legal aspects. There was something which struck us that there was a legal problem. But up to now we have not received that report. I remember we had tasked hon. Peter Nyombi and there were other prominent Members like hon. Katuntu and hon. Ben Wacha. So I ask hon. Ben Wacha and hon. Katuntu to talk to hon. Nyombi; I know he is busy with the Police affairs but let something be done to clear that report. Thank you very much. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Regarding attendance to these committees, I think it was last week when hon. Deusdedit Bikwasizehi brought up a problem regarding chairpersons of standing committees having commitment on other committees. How are we going to reconcile this especially when awarding the hours we are attending to these committees and then you publish it in the papers? Some of us are going to be committed here when we are also supposed to be in another committee. 

Secondly, on the Order Paper, it appears the report is ready yet it appears here – on No.6: “Consideration and presentation and adoption of the report of the ad hoc committee on the cancellation of land titles.” Did it appear accidentally or otherwise? I thought it was ready. 

THE SPEAKER: No.6 (a)? Sorry I do not have my Order Paper here; what does it say?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: It says, “Consideration and adoption of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor General for the year ended 30 June 2002. In brackets they say, Chairperson Public Accounts Committee then (a) presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the ad hoc committee on the cancellation of land titles. In brackets again, chairperson -

THE SPEAKER: That means that that report has got parts. First of all, we will start with the ad hoc committee’s report because it affects the entire report. I think that is why it was arranged that way. Let me tell you that in that report, the committee ordered the cancellation of titles. That was the committee’s report but with the separation of power, obviously you see that a committee of Parliament or Parliament itself cannot take over the work of Judiciary. Titles can only be cancelled on the orders of court or for fraud. So we wanted that committee and the advisors to take that into account and that was the point.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: It was already ready when I saw it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, whoever prepared it assumed because this was last year. That is also to prompt the committee to come with an answer. 

As for the attendance of standing and sessional committees, we discussed this in the Business Committee meeting. We realised that chairpersons have got a way forward where they have a chairman and they can sit and see how to allocate time to standing committees and sessional committees.  

In any case, if you are a Member of a sessional committee and at the same time of a standing committee, your absence in the sessional committee will be for a good cause. If your absence is for a good cause, they will not mention you here. It is only being absent without having explained why that is a problem. It is like when a Member is not here in Parliament but he has written to me and I have granted him leave. I will not say he is absent although I know some two Members, I do not want to mention their names but they have been constantly absent. 

You remember last year when I mentioned this issue, one of them came. I do not know how he knew that I was referring to him and the other time I saw another one here. I know them but I am appealing to them to change, otherwise I will mention their names.

3.01
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance and it is about quarantine as a result of Foot and Mouth Disease in animals in Lira, Lango sub-region. The community in Lango sub-region have requested me to come and request that if possible, the quarantine be lifted because I am reliably informed that the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries put in a request last June for money to purchase vaccines but to date, they have not succeeded.  

There are a number of implications as a result of this quarantine not only as regards school fees payment but the commercial sector and social issues like marriages and weddings. I understand that at one wedding, people ate “poor man’s” meat that is beans and they complained a lot. 

So, we want to find out clearly from the Minister of Finance. What is wrong with procuring the drugs for vaccinating these animals and when will they be procured? 

The second request is that the doctors in Lira check and certify which animals can be slaughtered or sold so that those that are still affected are not sold or killed because they are suffering.  

Mr Speaker, we demand that the quarantine be lifted so that people do not continue to suffer when deliberately no efforts have been put forward to procure vaccines for Lango sub-region and I think for the whole Uganda according to the hon. Minister of State for Animal Industry and Fisheries.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is the same matter we handled last week. Hon. Odit raised it and the minister also commented on it. This morning when you came to me, I tried to get the minister but I think he was in a meeting. Hon. Minister, can you say something about this because this is the same matter we handled last week?

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did mention last time when this matter was raised that we are in the process of procuring vaccines. We had taken samples to ascertain the strain in Lira and we realise that it is not only in Lira but we have some other districts, which are affected.  

Regarding lifting of the quarantine, I did mention last week that even if animals have recovered from Food and Mouth Disease in six months, they remain carriers. Therefore, it is very risky to lift quarantine and allow animal movement. However, when animals have healed, we lift total quarantine and allow for partial quarantine. Partial quarantine means that you can sell animals for slaughter but not transport animals for breeding. That is, they can be sold from farms to abattoirs. When we have completely eradicated the problem and we are very sure that it is safe, then we can lift quarantine.  

Otherwise, the honourable member also called me about the matter and I explained. I think what remains to be done is for the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Finance to avail the funds for the necessary procurement of the vaccine. Otherwise, the process is on. I thank you very much. 

MS BAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I find it extremely wanting that since December last year Government of Uganda is still in the process of procuring drugs for vaccinating animals. It seems it is not an emergency to the minister because since December and now we are in 2009, you are still in the process of trying to procure drugs! How serious is your commitment to the farmers whose animals are dying?  

This reveals to you the extent of our commitment to agriculture in this country. If there is this quarantine and six months down the road he is technically saying these animals are not able to move, where is the trade in livestock and what happens to those households that are dependent on livestock?  

Hon. Minister, how serious can you be to this country as far as this is concerned? I do not know what appears as an emergency to this government and to your ministry.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, we have a lot of cattle movements in this region and when we had an outbreak, we did vaccinate in risky areas and transit routes. However, because of demands for Christmas that people must have meat and we must lift the quarantine, we did think it wise to have partial quarantine to allow people to sell animals for slaughter. But during Christmas days, some unscrupulous traders managed to sneak animals not necessarily taking them to abattoirs but for breeding and they have caused an outbreak. And before we procure a vaccine, we must take the strain and we have taken the samples. We know the strain and we have made a request to Finance as I indicated last week that we have already communicated to our regular suppliers and we are waiting to remit funds so that we can get the vaccine. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Last week when the minister made his explanation and he talked about strains, I left the matter but it looks like now the strain of the Foot and Mouth Disease is the reason he is bringing up for delaying. I did agriculture and even when we learnt about Foot and Mouth Disease, we never talked about strains and as far as I know, the vaccines that are being supplied are not strain specific. I would like now the minister to tell me honestly if there are strains of Foot and Mouth Disease viruses, how many strains are in this country, and whether the vaccines that they bring are strain specific because he just reminded me of my student days? Maybe things have changed. Could the minister give us this technical clarification?

MR TUMWEBAZE: For any outbreak, you investigate it, monitor it and see whether it is increasing or diminishing. When the Minister of Agriculture imposes quarantine in any area, sometimes you wonder whether they have requisite capacity to monitor the cases of Foot and Mouth Disease right from the onset to final resolution of the disease. Those are medical terms and the doctors know them. I am wondering whether the Minister of Agriculture has capacity to monitor the progress of that disease because sometimes you find the quarantine being imposed unnecessary because they do not know when the disease is severe. When you look at most of the cattle corridor areas, they impose quarantine for say a year, but you do not see veterinary officers taking records, looking at where there are new cases prevailing or coming up and sometimes you find quarantine being irrelevant –(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you. The information I would like to give you is that, this information about Foot and Mouth Disease was detected in June last year and the director of animal services informed government accordingly and they put their request for money to purchase vaccines since June last year. What research do you need therefore?

Further information is that, when there was FMD in Western Uganda and Southern Uganda sometime back and we were in recess, we were called back and money was requested for and released immediately to purchase the vaccine. What kind of government standard are we talking about?

MR TUMWEBAZE: As I wind up, I am concerned about the surveillance abilities of the ministry at district and sub-county levels in terms of veterinary officers. How do they survey, monitor and at the end of the day recommend that we should maintain the quarantine restrictions or we should lift it? That clear system should be known and that is the clarification I am seeking from the minister. Thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me clarify on two issues: One, the allegation that we responded to FMD because it was in the south and west is not true, because at that time the FMD had spread to 22 districts including part of the North. As we talk now, FMD is not only in Lango; we have FMD in Rakai and parts of Isingiro. 

As to whether we have capacity to survey, yes we do and the information we get is from both farmers and the district veterinary officers and the sub county veterinary officers who are on ground.

Why have we kept quarantine for a long time? Unnecessary cattle movement is not a good fashion in modern farming. If you have to take animals, you must make sure that where they are leaving and going are safe for animals. We have kept partial quarantine for a long time in this country and we have attained the following results: When this Parliament appropriated a supplementary budget of Shs 4.5 billion which was not enough to cover the nation but which was adequate enough to treat affected areas, risky areas and transit routes, we run the whole country for 15 months without any outbreak of FMD. This translated into people trading in animals and animal products for 15 months without a break.

I would like colleagues to assist the ministry since we are all stakeholders. When we put partial quarantine, we are not being stringent on anybody. All we are saying is that you must take animals for sale and slaughter and if you want to transfer animals from point X to point Y, the veterinary officers in point X and Y must agree that the animals are healthy and where they are going is safe. By putting regulations on animal movement and unnecessary shifting of farmers without even knowing whether they have learned where they are going, we are doing something good to the industry.

Finally, hon. Latigo –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I have been listening religiously expecting the minister to tell something near the truth. He has not reached there. The truth of the matter is that this ministry is being frustrated by the Ministry of Finance. Now the question of strain never arose at that time when we confronted the ministry. 

Two, we also know that this vaccine was formulated by a Ugandan when he was based in Kenya. Right now this expert is in the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries; he is a director of resources. So, I think the minister should be good enough - instead of protecting the Ministry of Finance, he should come out and tell us whether there is an emergency fund in his ministry to respond to these cases so that we know how to handle them. Where has been the Ministry of Finance all along since we have been battling with this matter? What is his role in responding to these cases?

And lastly, the minister has said they have placed some orders; they are getting samples. What is guiding you in requisitioning for the funds, if you still do not know the magnitude of the disease? I thank you.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: In addition to what hon. Odit has said, we are already bedevilled by – we do not know whether it is false information, regarding a report which appeared in one of these local dailies that some of our products like milk are already contaminated with faecal materials. And when we hear another problem regarding vaccines or drugs, vaccination and the rest, these are sending bad alarms to the public. It is high time the minister came out clearly and said, “Members I think this is what actually you can assist with regarding finance, regarding other things.” Otherwise, if such reports are coming out already and another one is coming on the floor of Parliament regarding treating diseases in the case of animals, it will not be good for our agriculture.

THE SPEAKER: I think the seriousness of this matter is stressed -

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I am not a liar and the Hansard can bear me witness. I did mention that we carried out samples in these affected animals and we came to know about the strain. It is routine. Those of you who have been in agriculture especially veterinary officers, you know that it is routine to make samples from affected animals before you make orders and we have done this and we have made requisitions.

I can understand why hon. Odit is pressing hard, but I can only say what I know in Ministry of Agriculture – I think Finance can also answer on his part. As regards to hon. Mutumba, I think I am on the Order Paper to explain that sabotaging statement. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But this is the second time we are dealing with this subject and I think the point has been made so that the minister takes action. Last week, we were on this subject; today we are on the same subject.

MR OKOT OGONG: The matter will remain hanging when we have not concluded the problem of Finance. Because the minister is now ready, I trust my brother the Minister of Agriculture; he is very effective and very efficient. Once he has the money in his hands, he is ready to purchase the vaccines. We want the Minister of Finance to tell us here today. If the minister is not here, the Prime Minister should make a commitment that from tomorrow you are going to arrange for money because animals are dying. The government that I serve cannot just sit down when our animals are dying. 

Rt hon. Prime minister come and tell our people when you are going to avail them money so that vaccination starts. But if he is not there then we cannot brush off this matter. We should discuss it. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Minister of Finance is not here, but this has gone on record. Next item!

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.22
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see on the Order Paper that there are two statements expected from the Ministry of Defence. At the onset I want to give a clarification. We indeed wanted to make a statement on both Somalia and the situation in Garamba, but what we had agreed with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs was that since Parliament had an earlier discussion on this matter, we should get into more details with the committee first and then return here with a full statement. So, for today, the statement is on the situation in Somalia.

Mr Speaker, there is a new situation in Somalia that gives us a basis of new optimism in regard to stabilising that part of our continent. Colleagues will recall authorising the President to deploy UPDF as part of the AMISOM force. This decision was taken on 13 February 2007 and the UPDF has since 6 march 2007 been in Somalia on this mission.

Although UPDF was there as the only force, it was joined by a contingent sent by the Republic of Burundi. Today we have approximately 3,000 troops under AMISOM in Mogadishu in Somalia. 

As colleagues will recall, there were four tasks that comprised the mandate:

•	To support dialogue and reconciliation in Somalia.

•	To provide protection to the transitional federal institutions, to help them carry out their functions of government and also provide protection to the security infrastructure in Somalia.

•	To assist with the effective re-establishment of all inclusive Somalia security forces.

•	To contribute to the creation of the necessary conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance.

What is our assessment of how AMISOM has performed to date, Mr Speaker? The force has provided security to the President and the Prime Minister and ensured the security of important and high ranking international figures that have since visited Mogadishu.

The force has protected key government installations, including the sea port and the airport.

Kenya and Uganda and the UNDP have carried out some training for the Somali police force.

Uganda and other African countries, notably Rwanda, have also trained some of the TFG troops.

Reconciliation and the political process have recently made significant progress, giving rise to renewed hope for stabilisation of Somalia.

So, in summary, that is our judgement of how AMISOM has performed in that difficult situation in Somalia. 

What is the summary of the costs to our government in participating in this mission? To date, Mr Speaker, we have lost 10 soldiers, and I had occasion to come to the Floor to give details of some of these brothers and sisters. 

Many have been injured but most of them have recovered very well. Those who will have some permanent injury are now 12.

In so far as expenditure budget is concerned, and we did promise that deployment in Somalia would be budget neutral, and I would like to firmly inform Parliament that this broadly has remained so. When I say broadly, I mean in net terms because in between balancing books we do make borrowing. You have a situation where soldiers need medicine, the money from AU has not come and you just cannot leave the troops to go without drugs. So, we do avail drugs to the troops and we get compensated later by the African Union. So, except in that borrowing, there has been no net expenditure on the troops apart from the regular expenditure that we would spend on them if they were in the country.

I give in this table the cost centres that we mainly finance with our troops who are in Somalia. First there is the issue of troop allowances. I did inform Parliament that for each soldier that we deploy in Somalia, there is a total allowance of US $500; US $400 goes to the soldier and US $100 goes to the government. And to date, we have been paid US $17,366,564. And on that cost centre, we are owed US $1,686,500. As I said, we have lost a total of 10 soldiers and death is compensated with US $50,000. So, we should have been paid US $500,000. To date however, we have received US $250,000 and expecting the balance of US $250,000.

Before the troops are deployed, they have to be prepared and there is expenditure incurred in doing so, and that is what we call pre-deployment. We have so far been paid US $3,664,000 and they still owe us US $6,428,000. 

We did go with some equipment; the troops took some equipment that belongs to this government and the agreement with the African Union was that we would be compensated for depreciation. And the calculation so far shows that we should be paid US $5,801,082 in depreciation of the equipment that the troops went with. 

As I said, honourable colleagues, some of our brothers and sisters have suffered permanent disability and they are due for compensation. The assessed disabilities amount to US $120,500, which is yet to be paid. 

Then lastly there is what we call self sustenance. This will include issues like medical treatment etc. we expect to be compensated to the tune of about US $9.7 million. 

So, in total we have received US $21,280,564 but we expect another US $23,970,375. 

That covers what we have called the cost to this country regarding our participation in this noble cause.

I would also like to take this opportunity to brief Parliament in summary about the political process in Somalia and how far reconciliation has gone. 

For over six months now, the Transitional Federal Government in Mogadishu has been carrying out negotiations with one of the opposition groups called Alliance for Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS). ARS, loosely speaking, could be called a splinter group from the Islamic Courts Union (ICU). And these negotiations have been taking place in Djibouti under the brokerage of the UN. This Djibouti process has resulted into what is now called the Djibouti Peace Agreement.

The main elements of this agreement are mainly three: 

•	Expansion of the transitional federal Parliament. The transitional Parliament has therefore been expanded from 275 to 550 Members of Parliament. The ARS has contributed 200 of the new Members. The balance of 75 Members will be filled as the process of reconciliation makes further progress. In other words, doors were not closed since there are still some significant opposition groups in that country. 

•	The second element of the agreement was that a government of national unity, a broad based government, should be formed. On 30 January 2009, the expanded Parliament elected a new President His Excellency, Sheik Sheriff, the leader of ARS. He is now the President of Somalia. I am glad to inform Parliament that Uganda observed the free and fair elections. The Ugandan delegation to this event was led by the Chair of the Parliamentary Committee responsible for Defence, hon. Mathias Kasamba. It included, Lt General Katumba Wamala and also a senior official from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The new president is now carrying out consultations in the spirit of reconciliation before appointment of a new Prime Minister who once he/she is in place, will in turn appoint a new cabinet.

•	The third element was the formation of a transitional joint security force. The agreement has provided for the formation of a military force initially consisting of 10,000 troops. Five thousand of these will come from the TFG and the other half from the ARS. This joint force is already being formed and is in fact already participating in keeping security in Mogadishu. So, as far as the process of reconciliation is concerned, we think this is a very significant progress, which has resulted into a new broad based government.

There was a question on what the security situation particularly in Mogadishu and more generally in Somalia is now. Colleagues will recall that although Ethiopia was not part of AMISOM, they were in Somalia and participating in maintaining peace therein. But I now would like to inform Parliament that the Ethiopian National Defence Forces completely withdrew from Somalia by end of January 2009. This has encouraged the Al Shabab to capture a number of towns outside Mogadishu including Baidoa.

The Al Shabab have also continued to attack Mogadishu. By way of explaining who the Al Shabab are, I would like to briefly say that this is the military wing of the radical arm of the Islamic Courts Union group who are based in Asmara.

Honourable members will also have learnt recently, through the press that a convoy of AMISOM was hit by an explosive set up by the Al Shabab. The press reported that a resultant shoot out between Al Shabab and AMISOM led to the killing and injury of civilians. The information we have from the AMISOM force is that the Al Shabab were responsible for the killing of the civilians. But in order to leave no stone unturned an inquiry has been set up so that we can have a firm explanation as to these unfortunate events that resulted from that incident.

In the meant time, Mr Speaker and colleagues, the joint forces of TFG and ARS have taken over positions that were vacated by the Ethiopia National Defence forces. The new president has also called on all Somali people and forces to respond to the call of reconciliation.

It is to be noted that although the Al Shabab are continuing to make attacks, the population is generally supportive of the reconciliation between TFG and ARS. Part of the evidence for this judgement is the following:

1.	Clerics and elders in Mogadishu have organised some militias to counter attack some of the Al Shabab elements;
2.	The population has carried out demonstrations clearly in support of AMISOM; in support of peace and reconciliation; and
3.	The leaders of the clerics and elders have had negotiations with AMISOM. They have assured AMISOM that they support them and I have given them encouragement.

Measures are being taken to strengthen AMISOM. After every six months AU will review the performance of AMISOM in Somalia and decide to renew their mandate. So, recently, this mandate was renewed though a decision was also made that the force be strengthened particularly given the fact that Ethiopian Defence Forces have left. 

Three processes are undergoing to ensure the AMISOM is enhanced. The first process will involve Uganda and Burundi deploying an additional battalion each. This will bring the total of AMISOM to over 4,000 troops. 

Secondly, Nigeria has also indicated that they will send one, two or three battalions; they have not been specific, but they are firm that they are coming to participate in stabilising Somalia.

Three, the AU Headquarters in Addis Ababa is contacting other member states of AU to contribute troops in an effort to build up to the target of 8,000 troops.

The second measure of strengthening AMISOM is being undertaken by the United Nations. Accordingly, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1863 on 16 January this year in respect of Somalia. 

The UN Security Council welcomed the contribution of AMISOM to the lasting peace and stability in Somalia. The council expressed its appreciation for the continued commitment of the governments of Uganda and Somalia. It also condemned any hostilities towards AMISOM.

The council determined that the situation in Somalia constitutes a threat to international peace and security in the region, and acting under Chapter 7 of the Charter of the United Nations, among other things, the council:

1.	Welcomed the decision of the African Union that AMISOM remains in Somalia and that that decision should be enhanced.

2.	Decided to renew for up to six months, the authorisation of the African Union to maintain a mission in Somalia. This is effective from 16 January this year when this resolution was taken.

3.	Council expressed its intent to transform AMISOM into a United Nations Peacekeeping Operation in Somalia subject to a further decision of the Security Council by 1 June 2009.

The UN Security Council approved the following:

1.	In kind, assistance to AMISOM through the transfer of assets following the liquidation of the United Nations mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea. As honourable colleagues will recall, there was a peacekeeping force between Ethiopia and Eritrea that has been withdrawn and they had some equipment that is now being passed on to AMISOM following this decision.

2.	They also approved the United Nations logistical support package to AMISOM. This will include equipment and services. This arrangement will go on until June 2009 or until such a time that AMISOM is converted into a UN peacekeeping operation.

3.	Council also approved the establishment of a trust fund to provide financial support to AMISOM until a United Nations Peacekeeping Operation is deployed. This fund will also assist in the re-establishment, training and retention of an-all-inclusive Somali security force. The council requested the African Union, in consultation with the Secretary General, to submit budgetary requests to this trust fund. It further called upon states to contribute to the trust fund while noting that its existence does not preclude the conclusion of direct bilateral arrangement in support of AMISOM. This is to say that a donor country could deal with the troop-contributing country without necessarily having to go through the trust fund.

4.	The council also requested that the Secretary-General should oversee the assistance that I have referred to. It further requested the Secretary-General to make reports to the Security Council at 30-day intervals on the progress of the deployment of goods and services to AMISOM. 

5.	The Council called upon member sates to support the strengthening and building of capacity of the Somali Government at the federal, state and local level particularly in areas of institutional development, human resource development, public finance management and accountability processes, and support to service delivery.

6.	Finally, the Council re-iterated its serious concern at the worsening humanitarian situation in Somalia and called on member states to contribute to the current and future consolidated humanitarian appeals.

The third source of support for AMISOM has come from the wider donor community. As I speak, the United Kingdom, the United States of America and the European Union have pledged more resources to support AMISOM.

The Arab League and the Organisation of Islamic Countries have also pledged to politically and materially support the Somali stabilisation process.  

As I end this briefing, Mr Speaker, I want to state that the matter of re-establishing the State of Somalia is a Pan-Africanist obligation. In the House, we have all broadly supported Uganda’s participation in AMISOM. Accordingly, I have ensured that I maintain broad briefing on this matter. Before coming to make this statement, I made briefings as follows:
1. 	Cabinet.
2. 	The Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament.
3.	The hon. Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; and
4. 	The Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

In conclusion, I would like to state as follows:

1. 	That the reconciliation process in Somalia has, in our view, taken a paradigm shift.
2. 	The international community has come out more strongly to support Somalia.
3. 	AMISOM is right now being strengthened; and
4. 	The prospect for Somalia stabilisation is, in our view, quite good.

I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for the statement. 

3.46
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am responding with questions to the hon. Minister.  

My name is Hassan Kaps Fungaroo, Member of Parliament representing Obongi Constituency. I am also a Member of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. At the time –(Interjections)– okay, also Shadow Minister in charge of Presidential Affairs and Anti-corruption, although that is not important to me. 

I would like to address myself to the differences between the presentation that was made before the committee and the one you have made before the plenary. It appears the concerns of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs that were raised in the presence of the Minister and the Chief of Defence Forces, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, have been ignored. I am saying this because we have not seen any of those points in this report. Let me therefore ask the same questions, for the sake of the record and the honourable members who were not in that meeting.

If you turn to page 4 and look at point 4.1.3, which talks about the security situation in Somalia, we are told the Ethiopians have withdrawn from Somalia. The immediate question that arises is: what were the terms and conditions of withdrawal of the Ethiopians? This Parliament needs to be informed about this. I am asking this because when the Ethiopians came into Somalia, they told the world that they had some interests in there. What is the stand of their interests as of today or as at the time they withdrew from Somalia? We need to know that.

Secondly, still under point 4.1.3.1, the last paragraph talks about the Al Shabab being a military wing of the radical ICU group based in Asmara. This means there is already a division. The Union of Islamic Courts is no longer one as it used to be at the beginning. If there is a radical group, it means there is a moderate one as well.  Thinking minds should ask: what is the dividing line between the radical and moderates? If the radicals are wrong, why is it that they have been able to mobilise a big force that is still capturing and filling the gap that has been left by the Ethiopians?

Politically, we should understand the dividing line between the issues that the radicals follow and the ones that the moderates follow. We are Pan-Africanists and as a member of the Global Pan-African Movement, whose secretariat is based in Kampala, I support a stable state in Somalia and any other part of Africa. However, we should ask ourselves: what are the modalities? What methods are we going to use to ensure our states remain stable? Do we look at the internal initiatives of the people or we are driven by external influences of people who have, time immemorial, been trying to control Africa from outside?

Mr Speaker, I also would like the Minister to explain the role of the United States of America in this issue. Is it just, as stated here, part of the diplomatic and donor community? It is recorded in our minutes that the Chief of Defence Forces said that the UPDF is a member of AMISOM, which is a pacifying force, but that it is also an ally of the United States of America and Ethiopia. These words have disappeared yet they concern issues that hinder the efforts of the UPDF. How come it is now fluctuating between being an ally of Ethiopia and the United States of America and being an arm of AMISOM which is a mission deployed by the AU in accordance with our rules?

I would like to kindly seek these clarifications, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving me this opportunity.  

3.51
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for his statement to Parliament. To me, the business page – page 2, point 3.6 - describes this as a loss to this country. We have not gained so far. When you look at the amount paid to us, are we going to really get it?  

The other concern is: for how long are we going to operate in Somalia? We need a counter statement from the Somali Government in order to understand what you have given us. Can we take it for granted that this is a true statement of what is happening at the frontline and on the political scene in Somalia? We demand a statement from Somalia to this effect. 

Also, if possible, we need to get a statement from the African Union. What has happened to other countries that had promised to go and help in Somalia? The contribution made by Uganda has cost us a lot of lives and injury and this is a great concern.

What are we preparing for our soldiers who are doing very well in Somalia in terms of training them further and then promoting them? They have already done a wonderful job; for how long are they going to live in Somalia? When you are promoting soldiers, do they also get promotions as they are in the battlefield in Somalia? This is also our concern.

On the Ethiopian forces leaving at short notice, I also feel the reasons for which they left are not clear. It is not clear if they are withdrawing because it was a popular demand in Somalia. We need to know from Somalia what damage has been caused. When we are leaving, I hope we are not going to be held responsible for damage caused by the Ethiopian troops when they first came to Somalia. 

Finally, we would like to know: are the 3,000 who were sent there going to remain there permanently or will they be changed? Some of them need rest or at least leave. Will they be changed and new ones take over? Thank you very much. 

3.54
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister relates to the statements made under the security situation in Somalia, that is, 4.1.3.2. 

I do recall that there was a widely reported allegation that the Ugandan troops were the ones who were involved in the killing of these civilians. Since this is a statement that the honourable minister is making to this House and to the nation, wouldn’t the minister have the commitment to clarify this particular matter other than just simply say, “The information we have is that the Al Shabab were responsible for the killing of the civilians”? Fully aware of the fact that he has briefed different stakeholders, and we know that there can be no other better briefed person in this country than the Minister of Defence, why wouldn’t the minister commit himself to clarify that statement?

3.56
MS BEATRICE AMONGI LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the minister for his statement to the House and to the nation. I also want to express condolences to the families of the ten soldiers who lost their lives. 

Roughly two years ago when Ugandan troops went to Somalia, the whole nation was very uneasy about the participation of Uganda in Somalia. Down the road however, I must say that as a country, we are proud of the performance of our soldiers in Somalia -(Applause)- especially regarding the fact that it is a very slippery and dangerous situation. I think the UPDF has conducted itself very well indeed and I think they deserve the applause of this House and the support of the whole nation. (Applause)

I am extremely encouraged by this report, especially the fact that because the UPDF has conducted itself well, other nations of Africa that were previously unwilling to participate are now showing signs of committing their troops. Also, the world and the UN Security Council have come out very strongly in support of AMISOM. I think that speaks of the level of discipline of the forces of Uganda that are the main forces in Somalia. 

I stand up to pay tribute to a well disciplined force that has proved that it is worth its name and has not brought shame to this country. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

3.58
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The last time the Minister of Defence made a statement to this House, I was more concerned with the absence and failure of other African countries to contribute troops to Somalia. Since then, it is only Burundi, which is not a very stable, strong and well-to-do country, which has contributed troops. All these other African countries - including Nigeria which has the capacity, the training and the number of troops - have not up to today contributed their troops to Somalia. 

I would like to first of all salute the people and Government of Burundi. Even with the many problems they have, they have at least been able to contribute and send troops to Somalia to join the Uganda contingent there. 

My complaint at that time to the Minister of Defence was that the Uganda troops would be thin on the ground and unless other countries did contribute troops, our soldiers would be in trouble. I am therefore not surprised that we have lost 10 soldiers and 22 are seriously injured. Under chapter 7, for a peace-keeping force to lose 10 soldiers and to have 22 wounded who are not supposed to be in direct combat is a big number. It is a big loss but it is because other countries developed cold feet in sending troops to Somalia. I think that is a very serious matter.  I hope that when the President was in Addis Ababa this time, he had a tête-à-tête with other heads of state to discuss and tell them that they had actually failed to live up to their expectations in contributing these troops to Somalia. (Applause)

The minister talks about Kenya, Uganda and the UNDP carrying out training of the police force; was this carried out here in Uganda? Was it carried out in Somalia? Were we paid? What was it? When did they pass out? Can he clarify?

Mr Speaker, the minister talks about Nigeria preparing to send a battalion or two. How long does Nigeria need to think? Why should Uganda prepare and send troops faster than Nigeria? 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, what hon. Butime has told us is really very pertinent. As a member of the Defence Committee, I know that the reason as to why Nigeria was not ready some two years ago was that they were about to go for elections. When the elections were over, they told us that they were waiting for the new president to be sworn in. So, they are giving lame excuses. I believe that if we are to have a strong force in Somalia in order to assist our gallant soldiers there to do their work effectively, AU must come out wholeheartedly. If this is a concern for the Africa Union, it should not be Uganda only. 

The minister has talked about having more troops - up to 8,000 - before other countries come in. Uganda is already sending other troops and I think by the end of this year, Uganda and Burundi will take up all the responsibility and these 8,000 troops will come from Uganda and Burundi. So, it is really very important that other countries come up so that we can carry out this work effectively. 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I will support Uganda and Burundi sending more troops to Somalia simply because our troops cannot be thin on the ground. Sending more troops will help our soldiers not to be thin on the ground. 

Finally, on page 3, the minister says – and this is really very interesting - that he is glad to inform Parliament that Uganda observed free and fair elections. Is he the one to judge if the elections were free and fair or should it at least be hon. Kasamba to tell us? How does the Minister of Defence, who is not a member of the team that observed, decide? He has already decided that the elections were free and fair before hon. Kasamba tells us! I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.05
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to seek clarification from the minister as to the justification for Uganda to send more troops. From the statement, we are sending another battalion. Hopefully, we shall not be told that more battalions will be sent. 

When I look at this statement, apart from the reason that hon. Butime has given of other AU member states reneging on their commitments, particularly Nigeria, you can see we are going to have a contribution of over 90 percent; I worry. If we add more, I think it will be over 95 percent. Why should we carry that burden when we have several members of the AU? 

Another reason that I would advance is that when I look at page 4 of this statement, I can see TFG as well as ARS enter into the Djibouti Peace Agreement and one of the key elements is formation of a transitional joint security force. This force is going to be comprised of 10,000 troops - 5,000 from TFG and 5,000 from ARS. Hon. Minister, if TFG and ARS are contributing forces to create a force to handle their security concerns - and remember, you have indicated here “transitional joint security force” - my understanding is that this joint transitional security force is going to take on the security concerns of Somalia. So why should we send more troops if they are establishing their own forces? Where is the justification for the extension of our troops’ stay in Somalia for another six months since you have said that the UN has taken that resolution? 

Finally, on page 1, paragraphs 2 and 3, the minister is not specific about the AMISOM troops that we have in Somalia. He is saying that the force is comprised of approximately 3,000 troops. I think you must be having a database since the information is there in your records; how many do we have? What is the strength of the AMISOM force? Do we have 3,000 or is it approximately 3,000? How many Ugandan troops do we have in Somalia and how many have been contributed by Burundi? We need the exact number. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

4.09
MR OCULA MICHAEL (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I must also thank the Minister of Defence for giving us this information. I just have one issue on which I need clarification. 

Somewhere the minister says that the AMISOM force is to be transformed into a UN peace keeping force. When we were sending troops to Somalia, this had not been brought to our attention as a country. I would like the minister to clarify to us the recruitment method of the UN peace keeping force? Is it just done by getting some force somewhere and transforming it into a UN peace keeping force, or they have some specific methods on how they recruit forces to become UN peace keeping forces?

Secondly, in case this force is turned into a UN peace keeping force, shall Uganda as a country have the mandate and authority to command them or will the authority be transferred somewhere else? I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Former chairperson of the Defence Committee.

4.10
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Ministry of Defence for being very transparent and coherent on this matter. Ever since we sent troops to Somalia in March 2007, the ministry has kept briefing Parliament and the nation about the same. So I really want to thank the minister for that.

Secondly, I want to add my voice to those that have commended the great work the gallant sons and daughters have done in Somalia. On the 3rd of this month, our troops were also commended in the UN Security Council and the African Union. I think it is very important to recognise what they have done despite the fragility of the whole situation in Somalia, and it all goes back to thanking the government for its commitment on professionalisation of the armed forces in this country.

At the time of sending our troops to Somalia, there were a number of questions that were raised but I must say that sending troops to Somalia has not been in vain. To me, the Ethiopian troops’ withdrawal is a great achievement. The concern that time was that Ethiopia had invaded Somalia and therefore it was very negative for them to keep working with our forces. For us to see Ethiopia withdrawing is a great sign of commitment.

Secondly and most importantly, one of the mandates of AMISOM was to provide and to secure the transitional federal institutions to enhance the process of reconciliation. When Sheikh Sharif Ahmed, the former chairman of the Islamic Courts Union, was elected as the President of Somalia, I think that was great work that was done. I just want to call upon the international community to put in more effort and take advantage of this window for reconciliation.

As I wind up, I want to reiterate what hon. Butime said. It is two years down the road since we sent our troops. If you looked at that very first statement the minister made, the argument was that Nigeria was sending troops very soon, Ghana was sending very soon and other countries were going to follow. Now it is two years down the road. This brings to question the readiness or the structure of the African Union security architecture - at the time of sending troops, Ghana was the chair of the African Union. 

I believe given the situation and piracy which is going on in the waters around Somalia, we need more effort from the international community. Let them come in and beef-up AMISOM. 

I just want to comment on what hon. Lukwago said, that since these people are forming a joint security force, why then are we sending other forces. Mr Speaker, if a force is at formation level, how do you expect them to have capabilities that can really handle such a fragile situation? Let other countries put in more troops so that our forces are not too thin on the ground. I also call upon the international community to put in more effort and to look at the Somalia situation as a priority. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you think we should continue with this statement when we are supposed to spend 30 minutes on it, and we have got another statement?  I think you have sufficiently addressed this, and I have heard people repeating themselves anyway. 

4.16
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. 

The President made a request to us in Parliament to allow him deploy in Somalia to keep peace there. It was actually on 13 February 2007, and the request was very clear. If we can go to the Hansard, you will get a clear request from the President. The request was that we are going to deploy 1,600; and two, that it was going to be for six months only. Since that time, the President has not requested Parliament for an extension. This means that constitutionally, the troops are there illegally. Yes, we supported it but we want to live by the law and follow the law to the letter. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Minister to formally come to Parliament and ask for an extension for more troops and we shall provide within the law. You should not just deploy like Ugandans are rats and we can deploy them anyhow. 

4.17
MR ERASMUS MAGULUMAALI (Independent, Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the Commander in Chief for having taken a wonderful decision as a Pan-Africanist to ask this Parliament to allow him to deploy forces in Somalia. 

Hon. Members, Africa is at crossroads. I have been attracted by a very wonderful statement on page 8 which states: “The matter of re-establishing the State of Somalia is a Pan-Africanist obligation. In the House, we have all broadly supported Uganda’s participation in AMISOM.”

I am a retired Major and, therefore, I know how it feels to be in an inner battle area. We unanimously decided to send our boys and girls to Somalia. We knew the dangers there but because of patriotism and Pan-Africanism, we decided that our boys and girls go there and keep the peace so that we can save our brothers in Somalia. 

It is important for all of us to continue supporting our troops there. It does not matter how many days we are supposed to be there. Are our brothers in Somalia free? Is there peace in Somalia? Is it safe for us to move two inches backwards? Generations to come will judge Uganda, which has managed to maintain its troops there while keeping an open eye so that peace prevails in Somalia. 

It is time for Africa to play its role concerning global issues. We are not waiting for America or anyone else. We are actually lucky to have a strong Commander in Chief who has the vision and says, “No, it is time to save Africa and it is my troops to do it.” He has taken the lead and deserves applause. 

Hon. Members, as we stand here maybe what we should be asking the President to do is to mobilise volunteers to be in position, ready to take on any other developments in Somalia. Uganda is a member of the United Nations Security Council. You can imagine the trust that this World body has in Uganda. Hon. Rugunda is in New York, let us burden him to go and tell the Secretary General that Uganda needs more support to keep our troops in Somalia and even to have more troops from other African countries there.

Ladies and gentlemen, if your brother has been attacked, you should not wait for a bigger brother to go and assist. Do not mind about Nigeria or Kenya. Mind about what Uganda has done because it is noble and has been praised. Let us help our government, our troops and Pan-Africans to build. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us conclude on this. The minister wants to say something.

4.22
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank colleagues for the very positive reactions that you have given to this statement, particularly commending our forces that are out there at the frontline.

Briefly and quickly, I will just make nine points. First, I would like to request our friends in the press to convey the concerns of Members of Parliament that other member states in the African Union should play their role. If they can do that very well, they will have played a very important function.

As Minister for Defence, I came to do accountability to Parliament. Although I consulted with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, I am not making a statement on behalf of that committee. Indeed, I expect that the committee, at an appropriate time, will also come to make their statement in this House. Therefore, it is not my responsibility to make a statement on behalf of the committee. 

It is true that hon. Fungaroo has consistently raised the issue of Ethiopia and the United States of America in Somalia. For us, you are our friend or our enemy depending on an issue and an interest. In the case of Somalia, first as you have heard many colleagues say, this is a Pan-Africanist role. We must help our sister and brother Somalia; anyone who would come to help us do that is our ally on that particular issue. To the extent that USA, UK or EU is facilitating the work particularly of AMISOM in Somalia, they become our ally on that account. 

As regards Ethiopia, it is an African country. In fact as I speak, Ethiopia is the chairman of IGAD and also hosts the headquarters of the African Union. To even call them an ally is a mistake. They are our brothers and sisters and much more than just an ally. Therefore hon. Fungaroo, we have no apology to give in using those terminologies in that context.

The third point concerns the reasons why the Ethiopian National Forces have withdrawn. First, let me say that I am also happy that the Ethiopian troops withdrew because they were covering up omissions by other people. The UN was sitting there doing nothing and quietly condemning Ethiopia, and member states of the African Union were there not playing their role. You should now see the vigour with which people want to respond to the situation in Somalia after Ethiopia withdrew. So in a way, it was a blessing in disguise.

We fully discussed this issue with the authorities in Ethiopia and the reasons for authorities in Ethiopia to withdraw were mainly internal to their country. They maintained their forces in Somalia. For us we are talking of AMISOM mobilising us some money and once in a while it is not enough, but Ethiopia single-handedly supported their troops. They were losing their sons and daughters, some of their equipment was getting destroyed and some of it was depreciating and nobody was paying them back. So the time had come for the Ethiopian people to ask why they were staying –(Interruption)

MR OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just before I rose up, the hon. Minister for Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Rwamirama, was reading a tabloid and apparently he is still holding it in his hands while the minister is giving very important information this afternoon. Is he in order to read a newspaper in this House and more so the Red Pepper?

THE SPEAKER: Was he reading his notes or a newspaper? If he was reading the newspaper, it is out of order but if it is part of his notes –(Laughter)- the minister is coming up to give a statement on allegations about the milk, which was sent to Syria. The statement is about that headline. 

DR KIYONGA: The national forces of Ethiopia withdrew because they had over sacrificed in this situation, but it is good that they withdrew because this has shaken the rest of the world to see that there is a gap that needs to be filled.

Hon. Butime asked about the basis of my judgement that the elections in Djibouti were free and fair. It is true that I was not in Djibouti just as I was not in the Security Council but I have made a report about the Security Council resolution. The elections were observed by a cross-section of the world and a provisional report is already out. This report has made the declaration that the elections were free and fair. 

If the force of AMISOM is converted to a UN peace keeping force, what will the command structure be? I would like to inform Parliament that when you have a peace keeping force of the UN, there is normally a lead nation. In the case of Somalia, no lead nation has been appointed yet. I do hope that because of the performance of Uganda and the UPDF, we could be considered a lead nation and therefore we would take command of that situation. 

Hon. Charles Oleny for Katakwi said I just stopped at saying the AMISOM force told us that it was the Al Shabab who killed the civilians. I think he had not fully read that paragraph. I concluded by saying that now an inquiry has been instituted to investigate that particular incident and when the results are out, we will inform the country and the world. 

Hon. Okot Ogong, I think all of us need to refresh our minds. The resolution of Parliament was clear - after a thorough discussion, we authorised the President, the Commander in Chief, to deploy UPDF in Somalia. That resolution does not have numbers on how many troops should go and it does not have a time binding clause. So it is not correct to say that we have violated either the law or the resolution that we passed on this Floor. 

Lastly, I want to re-assure hon. Charles Oleny that the money which we have not been paid will be paid any time and there is going to be no loss. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am making a statement in view of the story published by the Red Pepper on Saturday, 07 February 2009. The paper had a heading entitled: “Ugandan Milk Full of Faeces: Syria Rejects Ugandan Powdered Milk after Finding Huge Amounts of Pupu in it”.

This is very unfortunate, very malicious and intended to damage the industry and also our economy. The ministry wishes to state as follows:

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) is disappointed by the head story of the Red Pepper of 07 February 2009 claiming that Ugandan milk is contaminated with faeces and has been rejected by the Syrian market. 

The Dairy Development Authority (DDA) is a body within MAAIF mandated with the responsibility to ensure quality and safety of milk products from the farm to the table. Dairy Development Authority registers and licenses dairy stakeholders, inspects collection centres, surveys the market, tests milk products, trains and sensitises dairy stakeholders, enforces standards and regulations and also arbitrates. 

The Dairy Development Authority has improved the quality of raw milk collection through enforcement from transportation of warm milk in jerricans to chilled milk in sealed tankers for long distances.

The Dairy Development Authority works hand in hand with UNBS. Reports from UNBS’ well equipped and accredited laboratory indicate that our milk is of good quality and safe for human consumption. Dairy Development Authority takes a lead in ensuring safety right from the farm to the final products, and UNBS takes on the vigilance at the point of export where it is charged with the responsibility of issuing certificates of analysis regarding the quality of the product to be exported. This is not limited to the local market. At this point, DDA does pre-shipment inspection and issues transport permit. 

Basing on the above facts, MAAIF strongly reacts and disagrees with the story published in the Red Pepper as false, dishonest, malicious and intended to damage the industry.

The Dairy Industry’s Contribution to the National Economy:
The livestock sub-sector contributes 4.2 percent of the national GDP of which the dairy industry contributes more than 50 percent. 

The dairy industry employs over 800,000 households at farm level alone. In addition, the dairy processing plants and other milk marketing channels employ thousands of Ugandans both at the factory level and along the entire value chain.

The dairy industry contributes to Prosperity-for-All by improving household incomes and standards of living. The milk collection chain supports over 50,000 small-scale milk producer groups, to which Shs 2 billion is disseminated monthly - a model for Prosperity-for-All.

Marketing and Consumption
It is estimated that over 1.5 billion litres of milk is produced annually (2007) of which 70 percent is available for marketing. Thirty (30) percent is consumed by producing households and immediate neighbourhoods. 

Approximately 80 percent of the marketed milk goes through the raw milk market, leaving only 20 percent to be processed and packaged before marketing. This is attributed to the limited processing capacity of existing plants, which the Uganda Government is trying very hard to improve. 

The per capita milk consumption is 50 litres per person per year. Overall milk consumption is growing at an average rate estimated at eight percent per annum.

Uganda has limited capacity to process milk into value added products. There are 12 operational processing plants and mini dairies. I want to inform honourable members that with the new vigilance in regulation, all the 12 are operational now. Their combined annual installed capacity is about 105,515 tons (an average of 297,300 litres per day) and an average capacity utilisation of 29 percent.

Uganda exports 380 metric tons per year - as per calculations based on the years 2000 to 2006 - of milk and milk products to Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo and Southern Sudan as well as distant countries like Mauritius and Nigeria of recent. The export market is managed by a company which is being mentioned in the Red Pepper. This contributed US $4 million last year to the national economy and is steadily going up. This is because of the new powdered milk plant.

The total quantity of milk and milk products being imported by Uganda has been declining progressively since 2003. However, NIDO, which is mentioned in the Red Pepper, is a product of greater interest as it competes with Ugandan milk powder. It is re-branded in Nairobi to benefit from the East African Customs Union as an East African dairy product thus enjoying unfair advantage and denying the country revenue.

The danger of re-branding cannot be re-emphasised at this time when the melamine shock in China is still fresh in the minds of consumers and should be treated with the weight it deserves. Kenya and Tanzania reported a deadly chemical trace of melamine found in Chinese milk in the month of November 2008. It is likely that such products could re-packed and sold in Uganda or reprocessed into other dairy related products.

Very soon Uganda will be celebrating the Dairy Week, which is very important for our economy. It is a week to evaluate achievements and lay down more strategies for greater achievement. For this article to have coincided with the Dairy Week is very regrettable. 

I wish to inform the august House that when this newspaper published this story, we had a group of businessmen from Syria who had come into the country to seal contracts with various dairy plants for export of these products to their country. This is because our products are very good. Unfortunately, this paper decided to run that story at the time our industry was in serious negotiations with this group. 

The story is going to affect the per capita consumption, which has increased to about 20 litres per person in Uganda. World Health Organisation recommends 200 litres per person a year. 

The proximity of the sewage ponds does not pose any danger to this powder plant. In any case, the two plants have co-existed for the last 40 years with no record of contamination whatsoever. Faecal matter is not airborne. The factory is purely enclosed with particular attention given to the side facing the treatment beds of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. Milk flows in an enclosed system of stainless steel piping right from the point of reception to the point of packaging as a finished product.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries regrets the malicious story, which clearly intends to damage the dairy industry and therefore sabotage our national economy. We wish to point out the following false accusations in the story:

1. 	There is no faecal material in the milk powder.

2. 	Milk powder is not processed by oxidation as is being alleged.

3. 	The processing line for milk powder is enclosed and there is no possibility of cross contamination from the atmosphere as is being alleged.

4. 	An environmental impact assessment was done by NEMA and it was approved.

5. 	Waste treatment at National Water and Sewerage Corporation is enclosed and healthy. It therefore does not contaminate the atmosphere with faeces as is being alleged.

6. 	SALL has never exported milk to Syria. In fact when this story ran, we had been told that there was a group from Syria which had come to negotiate a huge amount of consignments to be exported to Syria after they had tested our products and found them proper.

It is unfortunate that the freedom of the media is being used carelessly to sabotage the economy of the country.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, Ugandan milk is safe. The Dairy Development Authority takes a primary role of regulating the dairy industry from the farm to local markets and UNBS takes up for export purposes and also for local consumption.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries implores the Media Council and those in the media to act professionally so as to avoid being used carelessly. This will help Uganda to sustain its comparative advantage to its neighbours in the production of milk and to fully exploit its natural resource base towards improving the national economy in line with Prosperity-for-All.

I want also to inform the House that all our livestock in the dairy industry are fed on organic material and therefore the quality of our milk is still very good. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and that of Trade, Tourism and Industry, Uganda Investment Authority and Uganda Manufactures Association have come out clearly to condemn this abuse of the dairy industry.

The journalists, through their own regulatory mechanism, should come out and condemn this act amidst its fraternity. This is the second story published to tarnish investment in this country. I want to remind honourable members that the Red Pepper ran a story in Kampala that water was full of pupu at the time when the country was preparing to host an international event - CHOGM.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries once again wishes to assure the public that our milk is safe and organically produced from the preserve of indigenous cattle. Ninety (90) percent of the milk consumed is from indigenous Ugandan cattle. It is properly milked, collected, transported and processed taking care of safety and value for money for consumers.

Mr Speaker, I really want to take this opportunity to request the House to condemn this act. I thank you very much.

4.47
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the minister for the statement. As we debate to condemn the Red Pepper for the bad propaganda regarding our dairy industry, there are some clarifications I would like to get from the minister: 

This was an issue of a state versus a company. But from this statement that I have got from the minister, I have read it, I do not see a situation where the minister is really asserting that government is taking the Red Pepper to court, because if Red Pepper were writing against Nsubuga, an individual, at least you could give such a statement. We would love see a strong statement! 

On page 2, the minister has highlighted the contribution of the Dairy Corporation to this country; 800,000 people are going to lose employment if this allegation is taken seriously by the public; we are going to lose Shs 2 billion in a month. 

I sympathise with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but it is time – if really the minister came up with his research and it is factual, I would have loved to get a strong stand regarding such people who are taking us back. I would have loved a strong document and see action being taken. We are not going to come here to pass a resolution that the Red Pepper be condemned, no! 

The Dairy Corporation is a vehicle for Prosperity-for-All. Just imagine – we are going to lose the market. The impact the Red Pepper has made cannot be undone in a day. Government has to make a lot of publications in local media, on radios, telling people that our milk is really good. I also read the Red Pepper yesterday and it was regrettable. To those who understand English, when you translate it, you cannot believe it. 

Mr Speaker, the minister has talked about the location of the factory, which is located near the sewage plant, and that it is enclosed and NEMA gave a report. Yes, that is correct. We really take that but to the public outside there, unless government takes action, it becomes a confirmation that the proximity of the factory to sewage is very close so anything can happen. 

I thank the minister for the statement but I would have loved the minister and the government to come out strongly and sue this company for damages. If we do not sue the Red Pepper, the public will think that this is just politics. I urge the entire Parliament to condemn such publications because they are taking us back. As we are fighting to eradicate poverty, they are taking us backwards. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, chairman of the farmers, and then I will come to you.

4.51
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that opportunity and thank you for being sensitive to the farmers. I want to thank the minister for this statement; it is not fun and I also want to thank him for doing it so timely. Maybe the only blame we can put on him and government is that they should have addressed the media first. But I think all the same it is important to bring this statement out. 

When I read that story, I shook my head in disappointment because scientifically, when you talk of faecal contamination of any substance, you know the lethal diseases associated with that transmission. Obviously you have to talk of Hepatitis E; you have to talk of all the diarrhoeal diseases, which are the most killer ones; talk of dysentery; talk of cholera. We have not seen outbreaks of these diseases in the areas where this milk is sold. It is really a hoax. 

So I want to appeal to my friends of the Red Pepper to issue an apology especially to the farmers because milk is one of the few farm products that a farmer manages to sell on a daily basis. 

You can sell cassava on a daily basis but it will run out but with milk you can sell it daily. So imagine someone spoiling that market of that daily income. 

You can sell eggs as well if you have stocked enough layers on your farm. So this reporting should be sensitive. While other journalists outside the country are protecting their markets, for us, we are not being sensitive. 

On that point minister, we are with you and we thank you for being sensitive and for bringing out the facts. Maybe the journalists will also learn to behave responsibly and equally realise that this same market feeds them. 

Picking on another point from your statement, on the question of how we milk our cows, “properly milked” could be relative. You see our farmers are still using the natural rudimentary method of milking a cow and with these exotic animals with their fat udders full of milk, sometimes our farmers are not getting the right volumes because of under milking. 

So if the ministry through NAADS, as I saw the President emphasising, can think - it is a private sector issue but of course interventions of government are welcome, like government intervened in the other sectors of cotton and coffee. 

If we can have technology of milking machines availed to our farmers, of course at a fee, and they are taught how to operate them and the technology is given a boost, we would see milk, which we are trying to defend against bad publicity, increase in quantity and we would see the daily income of the farmers increase. 

Otherwise, I thank you for bringing that statement. I do not want to condemn but I want to appeal because the media are our partners in sending messages. 

I want to appeal to them that for today some of us are not condemning you because tomorrow you will send a good message. Let them come up with an apology to the Ugandan farmers, to the milk consumers and then the following day we are all safe. Thank you so much. 

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you. Mr Speaker, I happen to be a small farmer and at the same time I happen to be a chemical engineer. 

Before I talk a lot, I want everybody to look at this picture where His Excellency the President is commissioning the plant at Sameer with King Mswati and the heading on the top reads, “Ugandan milk full of faeces.” Really, portraying the President commissioning the machine to manufacture faeces! What sort of carelessness is this? 

I am an advocate of freedom of the press; they are our partners in development but there are some individuals within the press - I am not saying the whole industry but there are individuals within the press who are greedy to the extent that they can even be bribed by some companies to put up such stories. This is greed. This is corruption within the press itself. 

He goes on to elaborate how powdered milk is manufactured. “The science of making milk powder is that oxidation dissolves in and sucks the outer oxygen from the atmosphere.” This really shows that the person who wrote this article is either a primary seven chap who has never even known what oxidation means or even what is meant by oxygen. Powdered milk is just evaporation; removing water at high temperatures.

Mr Speaker, somebody goes ahead and mentions NIDO. When you read the whole story, you find that the crux of the matter is NIDO milk. Somebody is trying to label our milk bad so that NIDO penetrates the market. That NIDO is good, it is not compared to – this one was working for NIDO. In other countries economic sabotage is taken as terrorism. We do not know how many people read this story and it could have caused suffering or death. This is their livelihood. 

It was during CHOGM that the same paper caused a lot of anxiety in the whole society, including our friends outside this country. It took us a lot of our time for us to clean up the atmosphere. We spent the whole day in Cabinet talking about faeces in water. Then water was tested in the whole country and even taken abroad. We found that there was not even any trace of contamination in the water.

Mr Speaker, we need a free press and we must promote it but individuals who come up with such things - and sometimes I wonder where the editors are, because it should be the duty of the editor to first check and screen the information which is supposed to be printed in newspapers. I think it is high time, whether you like the government or not, to select what is good for all of us as Ugandans and what could be good for you, as either an economic saboteur or whatever. 

I join the rest in the strongest terms to condemn whoever did this and if possible it should be our responsibility as government now to bring such a person to book. Thank you very much.

5.00
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and honourable members. Indeed it is very unfortunate that in this age and era we can still have such irresponsible media to attribute ugly things to food that is actually heavily consumed by infants in this country. 

I want to agree with my colleague. The minister is aware of the extent and magnitude of the damage such a publication will cause to this country. And he is not using his ministerial mandate to bring this media house to court to face the law, why? 

If you look at this very media house, it seems to thrive more on negativity in society than positive aspects. Now, if that is the situation - do not forget, Mr Speaker, that in this country we like investors and Red Pepper is an investor in that case. Before publications reach the final destination, the consumer, you have the managing editors, the chief editors, and you let a story of this nature slip into the public; and the minister is coming here to tell us that let the media council or whatever - what is impossible in taking such a media house to court? 

It is very disappointing! I always hear the President talking about papers that report political issues that are not friendly to the political climate of this country. Now, what is wrong with issues of this nature being pronounced by the President himself and even his minister? 

He has not told me that he is going to take Red Pepper to court, no; and there are issues of attributing the blame to individuals; in this case this could have been an individual’s story, no! It is a corporate body and those individuals work for this body and that means therefore the primary responsibility lies with the corporation first before the individual. 

We need ministers and ministries with backbones. You are not going to come here and ask for apologies, no. You must be seen to be acting responsibly so that you do not take a nation’s economy for granted. But if we do so, then we have a critical problem. (Laughter) 

There is serious ministerial guess here, on page 3, the minister is saying, I beg to be verbatim: “It is likely that such products could be re-packaged and sold in Uganda or re-processed into other dairy related products.” 

He is talking about melamine traces having been found in Chinese products. You do not take such a guess easily just like that. 

Then, Mr minister, where are the check points in this case? What investigative measures have you taken? You are assuming and I want to take this ministerial guess very seriously. If you know some of these products can leak through our porous borders into the country, what are the investigative measures that your ministry has taken in order not to contaminate the milk trade in this country and in the region at large? 

We talk about limited capacity, we should realise that this country is producing 1.5 billion litres of milk, but only process less than a third of it. And the minister has attributed this progress of milk consumption to good government programmes, like Prosperity-for-All?  

Mr Minister, that is acceptable, but then how about the processing capacity – you are talking about 12 processing plants. The President recently, in his letter to your ministry, brought an argument of having established some cooling plants in some trading centre –(Interjection)- whatever it is. It might be important and prudent for you to realise that 1.5 billion litres consumed in a raw form with some sold just like that, implies that there is a lot of wastage, in this country, of this very product. 

You had a good innovation one time that a lot of this milk could go to school feeding. You know that about 38 percent of our children are stunted in this country. And you are on record having told this country that a lot of waste is in the western part of Uganda in terms of milk being poured away. Now in this country we know for sure that you have committed only 4 percent of the GDP to the Ministry of Agriculture. I do not know how much the livestock sub-sector receives from the ministry. It should be in your mind that you have a critical responsibility of pronouncing yourself, as a government, on critical protocols that you have served in terms of financing agriculture in this country. And you are here lamenting about your limited ability to process Ugandan milk? 

Mr Minister, when are you cautioning your government to respond to the international protocols you signed? For example, recently you committed yourself on the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and you had a commitment to increase financing for your ministry to 10 percent. Unfortunately, you are still at 3 percent of the GDP, aware of the fact that 31 percent –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, we are here to debate what appeared in the newspaper about our milk; we did not come here to debate the budget or the policy statements about which she has displayed her ignorance; she does not know how much goes to animal industry though she was part of the House that passed the budget inhere. I need to be guided on which direction we are taking.

THE SPEAKER: This statement concerns the quality of powder milk produced in Uganda and shipped, allegedly, to Syria or other countries; it is about the quality.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, you cannot fail to talk about financing the Ministry of Agriculture when talking about issues that are related to quality questions in the livestock sub-sector. Unless the minister is extremely diversionary, he then does not understand what it means to be on the Front Bench.

Finally, I need to inform this House that we regret this publication, but we are also cautioned that we should stand up to the challenge of our jobs. If the minister comes here with a shaking knee and he is not able to take a media house to court having known the extent of the damage caused as a result of a publication, then it is very sad. 

But at the same time the minister needs to come up very strongly and establish realities to do with financing agriculture in this country, particularly this sub-sector. And unless we do that, Mr Speaker, we will never achieve the kind of growth we always project. How many milk farmers in this country, for example - when he has pronounced himself of the limited capacity to manage this product up to its final destiny - how many farmers are not getting the full potential?

Mr Speaker, when the minister tells us that this company has never exported milk to Syria – why is it that the Syrian Consulate or Embassy in the region or in Uganda reacted to this publication? I expected the minister to tell us that since we do not export milk to either Syria or the Middle East - that would be one way of letting the public know that this is a falsehood. Unfortunately, in his presentation, he has not shown that, which also leaves public in suspense - we want to know if we do not export at all- we do not. If we do, then why is there a reaction from the consulate? 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, in my report, I am actually refuting that we do not export milk to Syria; I have made that clear in my report. I have also made it clear in my report that there is no level of contamination.

MS BAKO: Thank you. And if that is the case then you have a clean case to win. What is the reason you are not taking this media house to court? 

Anyway, we think that this is an unfortunate statement by this media house and it must never be treated lightly because I know for sure many farmers try hard to feed their animals. How many farmers in this country want to get a reward for their sweat? But because somebody thinks he is going to make cheap money by blowing a headline that is very unfriendly to the economy - I think there is need for a prudent action to be taken against such media houses. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the hon. Member for Kawempe North, and then we see how we proceed. (Laughter)

5.13
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When it comes to issues of development, we speak the same language. And I know, Mr Speaker, that all of us were touched by this kind of publication. It is very dangerous to our economy. You are aware that genuine investors are not easy to come by. We have been getting some fake investors, promising to do ABC but in vain. I believe that these investors of Sameer are some of the genuine investors we can talk about. 

Given the fact that many of our farmers depend greatly on this sector, it does not make sense that such a statement, which is very dangerous to our economy, should be handled lightly. I say handled lightly because when this story came out, I expected a very strong statement immediately, even before this presentation by the minister. 

When this story appeared in the Red Pepper, it was the headline, but I do not recall whether today, the headline in the official government newspaper, The New Vision, was that our milk is safe. It is perhaps on the second page and yet in The Red Pepper it was a leading story. So, in that way, the government also never acted as it ought to have acted.

Secondly, the introduction of many FM radio stations; we are now boasting of over 100 FM stations and I believe that the story in The Red Pepper was blown out of proportion by these stations. Every radio you tuned into was carrying that story. 

So I think the Media Council, as a way of interacting with the press and electronic media, should find a way to hold various sensitisation seminars and workshops for capacity building. In case a paper publishes something negative and very dangerous to our economy and security, let us handle the paper that has published that but when it comes to the electronic media blowing it out of proportion - because the number of those who read the Red Pepper is limited compared to those who listen to radios. 

Someone called me from Canada saying, “We are reading that you have a company which produces milk which has faeces,” because these papers are on the Internet. So, it is really very dangerous and I will suggest that the response by the minister and the reaction by the National Bureau of Standards is not enough because building confidence is not only- because when we talk about certain governments rejecting our products because of a, b, c and d, you are forgetting the indigenous customers who are even more compared to others.

I have a school, Mr Speaker, and we usually buy these products. But yesterday the head boy asked me “Are we sure that this milk is safe?” I said, “Why?” “Because of what we read in the papers.” So, this is very dangerous.

Finally, it is my humble request and appeal to our friends in the newspapers and electronic media that as we try to attract more genuine investors here, despite our differences in ideology, we are speaking the same language. 

We know that the farmers who are supplying Sameer with dairy products come from both the Opposition and the government and some farmers are not concerned about this kind of politics; they are only concerned about selling their products to everybody who is willing to buy so that they can take their children to school. So, it very dangerous and I condemn, in the strongest terms possible, the publications by the Red Pepper.

5.19
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you are aware, I am the chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union which deals with farmers and anything which affects a farmer directly affects me. 

Recently, there was a report in China that milk killed children and milk was abandoned and all dairy farmers lost business. Now, as we know, milk is very dangerous; for a big country like China to forget about it, now we in Uganda are falling victims. But why does the Minister of Agriculture take a long time to make a statement? 

Recently, in the papers they said Shell was importing bad fuel. You must have read that UNBS was not checking Shell’s fuel. It was a wrong report. Shell got up immediately and said that the fuel they were talking about was not bad and that they bring in the right fuel. It was one of the big pages in the papers.

Now this company you are talking about should have been the first to say, “Please, what you are saying is wrong,” before the minister came here. But we have not seen anything of that nature.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I want to inform the honourable member that Ministry of Trade, Uganda Investment Authority, DDA, UNBS and the company itself made a statement and held press conferences. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yeah, that is very good. I wish you had seen the one of Shell. They got a page in the Daily Monitor, a page in The New Vision and a page in the Red Pepper to demonstrate that this was wrong. But the moment you go for just a press conference, they may not report anything and that is the reason -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want to thank the member for giving way. My friend, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, maybe that could be one of the reasons why they write such stories in the papers so that the companies can react by buying expensive pages and what have you. Could it be the reason behind that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since I do not work for the media, I cannot clarify on that. It is better for you to ask the media if this is another way through which they want to make money.  

The GDP which is contributed by the dairy industry is 2.1 percent because the minister said that this sector contributes 4.2 percent and 50 percent is for the dairy industry. If you multiply 2.1 percent by our GDP of $ 10 billion, that means we are talking about $210 million, which is about $420 billion. If it is true that we are looking at $420 billion, then the Ministry of Agriculture is still sleeping not to have acted by now on behalf of the farmers.  

But having said that, the minister goes ahead to contradict himself and say that it contributes US $2 billion. I do not know what you mean by 2.1 percent of the GDP and the US $2 billion because even conflicting figures worry us that you have not done proper research on what you are talking about -(Interjection)– yes, if you multiply two by 12, you get US $24 billion as opposed to US $420 billion. That is a big technical error.  

There was a time it was reported in the papers that Coffee from a certain region was being mixed with stones and sand. I never saw the Ministry of Agriculture stand up to talk. Now there is Foot and Mouth Disease in Acholi land, in Lango and in Teso but I have not seen the minister get up to talk -(Interjections)- yes, today I will speak and you will get angry.

As for these trucks that collect milk - in Bugisu we are carrying out zero grazing; in Teso there is zero grazing and milk is being collected on bicycles and taken to town. I have not seen a truck that collects milk from Eastern Uganda to Dairy Corporation or from Acholi or the North to here. These trucks are in one region and that is the reason why the minister has got up quickly to talk about Dairy Corporation being affected. (Laughter)  

If we want to develop this country, we must develop it equally. We should not be looking at one region and leave others. The Constitution of Uganda says –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, what is the relevance of what you are saying to the statement? We are talking about quality whether it comes from the North or from Kyanamukaka. That is the issue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to bring up is that it is very good that the Minister of Agriculture has acted on milk –(Interruption)

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the member to say that the minister has not acted promptly on the issues affecting some regions and has acted quickly on the issues affecting others, yet he has just blamed him anyway that he did not act promptly on this by not going to the media? Is it not contradicting? Therefore, is it in order for him to tribalise issues that affect the nation?  

THE SPEAKER: I have already said that; let us be relevant to the statement.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for that and I have said that the minister is 100 percent right to come and talk about this issue, and we are all here agreeing with the minister and supporting him as far as the farmers are concerned. But what we are saying is that issues of Agriculture do not affect only the milk sector, they affect everything across. We need a –(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, hon. Latif did mention that when it comes to national issues especially of economic importance, we must speak one language. It is not correct for hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who has been a member of this House for a long time and who has chaired the Committee on National Economy, to ignore the input of the Ministry of Agriculture when we recently came here to ask for a supplementary budget for the Stabilisation Fund for Cotton growers and we have executed it. And you are from the Cooperative Union, whose members have benefited from this Fund. So, it is not really correct for you to come here and not tell the truth. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much. Unfortunately, Bugisu Cooperative Union does not grow cotton; it grows coffee. It is called Bugisu Cooperative Union for Coffee. So, I am waiting for the Coffee Fund and I want you to bring money to spray our coffee because we are also affected by the Coffee Wilt. So you better act quickly; there is an epidemic there. (Laughter)  

We want the Ministry of Agriculture to put in place a PR as quickly as possible to handle the issues of farmers because if this milk is not bought, it is the farmers that will be affected; if the Coffee is not bought, it is the coffee farmers that will be affected.

In conclusion, we request the Ministry of Agriculture - we have been giving you money for the budget; in fact at one time, someone asked whether if they closed the Ministry of Agriculture, Uganda would close. Somebody said it would not, because they have not seen your impact. 

We want you to come here with a development plan from the Ministry of Agriculture and I can assure you that you will get maximum support from all of us. Having got that, we would know how best to deal with the issues of our farmers. 

But we request you to also transport milk from other regions. We need these trucks that side; they should not only be on one side and this is serious. But we have to support our friends from the West because we know they are ours, but we also want you to come to the East and the North. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I intend to close this debate because you have said everything. 

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The safety and well-being of the people is a fundamental responsibility of the government and the purpose of this statement was indeed to assure the population and the world at large that Ugandan milk is not full of faeces as stated by the Red Pepper. And our concern should be whether this statement gives assurance that indeed the safety of our population is assured. 

I want to add my voice as the minister responsible for safety, quality and standards with UNBS; we want to affirm to this House that we are indeed equipped with the necessary laboratories to test the quality of most of the items, especially the food items which are exported and there is no way a chunk of faeces would have gone into the milk being exported from Uganda. 

Secondly, sometimes we are slow to respond to statements from the press partly because sometimes when you respond, you increase its publicity. And other times you want to relay on the intelligence of the readers. Whoever read this story from the Red Pepper could see the fallacy of this statement. 

My colleague has pointed out already on the wording, “There was a huge chunk of faeces in the milk”. There is no way a chunk of faeces could be in milk. Whoever reads would throw it into the dustbin. And he tells you that the science of making milk powder is oxidation dissolving and sucks the outer oxygen from the atmosphere. 

Anyone who has been to the dairy industry knows that milk is tested right from the time when it is put into a cooler at the firm. It goes into stainless steel and through all these processes where no faeces can enter. So sometimes we are slow to respond because anybody with a sound mind would know that this is rubbish. 

MR BARTILLE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would just want to comment on the issue of not responding. The idea is not that Ugandans may not understand. The point is that milk is being exported, and it is not only Uganda that is exporting milk, but it is in competition with others. So the international community would want to hear what government is saying about it. So if you keep quite, the others will think that it is true. 

You are aware, Mr Minister, about the huddles in the trade world, there is a lot of competition and any thing like this can spoil your international trade.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, it is true; and Ugandans are generally intelligent people – this is generally false. 

As a concluding remark, there are competitors who are reckless and they want to be unfair in their competitive drive by making false reports thinking that it will enable their competing products to be more marketable. Government is taking very serious view of this; there must be professionalism in marketing. You simply cannot publish something like this and think that you will get away with it. 

I really appreciate the comments made on the Floor of this House and I reiterate that any newspaper which specialises in publishing falsehood must bare the consequences of that. And there are rules and laws to do exactly that and I have no doubt in my mind that your advice will be taken. But let us be very serious with this fact that Ugandans can be assured of the safety and soundness of the milk they take. Thank you very much.

5.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Ms Jennipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the Minister for Agriculture for the statement. I stand up to condemn this kind of report especially when the country is grappling with the issue of unemployment and when we are competing for the few investors. Other countries are wooing the same investors to their countries with heavy incentives. 

As a minister in charge of sewerage, I am standing up to inform the House and the country that the plant which they are referring to is very safe. We carry the sewerage from our customers in pipes until we get to the pond. These ponds are in series; we have ponds where we carry out different biological processes: We have facultative ponds where we do aerobic processes and it eventually moves to the maturation ponds. 

To prove that the effluent that comes out is safe, we use some of these ponds, especially the maturation ponds to harbour live animals like fish. Once they survive, we know that the water is safe. But before we do the final discharge to the natural streams, we have a whole directorate of water resources with a department responsible for quality monitoring. They go and take samples –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you an engineer?

MS NAMUYANGU: Well, given the years I have served as a Minister of Water, I am almost there. (Laughter)

MR ODIT: Let me get some clarification. This fish that you drop in the sewage; if it survives, and you clear the sewage system, what do you do with this fish? (Laughter)

Secondly, I also know that in Kampala City, a very small percentage of the buildings and the facilities are using sewage system; they use septic tanks. One of the reasons we are having floods in some of these streets is because of the septic tanks. They are too many, they are oozing and once they do so, there is a strong possibility that some of these animals can access water or the grass, which has been fed out of these drainage systems. Can you therefore clarify to us concerning these two elements? Thank you.

MR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much for giving way. I am quite impressed with the description that has been given as regards the series of events leading to the purification of sewerage. Many times we think that sewerage smells and I would believe that it also attracts flies and that flies may travel quite a distance. 

As you recall, the President of Uganda one time employed entomologists to determine where the green flies in State House were coming from. The entomologists, with their expert advice, advised the President that they could have been coming from City Council, which is quite a distance away. Wouldn’t you say that these flies within the vicinity of the sewerage could contaminate other places that they flew to?

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I beg that I complete my explanation on the Mbarara plant then I will respond to issues raised by my colleagues.

As I was saying, Mbarara sewerage plant is underutilised and we have not experienced any leakages or bursts. I want to assure the country that this plant is safe. The sewerage is handled by professionals who know what to do. 

Mr Speaker, we also carry out environmental audits by NEMA so we cannot allow a factory and a sewerage plant that are not compatible to be together. 

I want to assure the country that our plant is safe and there is no way it could have contaminated the milk plant. I am sure that there are people who are using the papers to fight investment in the country just like my colleague mentioned that towards CHOGM, we had a report about faeces in water, which was not true. 

At one time I was speaking on Radio Simba about this and somebody called in and pretended to be a friend of that person who took the analysis and he claimed that he saw it. I invited him to my office but he never appeared. 

One of my technical people who knew him and his voice confirmed that that is the very person who claimed to have seen the faeces in water. I want to call upon Ugandans to be patriotic, to love their country and ensure that reporting, especially by the media is done professionally.

Mr Speaker, responding to hon. Odit’s concern, it is true that we have so many on site sanitation facilities referred to as septic tanks. However, this is going to be sorted out because right now we have some money, with support from the African Development Bank and the European Union, which is going to enable us rehabilitate and expand the sewerage plant in Kampala. We are even going to build other sewerage plants and the one of Bugolobi is going to be worked on.

As regards the issue of fish, this fish is safe and I can tell you that as much as we do not encourage people to eat them because we are using them experimentally, it has also come to our attention that some people stealthily go, fish and eat them yet they do not die. 

Lastly on flies, normally with our sewerage ponds you hardly see the flies. I have seen many people, especially those who are dating, even sitting close to our ponds. We have those near Nambole where many people look at the water and it is clear with no smell at all. Therefore, it does not attract flies. I presume that the flies come from the public toilets around. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This concludes this debate, I think it is clear and everything has been said.

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are a few issues that were raised and I would like to clarify them. One was from the shadow minister who said that my statement is weak and that I should be taking Red Pepper to court. 

The issue of government taking any person to court resides with the Attorney-General and he is well informed.

Another concern is the steps taken by MAAIF to ensure that melamine does not leak in our system. We have the UNBS and DDA and they are working together with Uganda Revenue Authority to make sure that powdered milk, whose origin is not very clear and which does not conform to our standards, does not enter our market.

There were some disturbing issues that were raised by hon. Mafabi. I want to assure the House that the Ministry of Agriculture is treating all regions equally. I want to testify that the example given of diary is not really correct because we have recently acted on cotton, coffee, cocoa and we don’t discriminate. It is very unfortunate that somebody can bring such a statement that we are biased. 

As for transporting milk in sealed tankers, I want to inform hon. Mafabi and the entire House that Ministry of Agriculture and DDA for that matter do not own any milk tankers. These tankers are owned by the processors and they go to collect milk where it is. 

We put a ban on transportation of milk in cans for long distances because of temperatures and the risk of contamination and therefore, anybody who transports milk 50 miles from the processing plant and beyond is mandated to take it in sealed tankers. 

We do not own sealed tankers and if hon. Mafabi can find a bulking centre in the East, you will find that there is a tanker to collect this milk.

Finally, I thank members for their support and I hope that this will be the last time we become dangerous to our own economy, especially through the media. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us start with item five and then come to four.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PREVENTION OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS BILL, 2007

5.49
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to appear on the order paper. We are all aware that last time before we broke off for the Christmas recess, we had encountered a technical problem in the presentation of this Bill and, therefore, I request that I withdraw the Bill so that I can table it in two weeks’ time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: There is a proposal that the mover of the Bill wants to withdraw and according to our Rules, the mover may seek leave and then it is for you to decide. I put the question that the Bill be withdrawn.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Prevention of Trafficking in Persons
Bill, 2007, withdrawn.)

PETITION BY HON. AMONGI BETTY, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, APAC DISTRICT

5.51
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

“The Humble Petition of the Moslem community in Lango sub-region, relatives and friends of Dr Farheart Huling Oling; 

STATES that Dr Farheart Oling, a Ugandan who has been working in Saudi Arabia for the last ten years was arrested in September 2005 in Saudi Arabia and since then he has been held incommunicado. He has never been produced in any court of law; he has never been taken for legal redress; he has been denied access to his relatives and the officials from the Ugandan Embassy in Riyadh have tried through all the channels to access him and get official explanation but despite that and the diplomatic contacts several times with them, it has failed;

THEREFORE, your petitioners pray that this Parliament through appropriate mechanisms do ascertain an official explanation from the Embassy of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia here in Uganda on this matter with a view of resolving it conclusively; 

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.”

I beg to lay on the Table the petition with the details therein. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the purpose of this petition is to carry out investigations and find out what has happened to the person concerned. That is a petition involving a foreign country, Saudi Arabia, and I think the proper body to handle this should be the committee dealing with foreign affairs. They will handle it with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and then we shall promptly get a response from whoever is concerned with this gentleman. So the petition is sent to that committee which should expeditiously handle it and it is better to give them a time frame – within one month from today. Thank you.

I received a report from hon. Nyombi who was commissioned with others to investigate the land titles matter and he says he needs about two days to submit the report. 

And I think we cannot meaningfully start a debate on an important subject like the Public Accounts Committee report. The best thing is to adjourn and we shall start with it when we reconvene. As I told you earlier, we want the committees to start to sit full time to clear a lot of items that are on their tables so that when we come back, certain reports will have been generated so that we move swiftly until the Parliament is prorogued. 

And as I said, Members are required to attend and we shall be getting reports of people who are not attending committee meetings. With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned sine die. 

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)

