Thursday, 16 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:
	Mr Paul Mwiru

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwiru, on behalf of the Ninth Parliament, I want to welcome you to the National Assembly. On one side are the members of the National Resistance Movement, on the other side are members of the Opposition, and there are also the Independents. 

I want to hand over to you your instruments of office. First, the Constitution of Uganda, which you have used to take your oath; it will be your Bible. I hand you the Rules of Procedure of the Ninth Parliament. You should study them very carefully because that is how you will be able to discharge your responsibilities.

I understand you are a member of FDC, so the Leader of the Opposition will assign you two committees, one standing committee and a sessional committee. I wish you a successful tenure. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Please, the guests in the gallery, you are not supposed to clap.

In the gallery we have student leaders from Mbarara High School represented by hon. Bitekyerezo of Mbarara Municipality. You can stand up for recognition. We also have six councillors from Kalungu District; they are represented by hon. Florence Kintu. They are here to witness our proceedings. You are welcome. We also have 30 members of Byonabiyinzika Group of Bugabo Zone, Goma Division, Mukono Municipality represented by hon. Nambooze. They are here to witness our proceedings. You are welcome. They are dressed in nice clothes.

Honourable members, let me welcome you to today’s sitting. This morning, I hosted the ambassador of China to Uganda, Mr Zhao Yali, who is keen to establish a Uganda-China friendship association based here in Parliament. To that extent, we agreed that if there are, in this House, alumni of the universities of China or those who speak Chinese or those who are interested in China, they give me their names so that we can have the nucleus of that association, which will be the basis of our co-operation with the People’s Assembly of China. 

Secondly, today being Thursday, we shall be governed by rule 23, which gives priority to business of the private Members. However, since they are not documented, we shall use 30 minutes for that business. So far, the only ones I have are from hon. Safia Nalule, hon. Connie Nakayenze, hon. Mugume, hon. Lukyamuzi, hon. Amoding and hon. Jachan Omach. I hope we can finish that in the next 30 minutes.

2.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, today is a very great day for us, the people in the Opposition. We got an additional member in this noble cause of the struggle we are advancing. We want to thank the people of Jinja East for having elected for us Paul Mwiru as our MP for that area. 

We learnt many lessons during that election. It is important that Parliament urgently starts working on the process of enacting electoral laws and making reforms in the Electoral Commission. The election was not smooth. It was a militarised election. There was a lot of intimidation. There was money. All the ministers were there and we had 120 RDCs, DISOs, mention it and all of them came with cars using public resources. All those who came were paid per diem, transport refund and fuel and that is public expenditure. That is dangerous.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you are saying is very serious. Did you actually see them being paid because you must explain who paid them?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are saying that in Jinja East, there was heavy deployment of security personnel in the election. The RDCs were present; I saw the RDC of Sironko where I come from and I know him. I saw the RDC of Iganga and I also saw the retired RDC of Jinja called Lutta and that of Soroti. All of them had government vehicles.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you are accusing RDCs and they are not here. I did not see them; I do not know whether they were there. What do you want me to say? Just be happy you have won. When the law comes, then you can deal with these issues.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we want to thank you. It is good that we have won an election despite that. For the future and all the by-elections which are on the line, we request that people should not misuse their offices and public resources. In short, we are putting them on notice that next time we see them misusing public resources, we shall hold them accountable.

MR MUWUMA: I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition, to keep misinforming the House and yet he was the one commanding brigades that were battering and hurting people after ferrying so many of them from Mbale to come and cane people of Jinja? Is he in order to misinform the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really want to appeal to you; let us not generate a quarrel over this issue. We should quarrel when the law comes and point out where we want the changes to be made. Poor hon. Mwiru is going to think that he arrived here with problems and nobody likes him. This is not right. Allow him to sit and listen to the debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am happy that my brother, Milton, raised the issue of the brigade. I do not know which brigade I have, but I can tell you that the people of Jinja must have been the brigades because it was the people who guarded their votes. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, we welcome hon. Paul Mwiru as a Member of Parliament. We hope that all the members will accord him maximum cooperation as a new entrant. He will get cooperation from here but he should also be availed cooperation from the other side because he is now your colleague.

In conclusion, I want to again thank the people of Jinja East. We are remaining with a few by-elections, so we are coming back so that you assist us deal with this dictatorship.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (Mr Mululi Mukasa): Madam Speaker, let me also, on behalf of this bench, take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Mwiru for his victory in the Jinja by-election. You are welcome to this august House and surely, you will receive cooperation so that you carry out your duties as a member of the Opposition as enshrined in the Constitution.

I think there are many experiences that probably have been registered in this by-election by both sides - the Opposition and NRM. I think at an opportune moment, using the facilities available and the structures, we shall share those experiences and actually see how we shall learn from them to make future elections smooth and better for the wellbeing of our democracy. 

2.46
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance, and it concerns Mbale Referral Hospital. Last week, I was in Mbale and I was alarmed at what I saw going on there. In the first place, Mbale Hospital theatres have no water and operations cannot go on if there is no water in the theatre, especially in the surgical wards. 

When I tried to ask the doctors why some patients were not getting operated, they said that it is not possible to work on them when there is no water. One patient even volunteered to bring water and they said that it is not in order for them to ask patients to bring water to the ward or theatre. I want to request that something be done very fast so that we save the lives of people in Mbale.

The other thing I found out was that there were frequent power cuts. This again affects the theatres. Many people were stuck in the theatre because of power cuts. We should be helped in Mbale and a power line is given just for the hospital without interference from other lines. It would save the lives of people. They should also add another direct line of water to the hospital. 

The doctors said that the supplies that were given were not enough. Even when they were over, they could not authorise the patients to get the drugs from the drug shops. I asked them why they do not do this and they said it was not allowed. I would like the ministry to help us find a mechanism that would help us save lives in case the supplies are not in and the doctors are able to find a solution because it was quite alarming. 

The other thing that the doctors were telling me was that it was very difficult for investigations to take place in the hospital because they had to keep on referring patients to go and do tests outside the hospital. There are some tests that are done in the hospital but some are not done there and yet when they go out, the charges are too high. We therefore request that the Ministry of Health tries to provide all the facilities. All the tests should take place in a referral hospital; otherwise, it will lose the meaning of a referral hospital. 

Lastly, when I visited the health centre III’s and IV’s, I discovered that they lack microscopes. When I asked the clinical officers, they said that they only clinically treat patients. I would request that this be attended to urgently because the lives of the people in Mbale are at stake. I humbly request the Ministry of Health to make a statement to that effect - why Mbale Referral Hospital is in that kind of state. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Safia Nalule – (Interjections) - Let us receive all of them and then you respond. Honourable members, I would like to announce that in the Distinguished Visitors Gallery, we have the vice-president of FDC, - (Applause) - hon. Salaamu Musumba, former MP accompanied by hon. Moses Kabuusu, formerly for Kalangala. You are welcome. 

2.51
MS SAFIA NALULE JUUKO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities Representative): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to ask the following question: “Has the Uganda Government given adequate attention to the issues of equity?” 

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Equal Opportunities and UWOPA have realised that there is a disturbing trend that is taking centre stage in our country, namely mainstreaming equity in gender discourse. I pray that we do not lose focus on the urgent need to promote equality of opportunity and affirmative action. We should make sure that vulnerable people and vulnerable parts of the country get prioritised during policy and budget formulation here in Parliament.
 
I have looked at the guidelines for mainstreaming of gender, equity, HIV/AIDS and environmental concerns in the Budget Framework Paper by the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development and I commend the ministry for the attempt. However, I think a lot needs to be done to move from rhetoric to reality. A casual look at the guidelines reveals that the person who prepared them either lacked awareness on equity issues or just did not give them adequate attention. The author was looking at issues of equity from a statistical perspective but not from a practical point of view. 

If Government is to address the concerns of say persons with disabilities, youth, women, marginalised regions and new districts, it should know and talk to the people concerned. Because of the said guidelines not being thought through and developed through a consultative manner, no sector or ministry has articulated how it will address equity issues under its jurisdiction with the allocated resources.  

The truth is that there still remains lack of prioritisation of gender and equity issues during the budget allocation process. On analysing the ministerial policy statements, one realises that many times equity, gender and issues of marginalised persons are either just mentioned or they fall under the unfunded priorities. If justice was to be given to these issues, maternal and child health, special needs education would have been given specific budget functions or votes of their own.

Also, the Ministry of Trade and Industry should have been specific on how to reach out to all Ugandans. The Ministry of Public Service should be equitably giving jobs to all Ugandans, but again this is not the case. New districts like Luuka are only given Shs 100 million to start up and this cannot enable them have the services get nearer to the people – the goal of decentralisation. The criteria to access the equalisation grant by different districts is provided in the Financial and Accounting Regulations Act but accessing that money is a nightmare.

Yesterday, we passed a loan request with one of the aims being to decongest Mulago National Referral Hospital. But if equity was observed, the loan would have had a component to ensure that the regional referral hospitals have adequate health professionals, required machinery and so on. This would be a means of not only decongesting Mulago but equitably taking the required health services to all Ugandans.

I would like the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development to explain the mechanisms that she has put in place to ensure that sector budgets and ministries take gender and equity issues seriously, and whether there are penalties for non compliance.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to seek your indulgence and that of honourable colleagues to ensure that the constitutional provision on equity of opportunity is promoted and defended.  Article 32 (1) of the Uganda Constitution provides for affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for purposes of redressing imbalances which exist against them. Also in our Rules of Procedure, rule 156(1) mandates the Committee on Equal Opportunities to monitor and promote measures designed to enhance the equalisation of opportunities and improvement in the quality of life and status of all people including marginalised groups. This therefore means that we should treat matters of gender and equity as matters of obligation and matters of rights but not as favours.

It is in light of the above that I appeal to this House to support my proposal that when reviewing the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, we should provide that any policy, Bill or budget estimates presented to the House should be accompanied by a Certificate of Equity and Gender Compliance. That is the right thing this Parliament can do for the benefit of all people of Uganda including marginalised groups and geographical areas. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. I hope the Minister for Finance has noted the concerns of the member. Hon. Mugume. Before he comes up, we have additional guests; some pupils from Pader and Agago districts who are up there in the gallery. They came to see me this morning and presented a petition about the lives of the children after the conflict. There are things that they want Parliament and Government to take into account about their lives. They are welcome. (Applause)

2.57
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Madam Speaker, I wish to raise a matter of national importance. There have been reports that the composer of the National Anthem, Prof. George Kakoma, has been bed-ridden since 2010. I want to confirm the reports because I visited his place this morning and he is seriously sick.

Fifty years ago, Uganda wanted him for a noble cause, for which he responded positively and put his talents to use for all of us to enjoy his works and even more generations to come will also enjoy them. Fifty years later, he wants Uganda to save his life. However, since 2011, his family has made numerous appeals to Government to extend a helping hand to this nationalist who is suffering a brain stroke now, - remember that it is the same brain that composed the National Anthem - but such help has not been forthcoming.

Madam Speaker, remember the inspiring words in the National Anthem like “...we lay our future in thy hands. United, free, for liberty together we will always stand... Our love and labour we give...at our country’s call in peace and friendship we will live…” These are true words of a nationalist. We passed a budget for patriotic clubs that are of no relevance to us – (Interjections) – Yes! Madam Speaker, protect me. Here is a nationalist who is patriotic and just needs help to save his life for some more days that God may give him. 

Lastly, can the Prime Minister and Government come to the rescue of this nationalist, who offered to serve Uganda, by meeting his medical bills? I beg to move.

3.00
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I present a matter of public concern, permit me to express my gratitude to you, in person, and many other Members of Parliament including the Vice-President of Uganda and the Leader of the Opposition for the sympathy they extended to me when my daughter, Suzan Nampijja, was badly injured or nearly murdered by a bad person. She only survived by the mercy of God.  I have continued receiving so many messages from members of this honourable House. I am so grateful because those messages nursed my heart and that of my daughter, Suzan Nampijja Lukyamuzi, who was a member of the Eighth Parliament.

Since the occurrence of that tragedy, I have gained a lot of hope. I want to inform this House that I am going to do all I can to fight for the rights of women to own property – (Applause) – because my daughter nearly died while trying to protect her property. So, ladies and gentlemen, please count on the man. (Laughter)

I am raising a point of public concern pursuant to rule 35 (1) of our rules of Parliament. Allow me to raise this matter because it touches nearly every part of Uganda; it concerns the delay by courts of law to dispose of a number of pending parliamentary election petitions countrywide. Most of these delays are inexplicable in law yet they tend to rob the voters of their natural constitutional right to be represented in Parliament.

Above of all, these delays are unconstitutional pursuant to the following provisions of the Constitution that I am going to briefly evoke and mention. One of those provisions is Article 126 (2) (c) of the Constitution, which briefly reads thus: “Substantive justice shall be administered without undue regard to technicalities.” There are a number of people surviving on technicalities to misrepresent people. These must be addressed in a very serious manner by the Attorney-General and the Leader of Government Business both of who I hope are present.

Article 28 (1) of the Constitution briefly reads thus: “In the determination of civil and constitutional rights, a person shall be entitled to a fair and speedy hearing.” Some people have been waiting to be heard in the courts of law for as long as two years!

Let me also cite Article 1 (1) of the Constitution where it is said that the voters’ constitutional rights to representation in Parliament shall be respected. If I woke up one morning and voted for hon. Chripus Kiyonga, – God forbid – I am entitled to see him perform in Parliament to represent my interests. 

Some registrars of courts of law have been seen to assist late applicants in open defiance of court procedures. Someone gets late and yet you know that if you file your application late, you are not supposed to be assisted; you are late and that is all. But there are cases where registrars collaborate with wrongdoers to extend applications that have been already barred in accordance with court procedures.

In conclusion, there is need for the Attorney-General to tell this House when the hearing of pending election petitions will be completed. I, through the people of Rubaga South, need a comprehensive statement to explain the details of all the pending delayed cases of constituencies. The constitutional provisions that I have mentioned are just enough. One of the cases – and I am mentioning only two of these cases before I sit – is the one of Rubaga North. The fellow has been sitting in this House on technicalities –(Laughter)– and this directly – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, several other members are in this House in the same way. Please conclude.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, but I want to give one example –

THE SPEAKER: No, no please, do not fight members. Please speak in general.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: So, in general terms, –(Laughter)– there is need for the Attorney-General and the Leader of Government Business, pursuant to the provisions that I have concretely cited in the Constitution, to give an explanation to me on behalf of those whose powers are being suppressed constitutionally. If they do not give that explanation, we are going to take precautions, and I am very serious on that point. I need the explanation now and now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those are the only members who requested for time under rule 23 of the Rules of Procedure. Anybody who did not ask for that time will not speak. Let us have hon. Amoding, Tumwebaze, Jacan in that order.

3.07
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am standing to voice an issue of national importance about the trafficking of young women who are being taken to Malaysia for sex trade. I am aware that an issue of human trafficking was raised in the House last week by hon. Elijah Okupa. He prayed for some action from Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Gender to give reports to Parliament in regard to similar issues that were reported in Kuwait and Iraq. Since then, there have been some new developments. 

I would like to quote an article that featured in the Daily Monitor of 14 February 2012 in which there was a story to the effect that 600 girls were taken to Malaysia and trafficked into sex trade. Yesterday, the Consular of that country to Uganda appeared on WBS Television and gave a detailed narration of what is going on in that country. Even pictures, which were graphic, were presented on that programme. As a youth MP representing females as well, I felt very touched. According to her report, there are at least 600 young girls in Malaysia. For some of you who may not know this, Malaysia is the number one destination for sex tourism in the world. For our girls to be reported in such a country is very traumatic.

According to the reports that we have – (Interjections) - Somebody is correcting me that Thailand, Malaysia and other Asian countries are among the highest - (Interjections) - Yes. I wanted to give a report to this House. It is reported that 60 of these girls are in prison and are being held incommunicado; they cannot talk to their parents and nobody is there to help them find a way of communicating - (Interjections) - Let me just quickly give this –

THE SPEAKER: No, she is raising her issues and they are not for debate. 

MS ANIFA KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, my colleague. The information I want to give is that the Committee on Equal Opportunities is about to travel to Malaysia on the same issues and other related issues. We will travel in about two week’s time. I would be happy to have all this information so that we go with it as our checklist. I thank you.

MS AMODING: Just quickly to inform you, members; so far, about 14 girls have been deported to Uganda with the help of the International Organisation for Migration (IOM). The others are still there and they cannot even find a way of getting back home. 

Unfortunately, what we know is that since 2008, the Consul of Malaysia communicated this to the foreign affairs ministry but nothing has been done. At that time, it was about only 30 girls who had been reported in this trade. Now, the numbers have been growing to almost 10 girls every day who find their level through the immigration procedures of that country. 

I was, therefore, wondering if the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which actually has no minister here and I do not know who is working there, is aware that this kind of thing is going on. I am glad the committee is aware but I also want to know if there is a Ugandan embassy in Malaysia. 

Secondly, I do not know when the Speaker will give them time to respond but I want to pray that when the minister responds, the Minister of Gender informs this House what measures she has taken to curb these quack labour agencies that are recruiting people to these external markets. I am also aware that this is a government programme. It is a legally recognised programme of addressing unemployment and underemployment, but we need to ensure that our people are working in good conditions when they are exported out of the country. 

Thirdly, I wanted to raise this issue before the minister; I think Malaysia is one of the countries that need to be blacklisted by our country in terms of labour exportation. This is because there are very many challenges that these people are exposed to when they are exported or when they find their way individually to such countries in search of employment. 

Finally, I pray that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, when they present to this House that report, will also share with us a list of the labour agencies that are engaged in exportation of labour. They should also cause them to be published every year so that our young people who look for jobs outside know which agencies they can deal with. That is my issue and I would like the Ministry of Gender to respond to this issue when they are making a presentation to this House. I thank you.

3.13
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise very brief and very pertinent issues to my constituency and to Kampala and the whole country.

I represent the people of Kibaale County in Kamwenge District, the deepest rural underserved area of Uganda. We have for long had one road that connects us from Ankole to Toro, the Kamwenge- Fort Portal Road. Government promised to have it tarmacked and we believed it. Contractors were advertised for prequalification and we became happier. We were told that the financing was to come from the World Bank under a loan arrangement, we were very grateful for that. But this loan request has never been brought to this House. I have information that it will expire on 6th March and its effective date is 26th March. I am really wondering, who is that in Cabinet sabotaging our road? 

My second point of national importance concerns KCCA. There are two issues on KCCA. I want to know, either from the Ministry of Works or the ministry in charge of Kampala, since when did KCCA sell off to Karim Hirji the road behind Serena, that road that moves up to Sheraton Hotel and Mosa Courts? Imperial Royale is owned by Karim Hirji; we got that information when we were doing the CHOGM investigation. 

Today, I moved to meet a constituent of mine at Imperial Royale and as I was getting out through the other side, I found KK Security and a police officer and I was told that the road was a one-way. I asked them, “prescribed by whom? Who did that?” They told me to go to the management of Imperial Royale. Lucky enough, I knew a man called Kananathan and I called him. (Interjection) Whatever it is, he is the manager of that hotel. I asked him, “When did you buy this road that your private guards close it off?” He said, “Sorry honourable, let me ask them to open for you.” They let me go because I was “honourable”. So, I am asking, isn’t that a public road? 

As you go up to Sheraton, there are barricades. Because that hotel encroached on the road reserve, they have put barricades on the road so that strong vehicles do not hit the hotel. I do not know whether roads have become private property and I wonder why the tough Musisi has not looked into that matter. I am really serious about that. We need to know who sold that road, under what process; if it was not sold, why should the hotel regulate its usage? 

We signed the papers and there is a debate involving a management letter between KCCA and the Auditor-General. True, a management letter is not a final audit opinion, so we can give them a benefit of doubt, but I am confused about KCCA now; what structure of human resource is it implementing? 

I have people from my constituency who happen to have been employed by that authority. I will not mention them because I need to protect them. [Hon. Member: “Agaba”] No, Agaba comes from Sembabule, I was told. These people are staff of the former KCC. They were employed through the normal channels and they earn the rates of the old staff. Now it seems there are two parallel structures. Having formed KCCA, wasn’t it mandatory that the organisation is restructured, that a new structure is approved by Ministry of Public Service or by the relevant ministry? Which is which? Those are my two concerns with regard to KCCA. Thank you.

3.18
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, we all come from different backgrounds, we come from different constituencies but we are Ugandans. Of late, there have been rampant fire outbreaks in the whole country and they have destroyed markets, schools and even hotels in the national parks. 

As a great thinker, I thought the Prime Minister would think twice about this because we do not know whether it is these people trying to overtake the government that are doing this. The ministers have not come out with a report to tell us what is going wrong. 

Secondly, we are facing drought and food is being – (Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I was listening to my neighbour fairly well and to be very honest, I am one of the people who want to take over government in this country. Do you think I am in Parliament for nothing? I am very serious. I heard him associating those who want to take over government with fires in this country. Is the honourable member in order to attempt to make that association? 

He knows that it is the Government of Uganda that has failed to provide information in regard to inquiries made in light of fires that burnt Budo, Kasubi, the Kibwetere fires, and most recently in regard to a UPDF soldier of this country who was found in the neighbourhood of Bwaise pouring petrol around people’s homes. Is he in order to associate that with me, who wants to take over power legitimately when he knows that it is the government that has failed to resolve the fire dilemma in this country? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was not aware that you are about to take over Government. (Laughter)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me. So, the ministers should get interested in the investigations. 

We are facing drought but the rate at which food is being exported abroad - We have been called the food basket of Africa or East Africa, but it is going to be the other way round. So, on this matter, I request the ministers to at least sensitise the people that they should not sell all the food because with the drought, we do not know when we will have a downpour. So, they should sensitise and regulate the food going abroad. 

Lastly, when the price of coffee went down and people borrowed money from the banks to grow cotton, they were promised that it was going to cost Shs 3,000 but now they are buying it at Shs 800 in the village. Let the Minister of Agriculture come out with a clear position on the price of coffee and cotton and let it be gazetted in the papers such that the farmers in the village are not hurt the more. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.22
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a matter of national interest. According to UBOS statistics, the poorest man in Uganda is from Kamuli - (Laughter) - and also, the poorest man in Jinja is from Mpumudde in my constituency. To add insult to injury, the poorest people, according to government statistics, are the people to be rewarded last. How? 

Before the presidential campaigns, Government came and launched rehabilitation of a new Jinja-Kamuli Road, the road of the poorest person. They brought Dott Services Limited and they started work on this road. I do not know if it was for purposes of votes, but today they have removed all the tarmac and the dust is too much. Businesses have closed along this road, and people cannot stay in their homes due to dust. (Interruption)

MR TANNA: I would like to thank my honourable colleague for accepting this piece of information. The road from Tororo to Soroti was given to the same Dott Services Limited. That road was inaugurated by His Excellency the President in January 2011. To date, they have dug up the tarmac and it is extremely dusty. There is a health risk to my people of Tororo Municipality. They have failed us despite my people threatening to go on the street. 

We held a meeting and they agreed that they were going to irrigate with water at regular intervals so that people can carry out their businesses. That dust goes on merchandise in people’s shops including food stuffs. That same dust chokes people and has created an epidemic of cough in Tororo Municipality. 

Honourable colleagues, I even took the task to call the minister personally, hon. Byabagambi, and he explained and assured me that within the next three months, which I think is expiring by the end of this month, the road in the municipality portion shall have been done. To-date, the situation still remains the same. It is actually worse. I would not want to pre-empt but as the minister answers about the road going to the poorest person in Uganda, I would also like him to clarify on the one for the rich ones – (Laughter) - I thank you. 

MR BALYEKU: As I wind up, I want to request the Minister of Works and Transport to give the Basoga clear timelines when are they going to start work on this road and when they hope to complete this road. Even you, Madam Speaker, cannot go to your constituency. We cannot even access part of our constituencies. Is this deliberate for the poor person? Maybe hon. Sanjay Tanna, the rich one, can wait a bit and you start with the Jinja-Kamuli Road – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I happened to have served on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure and hon. Byandala was our chairperson and hon. Byabagambi at one time was the vice chairperson of the committee. We saw them elevated from that committee leadership to those positions and we had expected better things. 

The issue of these two roads was key in that committee because members pushed for it. Hon. Byandala here knows, but the problem Government made at that time was the politics. I beg the minister here to correct me if I am wrong. The Ministry of Works and Transport at that time decided to hand over these roads - the one of Kamuli-Jinja and that of Tororo-Mbale-Soroti - to Dott Services Limited without road designs. It was done for political reasons. Up to now, unless they gave the road designs last month, by the end of last year the designs for Soroti-Mbale-Tororo were not there. The ones for Kamuli were availed to Dott Services in August last year. That is why you see that road not being worked on. 

How can you go ahead to sign a contract with a company without road designs? Dott Services has been waiting for the road designs and they have not been forth coming. I think the government must be very serious here. They should tell us today whether they have now availed the road contractor with the road designs. I am giving this information because I was a member of that committee and hon. Byandala was the chairperson. I think Ugandans - the people of Busoga, the people of Bugisu, the people of Bukedi and the people of Teso - deserve an apology from Government for what they are going through. 

I saw people on TV demonstrating on Kamuli Road yesterday   because of the dust. Those who have butcheries next to the road cannot sell their meat and those in pharmacies cannot sell their drugs. So, I think we need an apology and things must be done rightly for Ugandans. Thank you. 

MR BALYEKU: Finally, the biggest cause of the strike that is taking place on that road is dust. Let the ministry improvise by watering these roads in the meantime to reduce on the dust as we await the plans as he said. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Works, maybe the only person who was able to travel from Kamuli to Jinja was the Bishop of Busoga yesterday. They allowed him to pass because he was the bishop but no one else was allowed to use that road. It is as serious as that. 

3.31
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr James Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleagues for pointing out these important issues. Allow me start with hon. Frank Tumwebaze who talked about the Kamwenge–Fort Portal Road and wondered if there is anybody in Cabinet who is against this road. Let me say this very clearly and loud, everybody in Cabinet is fighting very hard to see to it that this road is tarmacked and Cabinet has already passed this loan. Next week, I am definitely sure that the Minister of Finance will present a request for this loan from the World Bank in this House. I am sure of that because I am in close contact.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in the last Parliament, a loan request was brought to this House for the Kamwenge-Ibanda Road but we rejected it and said that we needed it to be completed up to Fort Portal. So, the ministry went back and brought a loan request that we passed. Can I be clarified whether that did not take place or it did? I need the minister to be helped because he is now bringing issues of the loans and yet we had that issue here to handle. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, this loan from the African Development Bank started from Nyakahita-Kazo and then Kazo-Ibanda-Kamwenge and the money we are looking for is for Kamwenge up to Fort Portal. So, the road is going to be done and as I was saying, next week the loan request will be in this House. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister for his presentation. I am sure, if I heard my brother, Frank, very well, what he is complaining about is that for the entire stretch from Kazo, nothing has been done. I know that we passed a loan here for that work and we were told that in a matter of months, work would be commencing. I am surprised that the minister has come to tell us stories. Can you clarify to this House what the exact status is? 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I wish my colleague, hon. Amuriat, who is also an engineer, was listening. I said from Nyakahita to Kazo, from Kazo to Ibanda-Kamwenge works are going on. We have two contractors there already running. What we want is money from Kamwenge to Fort Portal, and that is the loan which will be presented here next week. 

The second issue from my colleague, hon. Tumwebaze, was about Kintu Road, the one passing via Serena Hotel. My predecessor, hon. Nasasira, issued a statutory instrument allowing the management of hotels to close whenever there is a security concern regarding meetings taking place in that area. We should not downplay security when we have our friends in this country, and that road – (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I wish they could give me a chance and listen.
 
MR TANNA: I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister because that is a road many of us use frequently. I entirely agree with hon. Nasasira’s decision that that road should be regulated whenever we have conferences and we are hosting guests or there is a high security meeting in that area. The unfortunate incidents that occur, like he quoted there and like one that happened with me, actually two within the last two years, are on days when there are no meetings or conferences in both of those hotels, Serena or Imperial Royale. 

So, the question here on the Floor, and I think that is what hon. Tumwebaze was raising, is that he went there to meet a constituent and there is no meeting there but why do those people close the road by private security? Even though they want to close and it is a security issue, we would see SFG and Police there. We would then understand the circumstances under which that particular road has been closed. You drive to Munyonyo and see an army truck parked in the middle of the road and you will understand that the Army is doing its work, there is a meeting. But really, these people just close and sit in the road and you have to plead with them in order to use the road. That is the concern of the people - the day-to-day use of the road vis-à-vis what you have just mentioned. I would like to seek clarification, hon. Minister. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we have exceeded the time allotted for the private Members. Respond and we close. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague, hon. Tanna, for at least agreeing with us that there are times where there is need for security and that instrument is not out of place. However, I have noted the other points you have talked about and I am going to sort it out with the management.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, granted; even in Sheraton when there are high powered delegations and meetings, security takes over. Now, the question is, in that statutory instrument you are quoting, does Imperial Royale have the competence to take over the security management? Are they authorised to regulate how people go in and out? That is a very clear issue. Maybe that instrument should be laid here and we study it.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, those are the very things I am going to sort out with the hotel management and come back and report here. Hon. Tumwebaze should wait.

Let me now move to the eastern part of this country. Hon. Balyeku has talked about the Jinja-Kamuli Road and I sincerely apologise for what happened yesterday. Yes, this road was contracted out to M/s Dott Services Ltd and yes, as I explained here, this contract was given with a provision that there will be a design review. I explained that issue here and I do not need to waste time.

What I can say is that all the technical issues are basically finished. What happened is that there was only one slip. These people laid crushed stone for about two kilometres and they are using these two kilometres to test the design mix. What we want to know here is the content of the bitumen. Unfortunately, instead of doing these tests in parallel, they are doing one by one. The content of bitumen is supposed to be between 4.5 and 5.2 percent. Their first test was out of reach and that is why they are starting -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, why don’t you write a statement and come back and we have a full debate? 

MR BYANDALA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

3.40
THE MINISTER OF SECURITY (MR MURULI MUKASA): Madam Speaker, just a few words of reply to some of the issues raised by honourable members. One issue is in regard to Prof. Kakoma. To the best of my knowledge, Prof. Kakoma was given Shs 25 million as an ex-gratia appreciation for the work he did in composing the National Anthem. This was quite recently. At the time this anthem was composed, that was probably in the 1960’s or so, we are not quite sure but it is most likely that at that time Government actually rewarded him for his very good work.

Recently, Prof. Kakoma of course incurred a lot of heavy medical bills at Kololo Hospital. Shs 22 million was released to cover those medical bills and medicine generally for his life support was also procured by Government. The health of Prof. Kakoma is a concern for the President and for all of us, and I think a lot more attention is going to be extended to Prof. Kakoma so that there should be no problem or quarrel from the side of Government.

With regard to KCCA and the personnel structure there; yes, KCCA now is a new entity and it is in a period of transition. Indeed, a new structure was proposed in KCCA and the proposals were sent to the Ministry of Public Service for scrutiny and approval. The Ministry of Public Service is going ahead but in the meantime, work must go on in KCCA, so there is an interim arrangement and that is what you see. We hope this interim arrangement is not going to take long and certainly, we shall go to the new structure and the anxiety and whatever will come to an end. 

I am just about to wind up - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the concerns raised were very pertinent where there are two parallel salary structures in KCCA. Is it in order for the minister to justify two parallel illegal structures in one institution just because they are in transition? Kampala City Council Authority is not the only authority or body where restructuring has taken place but we have never seen parallel salary structures applied. It is good we have the Minister for Public Service here. So, is it in order to have two parallel structures within a single institution as the minister is trying to justify? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, don’t you think it would be better if you actually brought a paper to show us the new structure, the interim and the old, and what they are earning? In this way, you can speak from a point of knowledge because now I do not know; and do it quickly because we hear that recruitments are going on.

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Galiwango for raising the concerns about Mbale Regional Referral Hospital. 

I need some bit of time to get some of the facts and the reasons why, for example, water is not flowing, why supplies are not enough and why not all the laboratory tests can be conducted in the hospital. I therefore undertake to go and collect all this information and as requested by hon. Galiwango, I should be able to make a statement here in a week’s time, and that is on Thursday next week. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I wish to respond to the concerns raised by my brother, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, in respect to expedited dispensation of justice as far as electoral petitions are concerned.

To some extent, I appreciate his concerns but when it comes to attributing the blame entirely to the Judiciary, I defer. Why? By the way, I appreciate he is very versatile in understanding the provisions of the Constitution. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi must also thank me for encouraging and supporting him in that particular respect.

However, there is one important provision you did not cite, and maybe it is because you were not in the Eighth Parliament. Towards elections, we passed fundamental electoral reforms here, one of which was to the effect that election petitions now stop in the Court of Appeal; they do not go all the way to the Supreme Court. That is fundamental as far as expedited justice in that respect is concerned. 

Secondly, we even put some time periods. The problem is that I did not come with my electoral laws but the problems of delay are peculiar and every case must be looked at in its own merits because there are many challenges. By the way, even our laws stipulate that election petitions take precedence over other cases and applications in terms of being heard. We all know that, especially most lawyers here. 

Now, there is one fundamental problem in our Constitution and I am going to cite it to you. I think the legislators who made our Constitution did it in good faith but the way this provision is applied borders on serious questions – that is Article 137 of the Constitution. If you may look at your Constitution, Article 137 Clause (5) says: 

“Where any question as to the interpretation of this Constitution arises in any proceedings in a court of law other than a field court martial, the court – 

(a) 	may, if it is of the opinion that the question involves a substantial question of law; and 

(b) 	shall – the word is “shall” now - if any party to the proceedings requests it to do so, 
	refer the question to the constitutional court for decision in accordance with clause (1) of this article.” 

The promulgators must have had good intentions but we all know how we apply this provision these days. Midway the proceedings, any party says, “I have a question for constitutional interpretation; I seek reference to the Constitutional Court” and it is done. The hands of the court are tied. Now, that in a way defeats the intention of your Article 126, which is fundamental and is meant to ensure that there is no delayed justice. 

Maybe when we come back here to review and make proposals for amendments to the Constitution, these are some of the provisions to seriously look at. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, hon. Ruhindi, for giving way. I wish to inform the Attorney-General that we do not need an amendment in that because the Constitutional Court has stated that that is not mandatory; the court to which an application for reference is made has the discretion to decide whether a reference is necessary or not. However, I think he is right on the mark on the rest of the issue – that at times we cause the delay. But it goes back to the policy issue which his ministry must handle. Thank you. (Hon. Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, no. Please, honourable member. Hon. Minister, please wind up because I have other business. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, thank you. You can see the extent to which hon. Lukyamuzi is versatile in constitutional matters. 

I thank hon. Sseggona for that information and I hope that he will share with me the authority on which he is relying. There is a constitutional reference now going on and one of the grounds is challenging this particular constitutional provision vis-à-vis Article 126. But if we got that guidance, we would be very happy. So, there are many circumstances which can occasion delayed justice and this should not entirely be attributed to the Judiciary. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Finally, may we have the Minister of Finance to address the issue of equity that was raised by hon. Nalule.

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last year when we issued the budget call circular, we made it categorically clear that ministries, departments and agencies should ensure that they handle the issue of gender and equity budgeting squarely. The Budget Act requires that by February 15 of every year, we receive the Budget Background Paper, which clearly indicates to us how much each has put in as far as gender mainstreaming and equity is concerned. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to seek clarification from the minister as to why his ministry has refused to recruit a gender director despite the United Nations having accepted to pay all the salary and the operations, including even sending the money to the ministry for the last three years.

MS NALULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to inform the minister that I am very well aware of what he is talking of. I even have a copy of the document you are referring to. However, it was just a question of time because I would have wished to photocopy it for you to study on your own. 

The checklist, which is in this document that accompanied the budget call circular, just lifted paragraphs from the gender, disability and youth policies. In my document, I say that these cannot translate into budgeting for this kind of issue. I ask the minister to study my paper so that he compares it with their documents before giving me a satisfactory answer.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the Member of Parliament for Sheema but also vice-chairperson of UWOPA. After we realised that the budget call circular that the Ministry of Finance gives to different sectors has several gaps, last year Parliament together with UWOPA sponsored a number of MPs, including the Minister of State for Finance, to go to Kigali to study how gender is institutionalised within the different sectors and in the budget. Given the fact that what he is presenting had gaps, we have come up with several issues which we want to share with Parliament – perhaps next week – to put into consideration those issues that Uganda does not apply in terms of gender budgeting and equity. 

I believe that when we share that document, it is going to bring out those pertinent issues which we believe the Ministry of Finance should help us with or guide us on in terms of how we have been analysing issues of gender within budgeting or implementing issues of gender budgeting within the different sectors. Thank you. 

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. They are just supporting me in what I was going to say because we have clearly indicated areas that should be considered when we are dealing with gender and equity budgeting. 

I said that yesterday was the closing date for the Ministry of Finance receiving the presentations by various ministries, departments and agencies and we are continuing with the inter-consultation with various ministries. All this will be put in a submission and sent to Parliament. So, we are in the process of budgeting. 

Now, on what hon. Ekanya has raised, as far as Ministry of Finance is concerned, we have a gender officer but we can look - (Interjections)- A director? Now, that is quite big. Our structure currently allows only three directors, but we can look into that. As far as what the honourable member is saying, I have received her submission and we are going to study it to its detail. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think what hon. Ekanya was saying is that this is actually funded and has no costs to your budget. All you have to do is to advertise and get the right people. I hope you will be able to do that.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, as I said, the issue of structure is a bit complex. If we are to put in another directorate, then we have to get clearance from the Ministry of Public Service. So, I will just have to take this up and follow it up and maybe give a report later. 

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, I hope that when UWOPA brings the issues of the certificate of equity, you will support us. [Ms Bako: “The issue of women.”] Malaysia - we are expecting a report. Minister for Security, you know you are supposed to bring a statement on the women who are trafficked to Iraq and you have been requested to include the issue of the girls who are in Malaysia. So, please make it comprehensive.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-PORNOGRAPHY BILL, 2011

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Mr Simon Lokodo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Pornography Bill, 2011” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded

MR LOKODO: Madam Speaker, this Bill was earlier on presented to Parliament in December but it was deferred because it had an outdated certificate of financial implications. I am therefore happy to inform you that now I have an updated the certificate of financial implications. It is signed and dated 14 February 2012. I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Bill is referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny and report back.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the tax expenditure for the second quarter for financial year 2011/2012

MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the issue of tax exemption can be brought, but it is a serious matter. It is where we collect money from other people and we pay for others. We have not really scrutinised these reports. We would be happy if the minister gave us the entire exemptions he has given. This is a serious matter. If we only look at what he has presented, you will see only Southern Range Nyanza as the biggest beneficiary and Aya Brothers. This is very dangerous.

THE SPEAKER: But isn’t it going to the committee? –(Interjections) - You mean he is smuggling it? Can you explain how he is smuggling it in?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, he is smuggling it because for all the years we have been in this Parliament, it is after the Minister of Finance presenting a new budget that he presents a list of tax exemptions for the previous year. It is then considered during the budget process and it is approved or rejected. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, what is your position?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the paper that I have just laid says, “Tax expenditure for the second quarter.” It will go to the appropriate committee and then the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will answer issues that may arise. So, we would like to be up-to-date.

Article 152(2) of the Constitution obliges me to report to Parliament periodically on the exercise of the powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by law. This is to report that from October 1st 2011 to 31 December 2011, Government has paid Shs 3,759,806,188 only as per the attached schedule. So, if there are issues to be raised, then we can only handle it through an appropriate committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 


4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.1 for the Financial Year 2011/2012 Budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny and report back.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION TO HABA GROUP OF COMPANIES LTD AND RHINO INVESTMENTS LTD IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010.

(Debate Continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we said we would continue debate, but before we proceed, I want to invite the Leader of Government Business to make a statement.

4.07
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I stand here to make a statement as Leader of Government Business in Parliament on the report of the Public Accounts Committee on Government’s compensation to Haba Group of Companies Ltd and Rhino Investments Ltd in financial year 2009/2010. 

Upon receipt of the report of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) on Government compensation to Haba Group of Companies Limited and Rhino Investments Limited, the President constituted a Cabinet committee, chaired by hon. Dr Crispus Kiyonga and attended by the Third Deputy Prime Minister in the presence of hon. David Bahati, to study the report and advise him on the way forward. In addition to studying the report, the committee met the following:

•	Hon. Khiddu Makubuya; 
•	Hon. Syda Bbumba;
•	The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury;
•	The Deputy Secretary to the Treasury;
•	Former Government Valuer;
•	Architect Kazahura, Chief Government Architect; and
•	The Deputy Governor Bank of Uganda.

The committee kept His Excellency the President informed throughout these proceedings. In view of the report of the Public Accounts Committee and the interactions with the above ministers and officials, the Cabinet committee made the following findings:

1. 	In July, His Excellency the President discovered that Kampala City Council had privatised the peoples’ markets of Owino, Nakasero, Shauriyako to private companies namely Haba Group and Rhino Investments. 

2. 	In order to avert a potential social crisis in the city markets, His Excellency directed the Attorney-General to study the legality of compensating the private companies and return the markets to the urban poor.

3. 	His Excellency further constituted an inter-ministerial committee comprising of the Ministers of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Local Government and Finance to authenticate and evaluate Haba’s input in the markets and resolve the matter.

4. 	The committee found that there were errors and omissions committed by the ministers and other officials involved in the compensation. (Applause)

5. 	The audit report issued by KPMG found that indeed payments in excess of what was duly evaluated were made.

6. 	By 15 February 2012, the committee was informed that Shs 140 billion had been paid by Bank of Uganda to Haba Group of Companies.

In view of the above, the committee concurs with the PAC report that there was substantial financial loss to Government and the public. (Applause)

Way Forward

Therefore,

1. 	Hon. Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Syda Bbumba have accepted political responsibility for the errors. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Syda Bbumba have taken the decision to resign from their positions -(Applause)- as Cabinet ministers with immediate effect.

2. 	The Cabinet committee was unable to interact with the Governor Bank of Uganda and the Solicitor-General because they are out of the country on duty. The committee will meet them upon return and give His Excellency the President appropriate recommendations.

3. 	Government will take appropriate action against other public officials including the ones mentioned and not mentioned in the PAC report. (Applause)

4. 	His Excellency the President has directed the Attorney-General to recover monies in excess of what is due to the companies. (Applause)

From these investigations, Government has learnt lessons and will take the steps to rectify institutional weaknesses that could lead to recurrence of similar situations. These steps will include the enactment of the Government Compensation Act and strengthening the office of the Chief Government Valuer.

I beg to lay this report on the Table and the copies are being photocopied and you will get it. That is my report, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Government Business, we want to thank you very much for the update from the Cabinet but we need to conclude the report. I think hon. Syda Bbumba would like to say something.

4.16
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. It is rather unusual to speak after the Leader of Government Business but for the Hansard, allow me to make this statement. It is true I have taken political responsibility but nonetheless, I would like to give a few clarifications for the Hansard.

I wish to respond to the report of PAC relating to my role in the payment of the compensation to Haba Group. The fact of compensation by Government to parties who have been injured, aggrieved or wronged by actions of Government is common; at least, through my experience in the Ministry of Finance, there were quite many of them. It happens all the time. Our Constitution has taken cognition of this under Article 119 by establishing the Office of the Attorney-General to handle this.

When I was appointed Minister of Finance and Economic Development in accordance with Article 113, I took the oath of minister under Schedule 4 of the Constitution and I was in charge of overseeing the general running of the ministry to ensure that its functions are fulfilled. It was within the schedule of my duties when a decision was taken to pay compensation to Haba Group of Companies. 

I would like to emphasise that in my capacity then as Minister of Finance, I knew the legal position with regard to compensations to individuals and groups of companies aggrieved by Government actions as stated in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 119, and operationalised under the various laws specifically the Government Proceedings Act Cap.77 and the Government Proceedings Civil Procedure Rule S1/77/1. Under these rules, the matter of compensation falls under the ambit and the functions of the Attorney-General. It is when the Attorney-General has conclusively dealt with such matters that the Minister of Finance is called upon to pay compensation as determined by that office. 

The Minister of Finance is bound by the conclusive finality of the decision of the Attorney-General. And under the Constitution of Uganda and other laws, the Minister of Finance has no mandate to question the decision of the Attorney-General. The duty of the Minister of Finance is to ensure that there is timely implementation of the decision of the Attorney-General. 

My ministry then received a request of payment of about Shs 142 billion through a letter from the Acting Solicitor-General dated 29 November, 2010. The Solicitor-General was conveying the decision of the Attorney-General. My role was to ensure that this money is paid within the convenience of the budgetary constraints in view of the fact that the Attorney-General, constituting his constitutional authority under Article 119, had authorised payment of this amount. The commitment to compensate had been established. 

In view of the budgetary constraints at the time, it was impossible for the Minister of Finance to pay this money immediately. It is normal practice for the ministry to seek the assistance of Bank of Uganda under such circumstances, which I did by requesting the Governor to assist HABA Group under the circumstances, as the Governor deemed fit.

It should be remembered that in requesting the Governor Bank of Uganda’s assistance to HABA, I did it following guidance from the Executive, to liaise with the Governor for any possible assistance. My request to Bank of Uganda was consistent with the fact that Government had legally committed itself through the decision of the Attorney-General to pay the compensation. 

In cases of this nature, Bank of Uganda is paid back when the Treasury is in position to meet the commitment taken at the request of the Minister of Finance. This request to Bank of Uganda was not anything out of the ordinary dealings between Bank of Uganda and the Treasury. There are several precedents to this. So, many companies have been assisted -(Interjections)- in this way! 

I have noted that the committee made a number of observations. One case in point is the Sembule Group of Companies. They were assisted before and this is the second time HABA was being assisted. They were assisted before in 2005. 

I have noted that the committee made a number of observations under paragraph 114 –(Interjection)– can I be protected, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Order Members, order please.

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I have noted that the committee made a number of observations under paragraph 114 of the report. Many of them are accusatory and others are general in nature. They do not put in context the duties of the Minister of Finance in handling payments authorised by the Auditor-General. 

There is an element of false accusation as well. My role was that of a person who was bound to ensure timely implementation of the Attorney-General’s decision. I did not make the decision regarding evaluation, but I was required to implement it. The decision was made by a competent authority. I could not and had no capacity or authority to stop the implementation of the Auditor-General’s decision. 

Paragraph 90 seems to suggest that my letter of 7 June 2010 had no linkage with His Excellency the President’s request. What PAC overlooked was that the President, as early as March, 2009 met the Attorney-General, Minister of Local Government, and a representative from the Ministry of Finance, and in that meeting, the President directed that the matter had to be resolved within 60 days from receipt of communication. 

The request to the Governor on the type of assistance was carefully taken, considering the independence of the Bank of Uganda as enshrined in the Constitution, Article 162(2), which provides that Bank of Uganda shall not be subjected to the direction or control of any person or authority.

I handled the process of compensation to HABA Group of Companies in accordance with the legal mandate of the Minister of Finance and, Madam Speaker, I plead innocent of wrong-doing. Mine was a walk -(Interjections)- along the path of the Rule of Law and constitutionalism -

THE SPEAKER: Order, order Members. 

MRS BBUMBA: I never at any one time broke any law. To the contrary, I followed the well-known legal principle that the Attorney-General’s decision is binding on Government departments, which are obliged to implement it. My role was an implementer. I did not do anything else. I did not break the law. Though I have taken responsibility, I am innocent.

The PAC report faults me for requesting Bank of Uganda to render assistance when the PS/ST had written a letter to the Attorney-General on the 2nd of December to conduct a value-for-money audit. I wish to state that the idea of conducting a forensic audit was my initiation and this PAC report is being discussed on my initiation. I discussed the idea with the technical staff. However, we did not conclude on the time when such an audit would be conducted. (Interjections) In the discussion –

THE SPEAKER: Order Members

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, in my opinion, it was not a precedent before that I write letters to the Governor for request of assistance. The audit was to be applied at the time when money is being released from the Consolidated Fund, but the letters of comfort which we requested the Governor to issue were not a release from the Consolidated Fund. The audit was important when time came for Government to pay through the budget because you cannot provide for unverified claims as part of Government expenditure for appropriation.

For emphasis, the audit was not about the level of assistance the Governor was going to extend to HABA, but rather, when eventually Government was going to pay through the budget, the amount would have to be verified. Whereas my letter to the Governor was to see what assistance he would be given in the entry as the Government budgets for verified money, that notwithstanding I saw the PS’ letter after I had written to Bank of Uganda. I do not recall the date when I received a copy of this letter because this was a busy campaign time when we were having primaries and at the same time, the office of the Minister of Finance is a very busy office.

Normally, letters which are taken first are those from the President - those which require action; but letters for noting are normally kept until when the minister has got some free time. 

It is important to mention that todate, no money has been released from the Consolidated Fund with regard to the compensation of Shs 142 billion. What was released was from Bank of Uganda -(Interjections)- Paragraph 107 - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, order Members. Honourable members please, do not heckle.

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, can I be protected in order to present my statement? (Mr Ekanya rose_)     

THE SPEAKER: Order, order Members. 

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, in the implementation of the AG’s decision -(Interjections)- I was always consulting with the technical staff. A case in point is the letter of 24 February of 2010 to the Governor, which was written after consulting with the PS/ST and it is among the documents which were attached to the report.

Having stated all the above, the Minister of Finance was bound by the legal position with regard to legal compensations to individuals and companies. 

Madam Speaker, I was informed that there is a well-known case regarding that legal position, that is the case of Banco Arabe Espanol v. Bank of Uganda. In that case, Bank of Uganda had argued that the Attorney-General’s opinion is not bidding on the bank. The Supreme Court judges unanimously ruled that the Attorney-General’s opinion is binding on all Government departments and agencies in which Government has an interest. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to observe that the Public Accounts Committee report ignored the letter from His Excellency the President dated 1st February, and I am wondering why it was ignored. The report also arrives at conclusions based on circumstantial evidence rather than facts. The letter was recommending evaluation, and if it had been found that HABA had been paid more money than it deserved, then that money would have to be reimbursed. But that was not considered in the report.

Madam Speaker, allow me to say what I have contributed to this country:

•	I started as a young girl and I was with my six brothers who were among the first recruits; they died in FRONASA during the struggle to liberate this country. 
•	I participated in the liberation war which ushered in the Rule of Law and Constitutionalism, which we are enjoying in this Parliament.
•	I served in the Interim Electoral Commission.	 
•	I came to political limelight when I was appointed Minister of State for Economic Monitoring in 1996, and after one year, I was promoted to Cabinet Minister for Economic Monitoring. 
•	After one year, I became the first woman Minister of Energy in the Ministry of Energy, where I served for eight years. I served in the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development and while in that ministry, we hosted two meetings for CHOGM: the Youth Forum and the Women’s Forum and there were no audit queries on those two meetings.
•	I  joined the Ministry of Finance in February 2009, and I am happy to report that I was the first female Minister of Finance in this country. I am also happy to report that during my term of tenure, I won the prestigious award of the best Finance Minister of Africa (Applause).

Madam Speaker, all that notwithstanding, in view of the Public Accounts Committee recommendations and the preservation of my party, the NRM party which I cherish, the NRM Government, my President, the man with a vision, as the Leader of Government Business has stated, I have tendered in my resignation and taken political responsibility. 

When my colleague, whom I call my son, hon. Peter Ogwang, started the process of censure, I told him not to labour. I told him to wait for the Public Accounts Committee report and whatever it recommends I would be honourable to take it. I would like to inform hon. Peter Ogwang and the people he was with in seeking for signatures, I have honoured my promise! 

I wish to thank His Excellency the President for having given me the opportunity to serve this country for the last 15 years and nine months - uninterrupted service with an untainted record. I would like to thank my colleagues, starting from those from the Sixth Parliament, Seventh Parliament up to now, and the technical staff whom I have worked with during my ministerial work.

Madam Speaker, my colleagues in Parliament have made me a performer, especially when I was in Finance and Energy. There were very difficult tasks to accomplish and they always assisted me to sort them out. 

My statement would not be complete if I did not thank and recognise the great people of Nakaseke North. I am here because of them and I am going to remain a backbencher because of the people of Nakaseke; they have always voted for me overwhelmingly. In the previous election – I would like to challenge honourable colleagues on this - I think I got the highest score: I got 93.4 percent! 

I would, therefore, like to reassure the people of Nakaseke that although I am moving from the Frontbench, I will continue with the commitment to serve them. And I request colleagues on the Backbench to receive me with warm hands –(Interjections)- of course, I meant those on the right side of the House.

Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the Almighty Allah for having made it possible for me to serve and I pray that He continues to give me wisdom and support to continue serving the NRM Government, which must stay for another 100 years, Insha’Allah – with Allah’s support I know I will make it.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and colleagues! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Hajati Syda Bbumba, I want to thank you very much for the statement and the humility with which you have made it. I would now want to invite Dr Khiddu Makubuya whom I see standing. I believe he wants to say something. 

4.36
DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to say something. We are discussing this item because of the work of the Public Accounts Committee. I would like to declare that I support the Public Accounts Committee! (Applause) It is an important organ of Parliament; there is some course of dealing between me and the Public Accounts Committee. Sometimes it hasn’t been easy; you can ask the honourable Leader of the Opposition when he was the chairperson there. But I think we were playing our respective roles and I support the work of the Public Accounts Committee.

I agree that better order would have been for the smaller drums to speak first and the big one to speak last. But God did not allow this and so we move with the fact that we speak after the Leader of Government Business has spoken.

I just want to make qualifying remarks because they should have looked small if they had come earlier, but now they will look somewhat big, but they are not really big. For example – I think there are some things that just need to be explained. 

On page 4 of the committee’s report, they speak about challenges. “6. In conducting this inquiry, the committee encountered a number of challenges:

1.  "Some witnesses were uncooperative and hostile like the former Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, who initially challenged the locus of the committee to investigate the issue of compensation."

Now, I think I just need to explain the facts as I understood them. I was summoned by the Public Accounts Committee and I went there without being dragged by the Police. In spite of what the newspapers report, I went there voluntarily the first time I was summoned and I raised this difficulty: You are asking me to answer about what happened in the Attorney-Generals’ Office, but I have left the Attorney-Generals’ Office and handed it over to a successor and what do we do now? I have no access to the files and technical people. How will I answer? From memory? 

So, that day, although it was a bit difficult, eventually, we agreed that we could not proceed and so we got in touch with the Office of the Attorney-General to recover or give me access to the files – to grant me access to the technical officers. 

Before that was accomplished, another issue arose, which was that - actually, it is not a simple matter of access to files or technical officers. You really have no Locus Standi to speak for the Attorney-Generals’ Chambers because you have left it. 

Now, this is not a matter that you answer in any way you want. So, I asked the Attorney-General for a legal opinion on this and the Attorney-General said, “Yes, I am willing to give a legal opinion, but for the next so many weeks I will not be around.” Then I asked, “Why don’t you help me to inform the Public Accounts Committee accordingly?” He wrote to me and I took this letter to the Public Accounts Committee and my friends! You should have seen the fire –(Laughter)- when I took this letter there!! They said that I was just dodging them and being stubborn and so on and so forth. 

Now, unfortunately, the Attorney-General was a bit busy and it took two months to produce the legal opinion. When the legal opinion came, we could not wait for the interpretation and again I went to the Public Accounts Committee and the substantive hearings started. 

I have a bunch of letters here. This is from me to the clerk to the Public Accounts Committee dated 6 September, 2011, informing the Public Accounts Committee that I could not go because I was still waiting for a response from the Attorney-General.

I also have this letter of 8 September, 2011, from me to the honourable Attorney-General, requesting access to information, files and relevant officers.

There is another letter here from me to hon. Peter Nyombi, the Attorney-General, dated 16 September, 2011, asking him to indicate whether as a former minister, I could actually speak for a ministry that I had left; and then on 18 November, 2011, that is when he responded and thereafter I began to appear substantively in the Public Accounts Committee.

So, this time was taken up by this process and it is an important process in terms of public administration, “who speaks for a ministry” the outgone one or the one who has come in? Madam Speaker, with your permission, may I lay these letters on Table.

Similarly, the Attorney-General is an issue in the report of the Public Accounts Committee and in other submissions.

We all have copies of the Constitution and so I will not take Parliament’s time to read out Article 119. You will also look at Article 174 on permanent secretaries where under that one the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Justice is the Solicitor-General and we also refer to Section 29 of the Interpretation Act, Chapter Three of the Laws of Uganda. It is a short section and let me read it out: 

“Any power conferred or duty imposed on the Attorney-General by or under any Act, may be exercised or performed by the Solicitor-General –

a)	In any case where the Attorney-General is unable to act owing to illness or absence;
b)	In any case or class of cases where the Attorney-General has authorised the Solicitor-General to do so.”

Madam Speaker, like hon. Syda Bbumba said, the position has been clarified in the Supreme Court in Bank of Uganda v. Banco Arabe Espanol - Civil Appeal No.1 of 2001.

For the future, both Government and Parliament will have some time to consider the meaning of Article 119, because what is the essence? What is the substance? Is there capacity, power and authority in the Attorney-General’s Office? Or –(Interjections)– no, I said for the future they will actually look at it and consider what these things actually mean.

Madam Speaker, there is a lot about standards applied in the valuation, which led to these figures and so on. But in one of the fora, I was asked whether the methodology applied in this valuation is known anywhere. My reply is that this methodology is known. It is based on two documents: a) The Valuation of Investment Property under Construction Guidance Note No.17 by the International Valuation Standards Council and b) Investment Property Issues under Construction, KPMG and another limited – some of them were issued by this very KPMG.

Finally, in this connection, there is a professional opinion on the use of International Valuation Standards and Guidance Notes in Valuation and Compensation for Investment and Construction Projects. This is from IBI and May I lay these three documents on Table so that – we are only saying that these were not imaginary; they are actually known and are applied professionally.

Madam Speaker, there are claims of mismanagement, abuse of office and references to corruption. However, I would like to say that I don’t accept these claims as far as they relate to me. 

Similarly, the recommendations on pages 55, 56 and 65 need more logic and prudence and so it is difficult to rely upon them as they are without further work.

However, Madam Speaker, I have been in this public life for more than 16 years. Throughout this time, I have tried my best in all those portfolios where I have been deployed. And above all, I rose to a very high level in both the public and private legal sectors. Law is about substance, rules and public perceptions.

The report of the Public Accounts Committee recommends probes by other agencies. But honourable colleagues have been uncomfortable to see me at the Frontbench since this issue became a public matter. Some colleagues have gone public on this issue and expressed disgust. Therefore, I decided to vacate the ministerial space to enable those who think that they can take this matter to the next level to do so without hate or hindrance from me.
 
In view of the foregoing, I undertake to resign my current deployment as Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister as soon as I am able to comply with the necessary legal and administrative procedures.

I thank His Excellency the President, for giving me the various opportunities to serve my country as a minister. I also thank the many colleagues with whom I have served in Government. I further would like to thank my honourable colleagues in the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth and now the Ninth parliaments –(Applause)– who have supported me over the many years I have served as a minister.

Madam Speaker, I know that we are hard-pressed for time, but I would like to record one thing that I learnt through my interactions with committees of Parliament. There is nobody who was born while knowing how to do the work of a minister of Government. So, appearing before these committees of Parliament greatly trained me on how to do the work of a minister.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and your predecessor in office, for supporting me in the service to my country. With your permission, Madam Speaker, may I read from – quite briefly - Chapter 3 of Ecclesiastics: “For everything there is a season. A time for every activity under heaven. A time to be born and a time to die.” A time to become minister and a time to cease to be minister. (Applause and Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Order Members.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, thank you for listening to me! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank Dr Khiddu Makubuya for his statement. I noted that both our colleagues are still with God. Hon. Syda cited the Quran and hon. Khiddu Makubuya cited the Bible. 

I would like to treat these statements as personal explanations under part 9 of our rules. They are not subject to debate. The reason I am saying that is because the Leader of Government Business stood here and said they are no longer ministers. So, by the time they spoke, they were speaking as backbenchers. That is why they fall under Rule 42, and their statements should not attract any debate. I am appealing to you honourable members that we revert to the report and leave the statements as they are. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank you for your wise counsel and guidance. I just want to seek clarification and guidance from your Chair. Whereas it is true the honourable ministers have made personal statements, which require no debate, they have been raised at a time that we are considering a very serious report on the Floor of this House. They have raised statements which would imply to future Hansard readers that this House went ahead to make decisions of condemnation for people who have pleaded innocence on the Floor of the House. The record must be put in concurrence of the debate that we are considering. 

I would have sought clarification at the time they were making the explanations, but I thought I should give them the opportunity to finish this. But for Members to fail to make references to their statements, when they are pleading innocence, and Parliament is going to make a decision to approve the report of the Public Accounts Committee, in which they have been implicated. I wish to be guided under the circumstances. How shall we proceed and how shall we consider the issues that have been raised? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I said that this is a unique situation. The Leader of Government Business arrived here and said that he has relieved them of their responsibilities. That is what happened and you were here. They spoke after they had been relieved of their duties. I tried to see where they fit: Are they ministers; are they not? And I decided that they are speaking as individuals. Why don’t we go back to the report? 

MR NGANDA: Thank you very much for your wise guidance, Madam Speaker. I am seeking further guidance from you. The Leader of Government Business read a report or a statement to Parliament in which he revealed that a ministerial committee was set up, considered the report, and actually discovered that the two former ministers were in error. As a result, the two ministers told the committee, or, I suppose, Cabinet or the appointing authority, that as a result of those findings of the ministerial committee, they were resigning. 

The two ministers have appeared in Parliament and actually contradicted the Leader of Government Business. They have actually gone down crying to suggest that actually the Leader of Government Business lied to Parliament and must have coerced them to come here and accept that they have resigned, but probably under duress. 

The guidance I am seeking from you – this is the situation we find ourselves in as Parliament. The two ministers are crying. The Leader of Government Business gives an impression that they sat and agreed with them and that they take political responsibility. What do we do with the report and what do we do with the statement of the Leader of Government Business, vis-à-vis the statements made by the two colleagues, whom I am happy to welcome to the backbench. 

THE SPEAKER: I was listening carefully. I did not hear any of them say that they have declined the instructions of the Leader of Government Business. But let’s hear from hon. Katuntu.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This time, my counterpart on the other side is there and I thought this is the time for him to come and assist. When you read this report, there are several recommendations including investigations and criminal proceedings against the two colleagues who have spoken previously on the Floor. 

They are in a very difficult position, and the Constitution protects them. Nobody will give any incriminating evidence against himself. If anybody expected them to come here and say, “Yes, I erred; I committed this crime” you will not get it. It is not possible. The Constitution protects that. 

We are in a very difficult situation and don’t demand and expect them to come here and start pleading guilty, thereby incriminating themselves. Maybe there is something that awaits them when they walk outside the gates of this Parliament. So, what do you expect them to do? 

My advice is, we can go ahead with the debate. In any case, all of us should debate the report and not what the two colleagues have said. Assuming they hadn’t made the statements, wouldn’t you have contributed? I think we should all come with our ideas, appreciate the report and debate it other than degenerating to debate what somebody has said. Once you do that then you will even cease to debate the report and start debating the statement.  

I would suggest that we continue with our general debate. For those who think there is evidence, you can bring the evidence on the Floor until you convince Members, especially members of the committee and say, “Look here, there could have been assertions that x, y, z happened, but the facts that we have are these,” and we proceed and we dispose of this report, one way or the other. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the essence of my ruling; that we revert to the debate on the report.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I am seeking your guidance on this. I beg for your indulgence. This is basically due to my two backgrounds; one as a Muganda, and one as a Muslim. The two ministers who have resigned are within the House and the matter which is going to be discussed touches them greatly. If it were not painful, I would request you, Madam Speaker, to allow them take leave of the House so that the House is free to debate, since they have done their part. (Interjections) I am seeking your indulgence, Madam Speaker; there is no dictate to this, so that it is easy for their sake and for the sake of the House. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Members have taken leave of their offices of minister, but they are elected Members of this House. I cannot eject them from this House. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry if my statement was construed to mean that you eject them from the House. I was simply saying that it would be good manners to let them get out and the debate continues. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, each of you except me has an opportunity to go out and come in as they want. Please, leave the Members. They are Members of this House, leave them here. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a matter not related to what we are discussing right now. Many things are happening at the Frontbench here and it is a Commonwealth practise that ministers take the Frontbench. This afternoon, I have seen ministers standing and sitting on the back bench and I don’t know whether they are part of the team who were advised to step aside. I am seeking your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: I have not seen any minister standing. Please proceed. 

MS NAMBOOZE: I don’t know whether hon. Banyenzaki and hon. Justine Lumumba fear the Frontbench now that it is so hot. 

THE SPEAKER: I believe hon. Banyenzaki is monitoring the situation around that area. (Laughter)

5.12
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make my few observations on the report, allow me to thank you, Madam Speaker, my colleagues and the staff of Parliament for the support both financial and material when I lost my dear father. My family and I were overwhelmingly touched by the support we received from the institution of Parliament. May the Almighty Allah reward each one of you abundantly and may the soul of my dad rest in eternal peace! 

Having said that, I want to thank the Leader of Government Business and the Cabinet for coming out with a position and the statement. It has saved many of us who were constrained because from the beginning of the transactions and letters that the President wrote in 2008, the issue at hand was very incurable no matter the cost, because the whole transaction started going bad from day one, and the President mentioned it when he said that even at the allocation of these markets to HABA or Mr Basajjabalaba as we know him, there were problems; there were some illegalities; and it was not the government policy. 

I, therefore, want to thank the two ministers for accepting to take political responsibility because that is a term known. There are two terms in the Executive; political responsibility and collective responsibility. Today, you have taken both; collective responsibility by the Cabinet’s decision, and political responsibility by doing the needful. As hon. Makubuya said, there is time for everything. There is time to be at the front and there is time for those at the back to come there. So, that is the process and life continues. (Laughter)

Having said that, I want to thank the committee for their good report, but when the Prime Minister said something about other officers mentioned in the report, it was not clear and the committee as well is not clear about the public servants. When you look at the whole issue, the mother of all wars from this - and we have lost our colleagues to the back - originated from the public servants and, therefore, –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, two minutes and you conclude. Go straight to the issues. 

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, thank you so much. You see, I used the other minute to express my gratefulness. 

First of all, the President was very clear that he was misled by his aides. Secondly, the Constitution is clear in articles 172(1)(a) and 172 on the appointment of public servants. The President has the right by the Constitution to appoint, but who vets these public servants? There are no vetting procedures; there is no way he can check whether these people in his office do qualify and have the competence because the committee noted that there is incompetence in this. 

Therefore, I wish to see a recommendation requesting the President to follow Article 172 and do the needful to these people who misled the President and the rest of the officials. (Interjections)– For every issue that requires reports to be brought to the Floor of the House, you will see a character of the great Sembabule and I always contribute on principle. My principle is recruitment of staff in the President’s Office; how they are put into those positions and how they end up misleading the President. We must see that something is done to ensure that this does not re-occur. We must have a recommendation where the President goes within the laid down procedures for the staff under him and not every political failure, and not just because you want to balance politics in Sembabule. 

You need to have the right people. Some are not qualified; some have no expertise and some are just there. (Mr Ssekikubo rose_) Madam Speaker, hon. Ssekikubo is one of the beneficiaries of this report and he should have declared his personal interests in this matter and even in the connivance. He should have come out because these are issues known to him and me. 

5.18
MS MABLE BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to continue debate on this report. I once again want to thank the committee -(Interruption)
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that the Leader of Government Business said, “Officers mentioned in the report and those not mentioned,” but he never came out clearly to mention the listing because maybe it could have addressed some of the issues of hon. Kawooya. In fact, in this report, she uttered one statement: “It started from day one” and who is involved in day one? It is hon. Byandala here. By the way, this report has left out many people -(Laughter)– which is a very serious matter.  So, I wanted to ask the Leader of Government Business if he can assist us; who are these ones you have left out, because hon. Byandala is very clearly mentioned in the report of Local Government Accounts on the same issue? 

THE SPEAKER: No, but honourable members, I don’t think we want to turn this House into a court now.  If he was not mentioned in the report, I don’t see how we should take him at issue. We can call upon the agencies which are going to follow up the matter to follow it up. 

MS BAKEINE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity for us to continue debate on this report.
 
MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, aware that we have limited time, and aware that you told us that those who contributed yesterday would not be given opportunity to contribute today, is it in order for hon. Bakeine to contribute today? Is it in order for her to contribute again?
 
THE SPEAKER: Did she contribute on this one?
 
MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: No, if  it was on this you can’t. Hon. Amongin, what did you contribute on yesterday? 

MS AMONGIN: I didn’t speak on this matter. It is even on the Hansard, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Okay, she didn’t. Let her speak. 

5.22
MS JAQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. People are so familiar with my face that they assume that I spoke yesterday on this issue, but I didn’t.
 
I would first of all like to thank the Leader of Government Business for the response he has given to this august House, and I would also like to thank the two former ministers, hon. Bbumba and hon. Makubuya, for accepting political responsibility. However, I would like to - as a way of information especially to the sitting ministers, because as far as I am concerned, we are losing many ministers to these corruption scandals. I would like to request the ministers that when a document comes to your desk for attention, don’t sign it in a hurry because we have so many people who are very cunning, especially in the business community, that want to take advantage of your position. Now I can be sure that HABA Group of Companies is smiling while hon. Syda Bbumba and hon. Khiddu Makubuya are on the defensive. So, I think that is very important.

Lastly, when we talk about corruption, the Ninth Parliament has been given credit in regard to raising pertinent issues especially in regard to corruption. I wouldn’t want us to be lamenters. When it comes to the recovery process, that is a colossal sum of money for an individual.  I don’t think that he is even employing many Ugandans. It is a very pathetic situation to see to it that all that money goes to just an individual’s account. Ngora would need very little money out of that to hire the services of a doctor because women are dying while giving birth and there is no one to attend to them.  

So, Madam Speaker, even when these ministers have accepted political responsibility,  I would like to urge the committee not to rest but go further and investigate all the responsible personnel –(Member timed out.)

5.26
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Ever since the beginning of this debate, I have listened very attentively; I have listened in the House here and also listened outside within the community of the Ugandans who are outside; the Ugandans who are in my constituency in Iki-Iki. I was wondering how this debate would end. but I am happy that tonight I am witnessing the conclusion of this debate.
 
For this matter, I would like first and foremost to thank the Leader of Government Business and, therefore, to thank the government. I would like to thank the ministers, the two colleagues, who tonight have agreed to tender in their resignation. It was clear right from the beginning that when I listened in, the evidence which had been extracted by the committee, didn’t need to go to a forensic audit school to know there was something wrong because every piece of information which was brought and tabled in the report was sincerely very contradictory. You could see that there was something wrong.
 
I would like to advise our colleagues, who are in the Executive, our colleagues who are still in the Civil Service, that it is important that when you are communicating, sit and carefully draft the letters because that is what sold out all these colleagues. If that evidence wasn’t there, it would have been a bit difficult to convict them. So, take care; we don’t want to witness another problem of this nature. 

The Ugandans out there are crying, their money is being stolen and when they see that this Parliament is insisting to find out to the last dollar or coin like we have done in this debate, I think they are now very happy.

I take this opportunity to thank you, Madam Speaker, for conducting this debate very ably and I thank the colleagues for taking heart to consider this issue as one for the nation at large, not for the party.

5.29
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the PAC committee for the detailed report given to us. When this matter of HABA Companies and the money given to them was raised, I was perturbed and kept quiet. I said I would like to hear the report first before I can append my signature and I was not among those who appended their signature because I wanted to get the truth.

When I read the report, I have seen that there was pressure somewhere where the ministers have to work under pressure. First of all, Basajjabalaba was pressing the President again and again, giving pressure to the President, who gave the pressure to the Attorney-General, who in turn put the pressure on the minister, who put pressure on the Governor, who gave the money. And the speed was too much. What is the relationship between Basajjabalaba and the President that all the time he should be given money?

Another time I remember he was given Ushs 4 billion for his university when money was very scarce. They have also built for him a very big hospital and this is the tycoon of Uganda. I think also this Basajjabalaba and his company should be investigated. Where does he get his riches? Surely, he is putting everybody in trouble because he wants to get all the money in Uganda for himself; so, we must investigate him.

Then also for my ministers who have gone and those who are there, please do not have one-way communication. You must look back. For example, when the President says pay money, he should have said, “I have done this, what more should I do?” But you did not and kept quiet, Attorney-General. That is why you are now suffering here. If you had asked him, “Please, I have already done this, what more should I do,” you would have escaped the hook. Now you have suffered for this. The same goes to my friend, honourable minister, Syda Bbumba. Maybe if you had listened to the advice of the permanent secretary, you would have been saved.

So, I advise all the ministers to have a two-way communication and to also listen to advice given so that we do not continue to lose our money in Uganda.

I would like to thank the two ministers for honourably accepting the responsibility of stepping down. For sure, you will be proved correct when the time comes for adjudication. If you have not taken any money, you will be exonerated. It will depend on future investigations.

So, I pray that you join us and continue life as usual. Thank you very much.

5.33
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to air my views here. I also want to thank the committee for a job well done. But before I thank these ministers, I would like to seek clarification from you, Madam Speaker.

Many people have been talking about Basajjabalaba. Others say he has been pressurising the Attorney-General and the ministers. Who is this Basajjabalaba who can do all this? I think these are people who are just playing games. Basajjabalaba could have been used by some other people to do what they have done.

On this note, I want to thank the two ministers. There are ministers who have been censured in this House, but none of them have cried. I am very happy to see hon. Syda Bbumba strong and even smiling as you can see here. So, I really want to thank you for that.

What has happened today should serve as a warning to all of us here. Today is their turn and tomorrow is going to be our turn. We must check ourselves and not think that it is only these people.

There are very many people who have been involved in very many dirty things, including Members of Parliament in this House. There are people who have been mentioned in very dirty activities, but today we are saying this and that. Let us be careful and remember that as you point at someone with one finger, the rest of the fingers are pointing at you also.

So, I want to urge you, Members of Parliament, that this must be the beginning of very many things that we should do to ensure that corruption is totally dealt with in this country.

We must not use our positions to enrich ourselves; we must not use whatever resources are availed to us to ensure that others suffer. This country is suffering. Right now as we speak, fuel and essential commodities have gone up because of corruption, which has continued to prevail in this country.

This Parliament has got the capacity to fight corruption if we were all committed and I want to thank all those, especially in this committee, who worked hard to ensure that they came out with a very positive report; one that has been able to yield results and we expect many more from other committees. 

5.36
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done. I am not yet satisfied and I cannot thank the former ministers. I can only thank hon. Makubuya for telling us that there is a time for everything. There is a time for stealing and a time for eating. Now it is time for accountability.

The people of Butaleja and the people of Uganda will be so satisfied when they see that their money is refunded and recovered. Last time they presented a report on the bicycles and up to now we do not know what is happening. The chairmen LC I are asking me where their bicycles are. 

Today, the committee has presented a report, but there is no time limit. The Prime Minister has made his presentation and he has only informed us that the ministers are going to resign, but he has not informed us when our money is going to be recovered.

So, I urge that the government gives us a timeframe when we are going to recover our money so that I know that in a month’s time, I will go to the bank on this account and check that my taxpayer’s money is there. If they tell us the time, I will be satisfied, but so far I am not satisfied until I see the money.

5.38
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank members of this committee for this very detailed report. However, I am not convinced by recommendation number five, which states: “Government recovers from HABA Group all money paid including applicable taxes in excess of what was determined by the Auditor-General.” This recommendation was alluded to by the Leader of Government Business. However, my worry is: How much are we recovering? As soon as we leave this House, things may change and we recover something like Shs 100 million or Shs 1 billion. We want to be clear of how much money we are going to recover – what was the excess like? You never know even the Auditor-General may be having a number of figures just as we see the number of figures presented by the Attorney-General’s Office. My humble request is that the Leader of Government Business and maybe the chairperson of the committee should tell us how much money we are to recover from these people.

Secondly, this is an eye-opener to what is happening. In this report, it was mentioned that the Attorney-General could not access certain documents after leaving that office. But we already know that the PAC works on the Auditor-General’s reports which are compiled after a given financial year. Now, if we are to complain saying that, “I left that docket and so it is no longer my mandate” who will be held accountable if we are to continue like that. I want this House to analyze the law and see if there is a gap in it, then we should work on it. Otherwise –(Interruption)


MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, the information I wish to give is contained in Article 164(2) and it reads: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.”

NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, my colleague. Madam Speaker, I rest my case. People must be accountable no matter how many years down the road. Thank you.

5.41
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for their wonderful report which has come out at a time when Uganda is being faced with a series of corruption scandals. I think that Ugandans outside there are very happy. Most of us who were not in the committee thought that they may be compromised and whatever Ugandans expected would not be achieved. However, they came up with good work and for that we thank them. 

It is said that a fish starts rotting from the head. It has become very difficult for us to talk about corruption issues especially in our constituencies. For example, when you talk, the junior civil servants ask about the ministers who misused Shs 164 billion but are still in their offices. But now their resignation has helped us a lot. 

Madam Speaker, we should design a new way of fighting corruption so that we can uproot it from Uganda. This reminds me of what we saw a day before yesterday at Makerere University. The School of Psychology is designing a scale to fight corruption. I ask us to support them when they eventually present it to the committee. They will train us on how it works and I believe it will help our country. 

I totally support the recommendations of the committee, but Basajjabalaba, the director of HABA Group of Companies, being a businessman, knows the value of money. When we are recovering that money – because he has been using it all along for business – I suggest that he pays interest on it. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, we have a lot of challenges in our constituencies; we still have pupils studying under trees and teachers are using dry cassava for writing on chalkboards. Now, here is a man who banks billions of shillings! That is unfair because even the pupils know that the man is implicated in corruption. We have many unemployed youths out there; if this money was put into youth projects, how many of them would have been employed? (Member timed out.)

5.45
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the affected ministers for humbling themselves; it is very difficult to come here and resign publicly. That is a lot of courage on their part. However, I have one question that I want the chairperson PAC to answer: We lost a lot of money to HABA, but resolution number five says we should recover it. When you look at page 1 of the report, it says that HABA Group of Companies took powers of attorney from other companies that had won the tenders of different markets like Sheila Investments, Victoria International, First Merchant and Yudaya International. These were the companies that were given the tenders; how then did the money end up with HABA? Are we going to recover it from the companies which won the tenders or from HABA?

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My sister, the companies you are referring to are all under an umbrella company called HABA Group of Companies. So, it is very clear where the liability lies.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you for that information. My concern was that Basajjabalaba, according to recommendation five, waved forged documents wherever he took them. We do not know whether he never forged to become a leader of these companies. If he can forge for stealing money why can’t he also forge for presiding over these other companies? So, we are not really sure whether the powers of attorney which Basajjabalaba took were with the consent of these companies. That is one of my concerns.

The second one is caution and advice to my colleagues, the ministers. When you are appointed minister you are put in a ministry where they think you are experts or you have some knowledge. So, when you are given that assignment you must advise adequately. The problem of losing ministers all the time will not work for this country. I think the President should urgently fill these positions because almost half the number of ministers is about to get out of Parliament. So, we recommend that the President urgently fills these positions such that the capable Members come down and these ones go up. (Laughter) 

Lastly, the State House officials have been one problem. The State House officials who write reports for the President sometimes have done a disservice to this country. (Member timed out.)

5.50
MR ABDIL FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of PAC who understands the sub-region that I come from. If he was the Minister of Finance he would have allocated a lot of funds to my sub-region. In fact, the Shs 142 billion would have made Sebei sub-region to shine so much because we would have got some good things there. 

If a detective wants to identify a thief, one thing that the detective will notice if that person is not a thief is that he or she will cry. But today I have seen the two Members not even crying. They are very bold and that is how you identify a thief. (Laughter) In fact, if they had cried, I would have forgiven them. But nobody cried. We do understand that when one repents it is only God who can forgive. However, under the laws of Uganda, it is quite difficult for you to be forgiven. You have to be prosecuted. Maybe you will be forgiven under Article 121 where the President gives the Prerogative of Mercy. But we do understand that.

Now, if you have taken the Shs 142 billion, where did you keep this money because it is a lot of money? Did you keep it in a bank? Did you invest it in Uganda? Did you keep it in Nakaseke? And if it is in Nakaseke, I think the report of the chairman would have indicated that let us conduct a cordon and search within Nakaseke and we could find some bags of money there. So, we need to recommend that we should also conduct a cordon and search within those areas where these Members are staying and we might get something. We might end up getting billions of money in the houses. It is there because they cannot keep it in the bank -(Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, we are Members of Parliament but we are also aware that these Members have families. When you read this report, it does not say that these people are thieves. The report is very clear that these people should take political responsibility, stand aside and investigation takes place. I do not think that it is right for the honourable member to say that these people are thieves and that they cannot laugh. This is not the end of life. Investigations are going on and we cannot pass such judgment on our Members. So, is it in order to abuse and pass this judgement when investigations are still going on?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not use bad language against colleagues. Just address the report. 

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you are trying to define a thief you also bring some sort of criminality within it, in order to define it well. You should not be too specific in terms of handling a specific definition. But thank you very much, hon. Kiwanda, for giving us that clarification, but maybe you would have shown us your side. Which side do you belong? (Laughter)

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, I want clarification from the honourable member when he asks which side I belong to. We are both Members of Parliament and for his information I am on his side. I am on the NRM side. We are seated on the same side. What does he mean exactly when he says which side do I belong? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you clarify what you mean because he is sitting near you?

MR CHEMASWET: What I meant, Madam Speaker, is that is hon. Kiwanda for the report or against the report? (Laughter) 

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, if that is the case, we have not voted yet on this report and the recommendations are very clear. Actually, the Member is debating contrary to the report because this report talks about investigation. The report does not talk about judgement upon these Members. In other words, I am on the side of the report because the report recommends investigation against these Members. 

And honourable members all along we have been saying that whenever a report comes out, a Member should stand aside and investigation takes place. Some Members refused to stand aside and we were so bitter with them. So, really, if Members stand aside and investigation takes place, I would request that this is a good spirit and we should actually support it for the good of this Parliament.

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. So, we belong to the same group with hon. Kiwanda and we are debating the report and we want to approve this report that it is the best report that has been presented by the chairman. 

I would not like to waste a lot of time so let me only request some clarification from the chairman. In terms of the specific amount of money, we tend to hear some people saying Shs 169 billion and others Shs 142 billion. What is the specific amount of money that was allocated to these companies?

5.57
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Committee of Public Accounts for a job well done. The momentum that this House has generated since we came to the Ninth Parliament is something that is commended by the public out there. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, to thank my friends on both sides of the political divide, especially colleagues from the NRM, for putting this country ahead of their political party. (Applause) When you were boarding buses to go to Kyankwanzi, I got worried. When I saw you roasting the huge cow, I also got worried; but the outcome of this debate makes me believe that sometimes when you go to Kyankwanzi, you go for a good reason -(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give my colleague is that the NRM, the mighty party, was very worried when the Opposition went for a retreat in Jinja. We thought you were converging to eat and drink and plot for mischief. We are also very happy that you have come very positively in support of the genuine cause of NRM; to fight corruption. Thank you very much. (Applause)

MR AMURIAT: We went to Jinja to see how to tickle you in the fight against corruption and I think we have tickled you enough. I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition and my friends in the Opposition for forging a good working relationship with NRM. (Applause)

In December it was the hon. Kabakumba Masiko, today we have claimed as the Ninth Parliament, two ministers. I am sure that there is panic on the front bench because if you know you have dipped your hands in public coffers, we are coming for you. Your day of reckoning is coming. HABA was given this amount of money Shs 142 billion or there about. I know the ministers may have shielded certain facts, but that is upon them because they were given the opportunity to defend themselves.

This gentleman was given money for dropping not even a bead of sweat, allocated places in town and he did not even put a brick in place, but he comes and he wants this money and has taken Shs 142 billion. In my trade, this could have done 100 kilometres of paved roads, but this has been pocketed by one person for doing nothing. While our population soils and toils, our money is being robbed.

I would like to hail the ministers for making our job easier, but again, to challenge the Leader of Government Business on a matter with regard to the Governor of the Bank of Uganda. I have looked at correspondences written by the Governor, Bank of Uganda guaranteeing HABA to different banks. Some of these letters have come before my committee and we are actually leveling our guns against the Bank of Uganda Governor, if he doesn’t go in the next few days -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR AMURIAT: I fail to see the difficulty that Government has in taking a decision over the Governor of the Bank of Uganda. He is almost the genesis of this. If ministers can be forced to resign, how big is this Governor of the Bank of Uganda whose mistakes are conspicuous? I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business why they have avoided taking a decision. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

6.03
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to join my colleagues in receiving this report and at the same time, on behalf of the people I represent from Ayivu County that is Arua, to say, I give this report 100 percent support.

I think this august House should endorse all the 11 recommendations as they are and immediately give work to the various arms of Government to ensure justice and accountability prevails. We have been looking at the centres of controversy in this matter and rightly, the report points out all the agencies concerned. To begin with, the civil arm of Government where these various political leaders preside -(Interjections)- somebody has mentioned Governor, Bank of Uganda, but I will think it goes further in the Attorney-General’s Chambers. There are civil servants there and I am sure they must have played a role. Today, when we see the Attorney-General stepping aside, so to say, resigning, then what happens to the people who are in the kitchen? 

Two, the Minister for Finance, the Permanent Secretary who is seated there dealing with the legal issues, what happens to him or her? So, I think, as Members have agreed here, we must see the civil servants also follow suit, being prosecuted and our monies being recovered and the losses that have been caused to this Government. Really, Shs 146 plus billions! In Arua, where there is no clean source of water, where the regional referral hospital is in darkness, mothers being stitched on tadooba light - I think this matter should not be taken lightly and our colleagues who have stepped aside here should own it with a very big heart and with a lot of shame. 

Madam Speaker, it is very embarrassing all the time for me to be associated with people who resign and continuously keep entering this Chamber as if they are clean. Otherwise, we have seen people being flogged - if you have seen newspapers this week, you have seen people being battered for stealing; petty thieves, but we are having thieves here seated with us. Somebody steals a transmitter and she is still here. For how long are we going to investigate? We must have a timeline for investigating these people and putting them to order -(Member timed out.)

6.07
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is my maiden speech.

THE SPEAKER: You are welcome!

MS NABUKENYA: I was the mugole until hon. Paul Mwiru came; so, I am no longer the mugole. I want to commend PAC for this great report and I want to say that today, I am going to get an opportunity to speak about this report and this very sensitive issue.

The honourable colleagues today who have resigned come from the greater Luweero and I am actually part of that area. Pressure has been building in our district because of this issue, whereby we as the people of Luweero are very privileged or not privileged at all. We still have so much that is below standard. When we come to the education sector, the health sector; our roads are poor, besides, we have three ministers in our district and also, two ministers from the other districts. (Interjections) I have received information -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is her maiden speech. Please.

MS NABUKENYA: I have received information and I think the ministers have done the right thing. I want to tell them that they should not stand in the way so that if they are not guilty, we get what is right at the end of the day and we clear this on the ground. This will create a better picture for the people who come from our district in Luweero. 

This issue does not concern the report. We have a very big problem in Luweero. We have fires everywhere. It has been reported in the New Vision that people are burning – and I think we need to issue a national statement concerning fires because there is no regulation on who burns what. In this period, when we have a heat wave, they are burning everywhere and this causes a lot of damage. We are losing many plantations and important property in our districts because of these rampant fires. Madam Speaker, I am asking that a statement be made from the minister on the issue of fires so that we do not see this happening all the time in our district.

I would also like to say that we the people of Luweero want to see more done in the women’s field. Women are the majority in this country and we have seen production not taking root in our district, especially when it comes to agriculture, which is one of the under-funded areas in the budget. We believe that if we increased the agriculture budget, we would see the change that we want to see, especially by improving the income of the women and also in agricultural production so that we add to the development of this country.

Finally, I want to thank Members for not interrupting me when I was making my maiden speech. I think it was noble and I am looking forward to working with everyone in this august House.
Thank you very much. (Applause) 

6.11
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to proudly associate myself with the report and I would like to thank the PAC committee for having produced this report.

It is really a turning point in the history of the Parliament of Uganda. In eight months, we are seeing three ministers off their positions. If we move at this rate, it will be called a geometrical rate. One, two - next time when you finish the adhoc committee, we may have four; another time, eight. Now, where shall we be? It is surprising. It is not good for the country, especially for the government in power. Caution must be taken.

I would like to challenge the Members in this august House to aim at hard targets - the targets we have hit. The likes of hon. Kabakumba, hon. Bbumba; those are soft targets. Let us hit at hard targets to gauge our strength so that we are counted as the most vibrant Parliament in this country. 

I am amazed; how can an individual be compensated with Shs 142 billion when veterans are dying without compensation; when Arrow Boys who fought in 2003 with our families, are not compensated; when Amuka Boys are not compensated; when we people who lost cows during the war - the UPDF took our cows using trains to somewhere; the Karimojong took our cows, and we were not compensated; and an individual is given Shs 142 billion? This must be checked. 

MS BAKO: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is that if you looked at the report, the compensation amounting to Shs 142 billion is a network. It is not only an individual. If we went into the nitty-gritties to discover who was technically behind this compensation, you will realise that the man we are compensating is no ordinary man. He is the treasurer of the ruling party of Uganda called NRM. He comes from one region that has had the highest compensation in this country. (Interjections) So, it is not by accident -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, do not mislead the country. The treasurer of NRM is somebody different. 

MR OROMAIT: Madam Speaker -(Ms Kabakumba Masiko rose_) I am still on the ground. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure -

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, the Woman MP for Arua has made a very serious allegation against the NRM Party. The national treasurer of the NRM party is known. Her name is hon. Amelia Kyambadde. I have not heard or read her being named in this report. Is it procedurally right for the Hansard to keep reflecting our national treasurer as being compensated whereas not? (Interjections) I would like to move that, that record is expunged from the Hansard or she withdraws. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the treasurer of NRM is not that gentleman. Please withdraw.

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, well-withdrawn, but the gentleman we are talking about here, this country knows that he has very close association with the ruling party and he is the chairman of the entrepreneurs. We are not surprised that the circumstances under which he gets these monies just surround the politics of this country. (Interjections) Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But withdraw the reference to the treasurer.

MS BAKO: That is withdrawn. 

MR OROMAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for steering this House of the Ninth Parliament where I am also a Member. (Interjections) I was coming to this gentleman called Hassan Basajjabalaba. (Interjections) This man could be used as a curtain to cover up those who are eating from the other side. This must be investigated. As I conclude, I would like to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda, for not defending the corrupt. For example, when hon. Kabakumba was implicated, he never defended her. How about these ones who have gone? Has he defended them? (Member timed out.)

6.18
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this wonderful opportunity. I wish to also extend thanks to the committee for work well done.    

I thank the ministers for listening to their conscience because it has saved us a lot. But I wish to allay the fears of the people of Mawokota South Constituency in respect to recommendation No.5 on page 57, where the committee recommends that Government recovers from HABA Group all the money including applicable taxes. The people of Mawokota South asked me about lifting the veil of incorporation and have the directors of this company investigated critically by Government. My humble appeal is for Government to look into this matter and save us the trouble. 

Secondly, my prayer is that once this money is recovered; let it be added to the Youth Venture Capital Fund to help the unemployed youth of our country.

6.19
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to thank the committee for this report. I would like also to reiterate what my colleagues on the other side said that many of us had fears that the report would be compromised, but they stood firm. When you look at the back page, all of them signed this report and they owned it.

However, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. On page 2, it says that Yudaya Investments Ltd was awarded Shs 63,654,752,244 for loss of its sub-lease on the Constitutional Square. But the Constitutional Square is a gazetted green area. For somebody to sub-lease a green area constitutionally as per the Local Government Act, it necessitates to de-gazette it first so that you can change the user. 

On the investigations of the committee on Yudaya Investments Ltd, the committee has not told us whether KCC at that time had sat down to de-gazette this area and whether the –(Interjections)– I have read through this and now I am explaining as per the Local Government Act. KCC should have sat and passed a council resolution to de-gazette that area. The minutes of that council meeting should then have gone to the Ministry of Urban Planning and the minister then should have brought it to this House –(Interruption) 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Tanna, for giving way. As a Member of PAC, I thought you needed this information. The matter in question was earlier – it is a matter of 2002; it had not been gazetted. It was much later that Government decided to gazette that place. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to be digressed from the clarification I am seeking. I want clarification from the chairman of the committee regarding the same matter. To the best of my knowledge, from when I was born, that was the City Square; it was declared in our first Constitution in 1962; unless, when the new Constitution was promulgated and it was de-gazetted in the process. That is why I want to find out; how did KCC go ahead to give a sub-lease and six months down the road, when the person has not even added a brick on it, you are compensating him with Shs 63.6 billion on a contract that was an illegality? 

In this report, we read that when it was done, the then Town Clerk – Mr Ssegane, had long been suspended by the date he signed the document. That particular City Square deal hurts me to the core -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute for you to conclude.

MR TANNA: On the issues of the market, I heard the former Attorney-General speak passionately. He is a donof law and I hold him in high esteem. On page 2, it says that an independent assessment of KPMG had shown that HABA Group instead owed Government a net of Shs 999,039,186 at the time they went to court. 

We are all aware that there was a court ruling by Justice Egonda regarding the same. So, the clarification I want from the chairperson is – we all know this. We have got our supporters in markets and the taxi parks. There, if you do not pay tax for one month, your contract is terminated. If you are staying in a house and you do not pay rent for one month, it is terminated. This man had not paid for several months. So, why did you compensate an illegality?

That is the clarification I seek and I want to commend the committee and support the report in its entirety with the corrections that were made by hon. Jimmy Akena. 

6.26
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing this matter to a conclusion. The matter of Basajjabalaba and properties in Kampala is not new. You remember there was the Chris Mudola Commission. I do not know whether the committee benefited from the report of the Chris Mudola Commission. In fact, that report discovered that many of these companies that were being awarded contracts were not legally registered. That is how the then Local Government Minister, hon. Bidandi Ssali stopped the acquisition of City Square. 

Actually, we need to re-examine that report and do not be surprised when you discover that actually, tax-payers’ money is being given to companies that were not registered at the time they are purporting to have won those tenders. 

That brings me to pages 52 and 53 of the report. On page 52, the committee noted with concern that in this case, the President signed letters directing settlement of claims without knowing the quantum of the claim contained in the letters he referred to as having been drafted for him, which caused the tax-payer such great losses. That is the report of the committee. 

On page 53, at the end, the committee, in view of the above findings, observed that the President played an evident role in the compensation process. Madam Speaker, you are actually going to discover that while two ministers have resigned today, bringing the total vacancies to 13, it is evident where the problem emanates and we must take the bull by its horns. We are talking about resources of our country, not for ourselves, but also for our children. What is that that sends ministers to make these errors? What is it that sends ministers to make these misjudgments including professors with First Class law degrees? That is what Parliament must address. 

I know that for different reasons, there are people who are uncomfortable to even mention the name of the first culprit. We must be able to tell the chief executive that enough is enough. A commission of inquiry -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one more minute. Please, conclude.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Therefore, I had expected Parliament to make recommendations on each of the persons mentioned in this report, including the chief executive. In fact, the Leader of Government Business should have reported to Parliament that the chief executive is also very sorry for his role. But when you are asking ministers and coercing them to resign while forgetting that actually, the matter starts and ends with your boss, then you are doing a disservice to this country.

Therefore, as we conclude this report, Parliament must embark on the process of bringing the chief executive to order. It was not by mistake that those of you who framed the Constitution put a provision in the Constitution that the chief executive can also be removed. Thirteen ministers; we have three ministers who are in the courts of law for corruption; we have the three who have resigned; there are five ministers this Parliament did not approve; and in total, you have 13 vacancies in Cabinet. Isn’t the person constituting Cabinet also a problem? (Member timed out.)

6.31
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. If it was possible, I would have donated my three minutes to hon. Ssemujju Nganda to complete that particular part. 

Colleagues have discussed this report and I want to discuss the smallest matter in this report, but a very important one to the people of Uganda, especially the poor.

I must tell this House that I grew up as a market vendor in Mukono and that by that time, if the government had sold off the markets, I would be one of the owners of the markets in Mukono and I would be an MP and at the same time owning a market stall in Mukono.

On page 6, the President had this to say, “….why sell to an individual what belongs to many people?” If we continue selling off markets in Uganda either to individuals or the so-called sitting tenants, we are denying the people who will be in need of trading in markets tomorrow, but they cannot afford to own markets in the same stalls.  Tomorrow, rich men will own market stalls and that will be a very bad thing.

Madam Speaker, in addition to that, today, two ministers have resigned and according to the Leader of Government Business, they took responsibility for what happened in their ministries. 

But there was recommendation No.4, which talked about other people. I do not know how I will satisfy the people of Mukono, if I tell them that the government constituted a committee to look into this report and they advised that two ministers, Khiddu Makubuya and Namirembe Syda Bbumba from Luweero in Buganda should resign, but they had no time to look into a recommendation touching Tumusiime-Mutebile. I will have a problem convincing my people in Mukono. They will ask me questions –(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA:  I thank you, Madam Speaker and I also thank hon. Nambooze for giving way. The Leader of Government Business was very clear on that point. We were to meet the Governor and also the Solicitor-General, but both of them have not been in the country and we indicated that when they return, they will be met and an appropriate recommendation made. So, an impression should not be given that they have been spared.

MS NAMBOOZE: For the record, I do recall that the former Vice-President and now Late Dr Samson Kisekka, was relieved of his duties when he was outside the country. (Applause) (Laughter)

I invite Members to look at page 16, point 42, “The committee was informed that in 2007, on various occasions, Mr Basajjabalaba approached the President claiming for compensation as a result of Government having frustrated his investments.” And it was based on this that the President on 30th July, 2008 wrote to the Attorney-General directing him to examine the legality of the claims. 

On page 17, point 46, “On 16th June, 2009, His Excellency the President, wrote to the Attorney-General reminding him about the resolutions made by the meeting ...” and on page 52, “The President also wondered about the motive behind the hurried manner in which hon. Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Syda Bbumba acted...” (Member timed out.) (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No. Let us have the Leader of Opposition, Shadow Attorney-General, then we hear from the chair, to respond to the issues raised and we close. (Interjections) You cannot now negotiate with the Speaker. (Laughter) Let me ask the Shadow Attorney-General.

6.37
THE SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Abdu Katuntu): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to colleagues who have spoken before. I think the Public Accounts Committee has done this House proud by coming up with this report. 

I would like to address myself to the details of the report because it looks like most of our colleagues are just debating generally. You see when reports like this come out, we should be able to note where the problem is; to diagnose the problem such that we have medicine or a cure to that problem and it does not re-occur. 

If we continue debating generally, we may miss the big point and when you look at the recommendations given by the committee, you do realise that most of the problems are within the recommendations.

First, the ad hoc nature - the ad hoc workings of Government have created this problem. Where a President goes ahead and says, “Terminate the contract and let us see what goes on”, really, what happens? 

Where is Government policy? Did the President address himself to the consequences of the decisions he was taking in terminating that contract? I thought that should have been the first thing to do. And the sort of formula that hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya laid on Table should have been first given to the President. This would have helped him to know the consequences of his decision.

Madam Speaker, time and time again, we have talked about this issue of compensations. What is the law in place? Government just wakes up one day and compensates someone who says their cows were eaten. Another person will come and say their bicycle was taken by some lieutenant in the bushes of Luweero and you say, “Give them.” 

I notice that there is a problem. You cannot run a Government like a personal estate. There are rules that should be followed. In fact, most of these claims are bad in law. But because there is a level of impunity and there is no policy, we just continue giving what one minister called ex gratia. It is just in good faith, but you do not just give out money as ex gratia because that creates a system of patronage with people running to you all the time. That means you will have turned State House into a clearing house. One wants a piece of land and they run to State House as if there are no laws and policies in this country for anybody who wants to buy such a piece of land. That is where the problem is. 

You can cut off the heads of these ministers, but the bottom line is: the President must reform. If he does not, all of you ministers are going to be victims at one time. I am telling you. The Presidency should know there are laws and institutions in this country, which should be respected.

Two, when you look at page 27 of the report, the Attorney-General says thus: “My decision on the actual worth is that Government should pay to the claimant 75 percent only of the original claim.” That was the decision of the Attorney-General to the board. And you know that when the Attorney-General takes such a decision in accordance with the powers enshrined upon him under Article 119, who has got a right to vary that decision? Nobody has it. 

Therefore, recommendation number seven, first of all, contravenes the Constitution. Both those solicitors general had nothing to do. They were actually only communicating the decision of the Attorney-General to the ministry. So, why should we condemn them? I find difficulties with this recommendation. The Attorney-General had evoked his powers under the Constitution and taken a decision, which he put in writing before the solicitors general communicated it. What crime did they –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have been added only two minutes because you have raised an important matter, which will have to be responded to.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I was saying, I move that this particular recommendation be revisited. Otherwise, we will be hanging people for doing what they are supposed to do. They had no powers to reverse that decision. But also the person who made that decision has even accepted responsibility. Why should we condemn these people – Ms Harriet Lwabi and Billy Kainamura? 

As I said, at an appropriate time, I will move that we revisit and if possible, delete this recommendation.

The other thing is that I have heard and read a motion here. This was a bad deal and we should accept that, although in doing that, we should cut our losses. I want any lawyer to let me know how we shall claim this money –(Mr Ssegona rose_)– yes, because my view is different. What I want to say is that we need to find a way of getting the people who pushed us into this loss to pay for it. There are instructions that were being made here and there, some of which might be legally problematic. And before you take a decision, there is need to study the details. Otherwise, we need to cut our losses; it was a bad deal. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the chairperson of the committee –(Mr Nandala Mafabi rose _) No, even on this side, there were Members who wanted to contribute and I objected to that.

6.45
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

6.46
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): You know, Madam Speaker, you can easily shoot my troops. Let me also take this opportunity to thank all the Members who have contributed to this report. I would also like to thank the Leader of Government Business for what he said.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I have documents to lay on Table because I know they are very important to all of us. On 8 May 2011, the President wrote to the Minister of Finance with a reference titled, “Corruption through loan agreements and claims.” In that letter, he quoted three cases; the one of $149 million from the Chinese Exim Bank, and the $74 million also from China for digital migration. The first one was for BPO, which hon. Kabakumba Masiko, knows and the last one was in regard to Basajjabalaba, which the letter called a scandalous claim. 

According to the letter, it was scandalous that Government of Uganda owed Basajjabalaba Shs 142.5 billion on account of his adventures on the Kampala City Council markets. In the same letter, the President said in parts thus: “That cannot be acceptable to me.” 

The other document I have with me was written by the Governor of Bank of Uganda addressed to the Auditor General, Mr F. Muwanga. This letter is referenced under, “Claims for compensation by HABA Group of Companies.” It is dated 16 June 2011, and gives all the details about all the claims that took place. Let me read some of the interesting paragraphs. One of them says, “The above letters of comfort were issued in anticipation of receipt of payment from the Government of Uganda as compensation for HABA Group as advised by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and as guided by His Excellency the President.” But of interest are the guarantees that started as far back as January 2010. By the time the President wrote some of these letters, over $64 million had been guaranteed. I will table two of the letters. 

There is the one that is dated 13 November – earlier on, all the letters that were written to the Attorney-General and copied to the Minister of Finance or to that minister and copied to the Attorney-General, were never copied to the Governor of Bank of Uganda. But the one that was copied to the Governor is dated 13 November 2010, when the Governor already had given the money.  

In the one of 8 January 2011, the President is writing to the Governor Bank of Uganda and asking him to give money to HABA Group of companies. 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable Leader of the Opposition, are you introducing new evidence?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am just making reference and they are very important –

THE SPEAKER: Are they not what came from the chair’s annexures?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They are annexures, but I am referring to them as a report so that you understand the issues, but I can add a copy so that the Leader of Government Business can take decisions very well. 

There is a letter which is of interest, which the Minister of Finance wrote, and that is why the Minister of Finance should not claim that she is not in error, and this is dated 7 June 2010. She is writing to the Governor Bank of Uganda and saying that the money she is going to give is in the budget of 2010/2011, and when you check the budget, the money is not there. Why did she lie to the Governor Bank of Uganda?

The person who did the computation was called Hon. Dr Makubuya. He had set up a committee, but he refused the committee evaluation and decided to sit alone and compute. What was the motive of moving money from Shs 2 billion, to Shs 8 billion, to Shs 28 billion, to Shs 46 billion, to Shs 88 billion, to Shs 96 billion, to Shs 142 billion? In fact, the true amount of money now is over Shs 200 billion because interest is being paid. And he comes and says, “I acted as Attorney-General.” 

We must be serious on this. Some of these people should be in Luzira by now. We believe that they could have got directives, but the computation is also very interesting. 

When I was studying commerce in my O’Level, and I recently went and bought a commerce book, it says, “The Central Bank will have two customers and these customers are Government and commercial banks.” However, the Central Bank of Uganda has more than two customers. I went to the extent of buying the book and discovered that that has not changed. But what is the cause of this? This is not allowing institutions to operate. If you do not allow institutions to operate, it becomes a problem, and we must deal with this problem now. 

I am not going to deal with Bassajjabala because I have no big problem with him, but the money taken could build 250kms of tarmac road. 

The independence of the Bank of Uganda is vital and if the Governor, Bank of Uganda could do this, then it is dangerous. I want Members who were in the Seventh Parliament to recall the Shs 108 billion which was recommended to be written off and we wrote it off. It also went missing under the eye of the same current Governor, Bank of Uganda. We wrote off Shs 108 billion. We contested it but hon. Ssekandi could not help us. We must thank God that He helped us and we changed the leadership of Parliament; otherwise, we would have had that problem. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I am bringing up all this so that you can understand where we are going. In America and Europe, nobody can transfer more than $10,000 without the FBI or the intelligence system raising a red flag. In Uganda, somebody goes to transfer $80 million and the President says he never knew. I doubt that, because if Nandala was the one who picked it, he could wage a war against the government. He could buy guns and that would be dangerous. 

So, you cannot tell me that money was transferred without His Excellency knowing. He should also come here and accept that he erred. The moment you put a signature on a letter, you cannot talk about the people who drafted it. It is you who signed it. 

The Governor, Bank of Uganda is in court with my brother Basajjabalaba over Shs 23 billion. You have a case with a person, and he is the same person you are saying, “Give him more money.” Surely, if the Governor was not trustful of Bassajjabalaba, why would he give him money? That means the Governor trusted him. So, Basajjabalaba was right to pick the money. The Governor should answer why he gave him the money and yet he had a case with him.

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you about the board of Bank of Uganda. The Governor, Bank of Uganda is the chairman of the Board – I think we must amend these rules. The vice-chair is the Deputy Governor. They sit and decide. To give money in the bank, the board members have to sit. In this case, the Governor sat alone to guarantee it. And he knows the rules that the Secretary to the Treasury is also a member of the board and should have sat in the meeting, but he decided alone. To show you that even the internal audit report of Bank of Uganda is hopeless, they have never even picked it in the internal audit report that money had been issued illegally.

Yesterday, we talked about the laws. Nobody can guarantee anyone without the authority of Parliament. We should ask the Governor how he guaranteed without the authority of Parliament. 

The former Minister of Finance, Hon. Syda Bbumba, should not blame hon. Khiddu Makubuya. Having got the demand, instead of sending them to the Secretary to the Treasury to budget for the money, she ran to Bank of Uganda to ask for the money. That is even very dangerous. The Minister of Finance - and I want to warn those who are ministers - has no authority to ask the Governor Bank of Uganda for anything. It is the Secretary to the Treasury who is supposed to do that. That is abuse of office and it is criminal. As much as she says that she has got a clean record of 16 years, we have discovered she has that record. It is unfortunate we never looked very well, we would have got her a long time ago before she went to Finance. But unfortunately, we missed that, but we have got her now. She is responsible for this big loss. 

There was consent judgment. Consent judgment which the minister accepted had a problem. I am sure even hon. Ruhindi knows that the consent judgment which was brought from court was a forgery. No action was taken. Hon. Makubuya should be in prison because he acted on a consent which was forged and Hon. Syda Bbumba.  

Paragraph 90 of our report is very important. If you read it - and Members have referred to it; long before the President directed her to liaise with the Governor – this is very dangerous. We do not know when. When did the President direct her to liaise with the Governor? What we are seeing is saying 13th November. She is trying to say that the President is involved. And if you listened, she said that she was acting under instructions from the Executive. She had a point and I can tell you, Madam Speaker, that we must not take those words simply. They are very serious words. 

We should not leave out people who started the transaction. If you read that document, Eng. Byandala is culprit No.1. We should go back and start from the bottom up to the top. At the recommendation stage, I am going to recommend that staff of KCC who were involved should also answer, whether it is Ssebana, but the person we know very well and whose signatures we have even seen is Eng. Byandala. 

To draw money from the Central Bank, you need a warrant. How did the Minister of Finance ask for money without a warrant? 

I want to conclude. Paragraph 151 of the report is very clear: “In view of the above findings, the committee observed that the President played an evident role in the compensation process.” True, he played an evident role. When we go to recommendations, we do not recommend. We should recommend that “Sir, you played a role, but it was wrong.” 

I recall in 1986, when we came from the bush and took power, the President said this was a fundamental change and not a change of guards.  Earlier on, he had said, “We removed Binaisa because he had made State House a clearing House as the place for issuing profomas.” But he is not issuing profomas, he is issuing invoices. It is very dangerous for the President to issue invoices and I want to clearly state here that we must deal with this matter. Do not fear. Let us put it on record. If you buy a pipe to put in your house to bring water, the pipe does not drink the water. It is you, the owner of the pipe that drinks the water. How sure are we about the owner of the pipe? We must be killing Basajjabalaba. He is just a pipe. There must be somebody drinking the water and this must be taken on seriously without fear or favour and I am ready, if you want us to meet the President, to tell him, “Sir, you are wrong. You must respect institutions and you must stop this.” 

We want to deal with the recommendations. I want to agree with hon. Katuntu on the issue of the Solicitor General - whether the former or the one acting - those were communicating the decisions of the boss. In fact, the person who did computations is the Attorney-General and he is the one who decided. We do not want to kill our civil servants for the sake of it. The Solicitor-General is completely innocent and at an appropriate time, we must delete that. Who are the people in the line? They are:

1. 	The KCC, who started the process,
2. 	The President, who was evident from the role, 
3. 	The Attorney- General, hon. Makubuya, 
4. 	The Minister of Finance, hon. Syda Bbumba Namirembe, and
5. The Governor, Bank of Uganda. 

We should have dealt with the Governor long ago when he sold UCB, but somehow we erred; we told them there would be a problem with this person. He knows why he left the Ministry of Finance as the Secretary to the Treasury, to go to the Bank of Uganda and that is why the Minister of Defence, who was the chairperson, would not talk about it because he knows he was his secretary. Otherwise, if it were the serious Kiyonga, I know he would have said, “Governor Mutebile, go.” But he fears because he worked with him. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. We want to thank the committee of PAC for the good report done, but we shall deal with the recommendations at the proper time. God bless you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I invite the chairperson to respond to the issues raised? 

7.01
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to formally register my gratitude to colleagues, honourable Members of Parliament, for having been very patient with my committee. In the month of January, while we were on recess, there was a lot that was going on in the corridors of this Parliament. There was a lot that was being said of my committee in the media and at that time, my plea was that, “Please, be patient with us and allow our committee to conclude its work to the logical end, and then we would be able to make our report submitted to Parliament.” 

I am very happy that my colleagues were able to give us that benefit of doubt when I told them that we will, as a matter of urgency, submit our report when Parliament reconvenes. Thank you very much for the confidence that you put in us. 

There are number of issues that have been raised, many of which have already been adequately answered, but there is one which has repeatedly come up. Where did this money come from? Yesterday, I gave a very exhaustive explanation as to how unique this compensation claim was handled because under normal circumstances, when Government is to effect compensations either through court litigations or through out-of-court settlements, the vote that is usually charged is the vote of the Ministry of Justice and the Attorney-General’s Chambers. It is from there that this money is obtained through the Ministry of Finance and, therefore, it touches the Consolidated Fund. 

But for this particular compensation, the manner in which it was handled as I said yesterday, Madam Speaker, the known procedure was circumvented to the extent that these compensation claims were honoured and settled through letters of credit issued by the Governor, Bank of Uganda, on the premises. If you can go to my report, under paragraph 113 and 125, a clear reference is made to the letter written by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development then assuring the Governor to go ahead and secure these letters of comfort. She said, “We have got money already in our budget for financial year 2010/2011, where we have already budgeted for money and as soon as Parliament approves this money, we will as a matter of urgency service these loans.” So, it were from these premises that the Governor, Bank of Uganda went out of his way to have these letters of comfort written, to the extent that when these letters were given, the assurance that the Minister of Finance had given the Governor, Bank of Uganda was that within three months, the money would be available and it would be sent to Bank of Uganda and the Bank of Uganda would be able to settle the indebtedness using the money; and of course when this money was not forthcoming, the Governor, Bank of Uganda, wrote back to the minister to say, “Look, these letters of comfort have matured. They are due for offsetting. Where is the money?” and when the minister told the Governor that, “Hold on, we are still pushing,” it is at that point that the debtors’ account in the Bank of Uganda had to be used to offset some of the demands which were being made on Bank of Uganda by the commercial banks.

Madam Speaker, I am very happy to learn that the cabinet sub-committee has had a meeting of minds with my committee in that they have agreed on the core issues that the Public Accounts Committee addressed itself to. We observed that as a matter of natural justice, these companies certainly deserved compensation – there is no doubt about it, but the issue was the amount and the process through which it was effected unanimously. Even when we met as a committee and interfaced with His Excellency the President, we said, well, it is true these people invested money. However little it was, it was money invested, out of which they certainly needed compensation, but the concern was that the process and the amount which was forked out, was not, in the opinion of my committee, commensurate with what had been injected. So, I am very happy that we had a meeting of minds. 

Madam Speaker, your earlier ruling notwithstanding, I wish the former two ministers were here because in their submission, they made factual errors, which I think is only proper for the record of this Hansard that I put straight. When KPMG Consulting Auditors came into play, it was at the request of the Auditor-General. It was not the Ministry of Finance. It was the Auditor-General who wrote to the Secretary to the Treasury advising that he has heard about compensation claims being processed and that he was not satisfied that the amount which had been reflected was commensurate with the investment that had been put in place and, therefore, told the minister to hold on. Let us institute a forensic audit through KPMG so that they advise us on the right amounts that these companies deserve, and if only the minister then had probably gone slow and waited for this report to come out, we would not probably be in the mess that we are in as a country. 

Therefore, really, that was a factual error that she made. The corresponding letters are there, they have been attached to the report as annexes and they explain for themselves what really happened. 

The other issue was about the Consolidated Fund. It is true the Consolidated Fund was not in any way taxed directly. And even when the Secretary to the Treasury and his deputy, and the other senior officers including the Accountant General appeared before us - when we asked them whether we had lost a single shilling from the Consolidated Fund, they said no. They said as far as they are concerned, they have not paid even a shilling.
 
But because of this circumvention of the whole process, of course, whether it is through the data accounts in Bank of Uganda, that is still public funds and still our money just like the Leader of the Opposition rightly said, there are two customers in Bank of Uganda; it is Government and the commercial banks.

Therefore, when you touch the account of the first customer through the debtors’ account, you are already touching in the pockets of the tax-payers of this country. It is already there and very clear. So, this money is our money. Although it was secured through letters of comfort, at the end of the day, we as a country and as a people are responsible and we will be expected to pay it out. 

I asked the Governor, Bank of Uganda that if the Minister for Finance does not go ahead to put this money in the subsequent budgets, how will we, as a country, pay back this money? And you know what he told me and the committee? He said it will be written off as a bad debt. Uganda Government will have to foot it and this is electronically recorded in his statement when he appeared before us. So, these are things that we really have to own up to.

Secondly, concerning hon. Dr Makubuya, the then Attorney-General, you know I sat quietly behind there when he was making his submission as far as bullet number six, paragraph six, is concerned. You will agree with me that the learned Attorney-General was a difficult witness. I have had very many witnesses appear before committees of Parliament, but the then learned Attorney-General was a very difficult and uncooperative witness. 

I wish he was here because at first, when he appeared before us and saw the sensitivity and gravity of the issues, he first came and said, “No, I am no longer the Attorney-General. I have no access to that office and neither do I have access to the staff.” I had to write to the current Attorney-General, hon. Peter Nyombi, requesting him to grant unlimited access to hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya so that he can get to the office and get access to documents and staff. Indeed, hon. Peter Nyombi accepted and wrote back to me and copied to hon. Khiddu Makubuya that he had unlimited access; he should come and he would be accorded all the support he needed.

Of course, hon. Makubuya should have known it better than all of us, especially me a lay man, that Article 164(2) is written in plain language. You do not have to go to law school to know what it means and I think the other honourable colleague did cite Article 164(2), which literally provides that you are personally held accountable for your omissions and commissions while in a public office, whether you have left or not. 

So, for Dr Makubuya to come up and resist appearing before the committee because he was no longer the Attorney-General and that I should call hon. Nyombi to appear and explain for actions, which were carried out by him - I thought that was something really far-fetched and as a lawyer, he should not have taken that path.

As if that was not enough, Madam Speaker, you remember I came and met you with my vice and the lead counsel when hon. Makubuya refused to appear before us. We even went to you to seek your advice if we could invoke the Privileges Act and indeed you went ahead and wrote back to me to say, yes, we could invoke the Privileges Act, whereby we summon him under the signature of the Clerk to Parliament under your supervision.

While we were about to do this, we realised that Mr Aeneas Tandekwire had resigned and technical as he is, we feared even making one of the deputy clerks sign the letter because he would come and say we had no clerk. We knew he was going to say so, so we refused to take that path until I came around and said, “Okay, let me now issue summons to hon. Khiddu Makubuya.” 

When hon. Makubuya heard me on radio during the committee meeting that the Police attached to Public Accounts Committee had a vehicle and they have fuel, and they should look for hon. Makubuya in Kampala, in Luweero or  wherever he is, and bring him to me in my committee in any form, he rang me in the office that afternoon. I said, “But you, my senior, why make fun of yourself? We have high regard for you. You have ever appeared before us and other committees. Why don’t you just come and explain?” When he came - and of course, knowing that he was very uncooperative - I had to put him on oath. 

So, hon. Khiddu Makubuya gave us a hard time. I wish he was here because my colleague Members of Parliament who are members of that committee are here and they will bear me witness. Hon. Makubuya was very difficult.

Hon. Syda Bbumba was a very cooperative witness. Immediately she got our letter, she came and we did not have any hustle with her. So, really, for hon. Makubuya to say that he was not properly handled and that we were unfair to make that remark that he was a very difficult witness is an understatement.

On the other side, I also want to assure hon. Makubuya that as a committee of Parliament, our recommendations are not conclusive. That is the reason we have submitted it to Parliament and as an institution to which we are responsible and answerable; Parliament can amend our recommendations. As if that is not enough, there are also other institutions of Government like the IGG and CID, which are more competent in carrying out investigations that may lead to prosecutions, which powers my committee does not have.

That is the reason we went ahead to say, let the Office of the IGG and CID interest themselves and conduct further investigations into this matter so that appropriate action can be taken, because in making such a recommendation, we do accept that we have got limited powers as a committee of Parliament and our recommendations are not conclusive.

There is another question, which has been asked of the relationship between HABA and the other four member companies. HABA Group of Companies has what I will call - they are not really subsidiary companies because all of them are registered in their own right and I want to assure you, honourable colleagues, it is true there has been another statement made that these companies did not have registration certificates.

I want to make it very clear that we worked closely with the Registrar of Companies and we obtained certificates of registration of these companies. These companies are duly registered. HABA Group of Companies is registered as a company, Yudaya International is registered, First Merchant is registered and the others are all registered.

We have got the certified photocopied registration certificates in our possession. They are certified by the Registrar of Companies. The only arrangement - and of course when you look through the directors - one can have a feeling that these are family companies. These directors seem to be related either through business or blood, I do not know, but they are closely related. That is the reason it became easy for the four companies to give out powers of attorney to HABA Group of Companies to act on their behalf in as far as a follow-up of these compensation claims are concerned.

Another question, which has been asked of us is, how much money are we talking about in terms of compensation? Last Thursday, when I made my presentation here, I explained that, but for the sake of those who were not present, I want to explain the following once again.

HABA Group of Companies was compensated with Shs 142.6 billion. There is the additional Shs 27 billion, which, of course, the President talked about, which comes to Shs 169 billion, but that Shs 27 billion covers Nakawa Market. The Auditor-General has not submitted that report to us yet. So, right now, the figure we are talking about conclusively, as required by our Rules of Procedure, is Shs 142.6 billion.

I am talking about what has been forked out. If we were to talk about interest, certainly it would be much higher than that. Why do I say so? This is because according to our Rules of Procedure and the mandate of the Public Accounts Committee, our work is generated from the audited books of accounts of the Auditor-General.

The committee has not officially received a reflection from the Auditor-General in as far as the Shs 27 billion for Nakawa Market is concerned and the Auditor General assured us that, that will come in the next report that he will be issuing out. So, the figure we are talking about is Shs 142 billion and not Shs 166 billion as mentioned earlier on.

There is also the question which was raised by hon. Sanjay Tanna about the position of Constitutional Square. For those of you who have got the attachments, I refer you to a cutting from the New Vision newspaper of Friday, June 15th 2001. This is where Kampala City Council then took a decision to lease out the Constitutional Square.

It was not in any way de-gazetted, but for them, they took a decision as a Council that, “The Council feels that every effort must be made not only to preserve, but also to enhance the dignity of this nation’s symbol. The Council has, therefore, had the Constitutional Square re-designed in what is intended to be an aesthetically stunning monument of the Constitution and the people of Uganda.”

Therefore, this was a decision taken by the Council and when they made their advert inviting tenders, it was through this document that Yudaya International applied to obtain this tender. As you can recall from my report, it was the only firm that applied and that way of course, they earned it although my committee rightly asked why they did not re-advertise in order to call for more bids.

Concerning registration of the companies, I think I have already explained that. 

Last but not least is the question of the two acting solicitors-general who handled this matter. As the chair of this committee with the technical input that has been made by our lawyers on both sides, I concede on that recommendation of the two acting solicitors-general, that is Justice Bill Kainanura and Harriet Lwabi because indeed rightly, they were executing their normal duties.

The Attorney-General had no powers to directly write to the Secretary to the Treasury. The best he could do would be to write to his counterpart the minister and, therefore, the decision of the Attorney-General had only to be communicated to the Secretary to Treasury by the two acting solicitors-general and indeed they were carrying out their civil service role.

For example, for a person like Harriet Lwabi, she only wrote two letters. She actually came at the end tail of this transaction. So, based on that, I wish to concede on that recommendation as has been demanded by the Members.

I have not had time to consult my committee, but now that it has come here and I see all this, I hope my colleagues will accept that we concede on that. Well, this is the procedure, which is normally used here. As a chair, you concede when you think that you have been adequately convinced by the House.

Once again, thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. One thing, which I want to say for purposes of the record, is that I want these two former ministers to take it that as a committee of Parliament, we were executing our duties. I do not and I hope I will not expect any of them to take these matters personal with members of my committee. They were carrying out their duties and they relied on the evidence that they adduced before us. They relied on the hard copies of the documents that they presented to us and as a committee, we have nothing personal against these former two ministers.

We executed our duty as demanded of us by the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure, and I once again say, let it not be taken personal that members of the Public Accounts Committee were witch-hunting.

That ties it very well with the work of the Cabinet sub-committee, which as I said earlier on, I am happy we have had a meeting of minds because we all dealt with the hard issues that were given to us.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for having been patient with us. I want to thank the honourable colleagues for their patience with us because at one time in January, it was something, which was nearly getting out of control, where Members were even beginning to impute ill motives that we probably had been compromised and that we will do this or that.

I said, “No, just wait for our report to come. We will make it as naked as we have made it.” Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chair of the committee and your team. Yesterday, when we adjourned, I said that I wanted to give the government time to reflect on the recommendations and give us their views. I know they have partially done it today, but they have not done it conclusively. So, I do not know -

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to come at this stage, which I should have, but inadvertently I did not make it. I, therefore, pray honourable colleagues that the House adopts the report of Public Accounts Committee as it is, save the amendments that have been reflected. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: We will come to the recommendations later. Let us hear the closure of the debate.

7.27
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to believe that Ugandans who have followed our debate in this House this afternoon are feeling very happy. I believe they are feeling very happy because I think they have seen a national movement against loss of funds.

Our debate tonight has gone across the political divide and for those of us who got opportunity to do some work on this particular exercise and to be fair to the public servants, I want to inform Parliament that there were public servants who were also fighting behind the lines in trying to prevent loss of Government and public funds and they need our commendations.

Let me, on behalf of my colleagues, commend the Public Accounts Committee and in particular, I think because of his character, but also I think because he is a chairman, the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee.

He has been candid and factual. I was outside this country, but followed the debate on the Internet. Some of our colleagues wanted to move quickly with enthusiasm, but also in the right direction, saying they wanted to censure the ministers they thought had made errors. But hon. Wadri went public and asked them to wait, saying, “We have the Public Accounts Committee and we have not yet presented our facts.”

To some people, this may have appeared simple, appearing as though he wanted to hide something, but he has remained consistent all through up to the presentation he has made. I commend the committee’s chairperson. (Applause)

But Madam Speaker, we need to reflect on what has created this consensus – from the President, the Executive, Opposition and civil servants. I think it is the way this matter was handled. I believe – and the committee will agree with me – that they were very much helped by the fact that the Auditor-General’s report was very clear. It dissected the issue and laid bare the facts, without involving politics. Without that report, I think work would have been a little more difficult. So, the lessons we take are several. For example, that there is a serious problem of corruption in our country is factual. And we owe it to ourselves; we are no longer a colony. 

If we are going to survive, we must fight for ourselves. When there is a wrong, we must stand together and deal with it factually like the PAC, particularly the chairperson has done. My advice is, let us avoid politicising issues when they come up. As long as we have the facts, let us deal with them and nobody will try to hide facts at all.

On this note, Madam Speaker, I wish to give two points to the chairperson of PAC and eventually, we shall reconcile. You may not be aware that when our brother hon. Makubuya showed hesitancy to come to you, Cabinet in unison told him, “Makubuya, you must go and appear before PAC otherwise should they arrest you, we shall not side with you.” (Applause) I have also seen a document which I will share with you – I do not have it here with me. The civil servants in the Ministry of Finance advised on audit – on a second opinion. They did not want to contest the power of the Attorney-General, but said, “Given this magnitude, why don’t we quietly get an independent valuation?” I also have a letter written on December 2, 2010, from the officials in the Treasury, asking the Auditor-General to do an audit on this money. 

I am making this point because you also have information that the Auditor-General appeared to have requested for it. So, there may have been a concurrence of thinking here. There was a movement to try and see where the problems were. So, in order to keep our unity on the issue of fighting corruption, let us always look for facts and avoid politicising them. 

Concerning the role of the President in this, we carefully looked through and I think the committee also tried to be as reflective as possible. In our judgement, even in those letters which were drafted for the President for his signature, there was none that said, “Pay this amount and tomorrow”, whether to the Secretary to the Treasury, the Attorney-General or the Governor, Bank of Uganda. They were always saying, “See a way forward; technical officers, assess the situation and advise.” 

I am emphasising the fact that we need to go out for facts. Of course, if the President is in error, we tell him, like we would tell anybody else. But it is not helping our fight if we try to find some collateral damage along the way, hoping that this will make a political point. The letter hon. Nandala-Mafabi has laid on the Table is signed by the President himself and he says, “Did you really pay that much money? This is scandalous.” He was surprised that such an amount of money had been paid. By coincidence, three parties are in agreement – the President, the committee and the Auditor-General – that although the contracts signed by the HABA Group of Companies did not fully go through the procedure of ensuring that these contracts and sub-leases are cleared by the Attorney-General, nevertheless, using the law of equity, compensate what they spent. 

These were independent assessments, but a consensus emerged. So, the President, in our consideration, acted appropriately to avert social unrest. He tried as much as possible to use institutions under him, including the ministers, to advise him to do appropriate assessment and compensate appropriately. I concur with the committee that if they were to put anything in the recommendations, it could be to commend the President for the effort he made to ensure that due process is followed in making the assessments and, therefore, the compensation.

Madam Speaker, my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi from the “Mountains of the Sun” – the other ones are “Mountains of the Moon” -(Laughter)– spoke tongue-in-cheek. But I want to assure you that there are many patriots on this issue of corruption; there in the Opposition, Cabinet, NRM Backbench and among civil servants. So, nobody should insinuate wrong motives, that by us coming to this point and appearing not to have taken action against the Governor, Bank of Uganda, it is because of fear or favouritism; nothing could be farther from the truth. 

We have given a reason, and it is easy to check, that the Governor has not been in the country. So, for someone to stand here and say, “The late Dr Kisekka was fired while he was abroad” you have to look at what the circumstances were then. Our colleagues, who have today stood boldly to say, “We take responsibility politically and step down” we talked to them face-to-face, and not once - the committee mentioned by the Leader of Government Business. These are our comrades and we faced them, asking hard questions. We told them, “Comrades, between you and us, there were errors on your part.” And we reported to the President. We now want to give equal opportunity to the Governor of the Central Bank. You have given us facts, and we also have some. I assure this House that if we find that the Governor was at fault, our recommendation will not be any different from that we gave about our comrades. Be assured that no stone will be left unturned. In our report, we have said, “People named by PAC and those not named…” because being in Government we also have additional information. Take the issue of people who were drafting letters for the President. This cannot go scot free. We have to follow them also. What was your motive? What was your role in all this? So, the determination is there and it is very strong on this issue. 

Madam Speaker, we will be coming on when we reach the recommendations, recommendation by recommendation, but in general like our Leader of Government Business said, we will go along with the Public Accounts Committee report, but we are also attracted to the issue of the Solicitor-General because here, they were two people involved. There was the first Solicitor-General and the current one. I think here we agree - the Shadow Attorney-General, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee and ourselves - that these surely were taking instructions and so, I think it would be unfair, unless we had additional information, to think that they were playing influence behind the lines. I think at this moment, we have no reason to also put a rope around their necks.

We have been very candid and I think because my brother hon. Katuntu did not have enough time, he did not collate this with what he said. We have said in the open document by the Leader of Government Business that Government has learnt lessons and that we need to rectify some weaknesses. We have also said that we want to bring a law to be followed in respect of compensations. We have said the office of the Government Valuer has been marginalised, but it is so important and we want to strengthen it. So, the candidness and the determination is right there.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would say that let us remain united on this issue of loss of public funds and the way to maintain this unity is to go for the facts and not politics. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I do not know, Government side. Let me thank the government side for their response.

Honourable members, I want to ask the Clerk to pick out the proposals that have been made for amendment and those Members who have proposed amendments on the Floor should give them to the Clerk in writing so that when we convene next week, we can look at the recommendations one by one from a point of information and not just from the Floor. 

For now, I put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: So, House is adjourned to Tuesday. I hope we shall use only 30 minutes to deal with the amendments. Thank you very much for your patience. 

(The House rose at 7.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 21 February, 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
