Wednesday, 15 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I have nothing much to communicate except that we have a very long Order Paper today and we just need to work expeditiously. So, today, I will be timing each item.

2.26
MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance, since you are the one presiding over this august House, about some of the things that are appearing in the papers. We are reading in these papers that some MPs are becoming broke, and then they give names; I wonder who is doing this behind our backs? How do we go about this? It is giving us a bad image. 

I know there is an outcry about the vehicles and the rest, but I think some of our members are becoming a bit erratic in the way they communicate to the public or the press. A Member of Parliament should not go and start giving out false information. They start insinuating that some of us are broke and that is why we hanging onto these vehicles, that we have sold our houses.

I think there should be better behaviour and conduct. If people feel that they do not want the vehicles or the money, come out clearly and say that you do not want the money or this is what you are going to do with the money, instead of soiling other Members of Parliament by dragging them into that kind of stupid thing. Some of us have names and families. I think it is bad for some people to come and start imagining things about us. This is not the kind of behaviour that we should promote from here - going to the press and giving false information. In any case, if somebody wants information, they should come to your office or to the public relations office.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I think this issue of cars and people’s names appearing in the press that they are very broke is not good. When I read it this morning, I almost rang hon. Ssewungu when I saw his name there and others like Gen. Moses Ali or hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba. 

There are some Members of Parliament who sit with us here, they have gone to their constituencies and they have said that for them they do not want the money at all but they want to take it and donate it. I have told my constituents that I receive a salary from the Parliament of Uganda, I am facilitated to travel. We have some cars we came with; if they become old and I am meant be to given some small money to purchase another one, that it is fine. 

Shs 103 million cannot buy a new car, which I see these ministers driving every day. The thing has been blown out of context, and I think some Members of Parliament here are talking recklessly. I do not know whether it is because they want to stay here all the time. I have cars but I am happy to receive this Shs 103 million because I am entitled to receiving it. If I go to Mbarara Municipality and say “for me, I do not want this car”, I would have made a very big mistake.

People sent me here and they know this because even the appointment that I received when I was coming shows that all Members of Parliament are entitled to transport. All of us know this. However, you see someone going to the village and he starts talking about things that are very disconnected. Now, we want someone who does not want this money to come out and tell us why and you return it instead of spoiling people’s names.

MR SSEWUNGU: I am just learning about it now that I am among those people who are broke. First of all, the Red Pepper, which has written this article, contacted me to ask about coming to my constituency and they give me coverage of a double page. I told them that I do not have anything to talk about my constituency now because my performance has not moved to the top level. People in Masaka did what they wanted and I refused.

As a Member of Parliament, I have a representative in the Parliamentary Commission. If our leaders meet and discuss it, then there is no problem. Other parastatals also get them. How can someone come and say Ssewungu is broke, a former blackboard teacher who was earning less salary by then and now I am a bit smarter enjoying Parliament and doing my role very well. What yardstick do they use to determine someone who is broke?

We should also look for the source of this information because personally, I know that my payslip goes to my e-mail, which is not known by anybody; how do they know that Ssewungu is broke, when I am driving, my children are at school and I have a wife? We should also ask those who are writing about us how they are doing this. This is unfortunate from the Red Pepper and I want to state it categorically that I am not broke and we must find out the source of this information. We have a finance department; who released information that hon. Ssebuliba is selling his house?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not engage in a long debate. What I can say is that there is a deliberate plot to discredit the Ninth Parliament because of the reputation that we have gained in the country. This car issue is part of it. What I can say is that we are going to follow up this matter. If it is a member of this House, believe me, I will suspend that member. If it is a member of staff, believe me, we shall take action as a Commission. 

It is a plan, not by accident. Just be ready for more and develop thick skin. This is being done by people who want to bring us down but we shall take action and I am really sorry for my members.

DR BITEKYEREZO: As I conclude, I have a conviction that it is very painful to pretend in the Ninth Parliament because it will catch up with you. I have opted to get the Shs 103 million as per writing and I will buy a car which I want. If some money remains, I can take it to the constituency and do something but nobody will stop me from getting what I am supposed get.

I have a conviction that surely, if anybody goes and starts discrediting Members of Parliament for being broke, I think we are one of the most smartly dressed Members of Parliament Uganda has ever had. We are not bad boys and bad girls. We promise to remain dressing smartly and deliberating very well and we shall fight corruption up to the end.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is not good to have some information and you do not share it with your colleagues. 

Yesterday’s newspaper was somehow showing the source of this information. There was an Opposition meeting in Jinja and they were quoting that as the source. It was from that meeting that our honourable commissioner brought up that issue and his words were quoted. It was Commissioner Okupa. It was quoted in the Red Pepper and the Monitor. 

It was in that meeting where one member raised the issue of Shs 103 million and then the honourable Commissioner tried to explain how this money is very useful to the members. Some were still insisting that they were not going to entertain this because it may be regarded as corruption. So, as you start the investigations, you also dig out information from the Commission because you are near them. You can dig out information from them and know where exactly the information came from. 

Seriously, we need this money; Members of Parliament need to travel. Civil servants have been getting money for cars, RDCs and deputy RDCs also get cars of more than Shs 100 million. Some of us got loans which we used to buy cars that we have not yet even cleared. If we got this money and paid, it would be better for us. There is no need for us to suffocate ourselves because people will fight us. Let us keep our reputation, we get this money and those who want to return the money, let them take it back as individuals. But as Parliament, we need to coordinate with the centre and the local people out there.

THE SPEAKER: I do not want a lengthy debate on this matter. Members are entitled to transport. I do not know why they do not complain about ministers, the judges, the CAOs, RDCs and LCVs. If they are serious, let them go and follow up everybody who has a Government car in this country. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.39
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Ms Angelline Osegge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the following papers:

i. 	The Second Private Sector Competitiveness Project (PSCPII) – IDA Credit No. 3975 financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.

ii. 	The Uganda Energy Credit Capitalisation Company - Energy for Rural Transformation Project (ERTPII) (IDA Credit No. 455 and GEF Grant No. tf9094484) financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.

iii. 	The Nile Hotel International Limited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010.

iv. 	The Law Development Centre financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2009.

v. 	Strengthening Women Entrepreneurs Programme, funded by the Government of Norway, - financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010.

vi. 	Strengthening Women Entrepreneurs Programme, funded by the Government of Norway - financial statements for the year ended 31 may 2011.

vii. 	Financial statements for Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) Modernisation Plan for the year ended 30 June 2010. 

viii. Amnesty Commission Multi Donor Trust Fund Uganda Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Project financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those financial statements are from the office of the Auditor-General who is an officer of Parliament. They are committed to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for scrutiny and report back.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker – (interjections) - I wish you can protect me from former UPC man, now minister in the NRM Government. (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: I am standing on a point of order based on religious principals as written in the scriptures. A man had a log in his eyes and saw a speck in another’s eye. He said, “Look at that guy with a speck in his eye” when he himself had log. Is it in order for the honourable member who is a former active DP youth winger to point a finger at me as if he has not crossed to FDC?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he is just telling us how adept both of you are at changing.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. The rest I will sort out with him in a friendly manner outside. 

I wish to lay on the Table the following papers:

i. 	The Local Government Management and Service Delivery (LGMSD) Programme financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2011

ii. 	Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme - Project II commonly known at CAIIP from ADB Loan No. 2100150017394 - financial statements for the Financial Year ended 30 June 2011. 

iii. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010 for the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) SWAP Development Fund Project. 

iv. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2009 for the Joint Water and Sanitation Sector Programme Support under Ministry of Water and the Sanitation Development Facility - South West Branch.

v. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 for the Support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project II, ADF Loan No.2100150013194.

vi. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 covering the Power Sector Development Operation Project which was financed by IDA Credit NO.4297-UG and SIDA Trust Grant No. TF057743.

vii. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 for the Rural Financial Services Programme – World Bank-04510 IFAD Loan No. 591-UG, 

viii. Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 covering the SIDA Support to Competitiveness Investment Climate Strategy (CICS) Project under Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

ix. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 covering the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources Project, IDA Credit No. 3835; ADB Grant No. 2100155003467 and NDF Credit No. 427.

x. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 September 2010 for the support for national prevention, care, treatment, laboratory services and strategic information and policies for HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases and tuberculosis in the Republic Of Uganda under the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) funded by Centre for Disease Control (CDC) (Grant No. 5U2GPS000936-03). 

xi. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 for Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERTII), Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU) Component (IDA credit agreement No. 4554-UG). 

xii. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 for the Support to research activities at Makerere University funded by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) Phase III, Programme No. 75007369.

xiii. 	Financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010 for the Ministry of Education and Sports under Rehabilitation and Expansion of Sir Samuel Baker Secondary School, Gulu, funded by Belgian Technical Cooperation and Government of Uganda – Grant No. 0601111. 

xiv. 	Financial statements covering DANIDA Support to the Public Sector Management Reforms for the year ended 30 June 2010.

xv. 	Financial statements of the Ministry Of Local Government, the Local Government Management and Service Delivery (LGMSD) Programme for the year ended 30 June 2011. 

xvi. Financial Management and Accountability Programme (FINMAP) financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.

xvii.	Financial statements for Energy Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II), Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD)/Project Coordination Unit (PCU) Component, IDA Credit Agreement No. 4554-UG and GEF Grant No. TF 094484 for the year ended 30 June 2011. 

xviii. Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 covering the Energy Rural Transformation Project (ERT) – Bank of Uganda Component – IDA Credit No. 3588.

xix. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 covering Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project I (MATIP-I) under ADF Loan No. 2100150019294.

xx. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 for the Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II.

xxi. 	Financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 covering the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme – Project I (CAIIP – P 1).

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those reports emanate from the Office of the Auditor-General, who is an officer of this House. They are committed to the Public Accounts Committee for scrutiny and report back.

I want to recognise the arrival of H.E the Vice President. (Applause)

I also want to announce – the notice has just come to me now - that tomorrow at 10 O’clock, there will be an address on creating an enabling environment for the oil and gas industry legal and policy framework to be delivered by Dr Ajee Danladi Mamman. He is a Chartered Chemist of Great Britain, a European Chartered Scientist, a visiting professor at the Nigeria Institution of Petroleum Studies, Port Harcourt in River State and a member of numerous national and international professional bodies with 27 years working experience in academia and industry, including 18 years in the oil and gas industry. 

He is coming to address Members of Parliament. So, members, please, get time tomorrow to go to the Conference Hall and listen to this address as it may inform us now that we have the Bills that we are going to speak on. 

DR AMURIAT: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like clarification on the papers laid by the chairperson of PAC. If you check item 3 (x) and then item 3 (xxix), they are both for Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. Is it the same project which has had two financial statements over the same period being laid here or they are different? My understanding is that CAIIP is really an ADB loan. It seems to be duplication.

THE SPEAKER: There is CAIIP-I and CAIIP-II. I think they will sort it out with their committee because this is a report that came to me from the Auditor-General. They will sort it out in the committee. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST TO BORROW UA 46.0 MILLION AND ANOTHER UA 10.0 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK AND NIGERIA TRUST FUND RESPECTIVELY FOR FINANCING THE IMPROVEMENT OF HEALTH SERVICE DELIVERY AT MULAGO HOSPITAL AND THE CITY OF KAMPALA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented on 15 of December but I have asked the chair to give a synopsis just to kick off the debate.

2.57
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fred Mbagadhi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very clear that time is not on our side and we are well aware that this report was presented late last year. I am just going to give you a one-page synopsis of what is embedded within the report that was presented to this honourable House. The report was about a request by Government to borrow a total of Units of Account 50 million from two banks, the African Development Bank and the Nigerian Trust Fund Bank. 

While I seek your indulgence, I request you to allow me specifically give you a recap of the purpose for which this loan was intended. The objective was basically to improve access to quality and affordable health care services for the population of Kampala metropolitan area. In doing this, the project intends to decongest Mulago National Referral Hospital by establishing two referral health facilities in the divisions of Makindye and Kawempe. 

On the issue of project implementation, the project will be implemented using our existing country structures and systems. The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health will be the accounting officer and this very Permanent Secretary will designate a coordinator for the day-to-day running of the project. Overall supervision of this project will be guided by the Ministry of Health project steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I believe that you all have copies of this report, so I will not dwell much on the issue of observations and recommendations. In the report, we have five pages on observations and recommendations that were made by the committee. 

After the presentation of this report late last year, and since the report was not yet debated, the committee found it pertinent to hold a joint meeting with the members of the Committee on Social Services together with relevant ministry officials. During this interaction, additional concerns were raised by members to which the ministry officials made written responses.

It is at this point that in addition to the documents that I earlier laid on the Table to this effect, I request that you allow me to lay on the Table another document that captured the minutes of the subsequent meeting dated 9 February 2012. It is against this background that the committee found it prudent to conclude in the affirmative that Parliament supports the loan request from Government to borrow the stated amount of monies for the good of our country.

Lastly, before members commence their deliberations, I wish, if permitted by you, Madam Speaker, to request the Minister of Health to take the floor and make a few clarifications. I beg to move.

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Issues were raised at the meetings referred to by the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy and the Ministry of Health has responded in writing. I am, therefore, going to make this statement in response to the issues raised. We have prepared enough copies which I believe could be circulated –

MR MUKITALE: I request that the copies of the report of the committee in a brief to Parliament and the Minister’s response be circulated to members because they are all behind there.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairman of the Committee on National Economy for reviewing this loan request and recommending its approval. 

The committee did a lot of work reviewing many documents and visiting some on-going health projects. Since December 15th – The date is 15th – I propose a correction - and not 21st December. Since 15 December 2011 when this loan was tabled in Parliament, we have hosted the Leader of the Opposition, the Parliamentary Committee on Social Services and out of these interfaces, some issues emerged. 

We have also had a joint review of the loan request between the committees on National Economy and that of Social Services and the Ministry of Health and we have harmonised our positions. 

I would also like to thank the chairperson and members of the social services committee for transparently sharing with us the concerns of the committee. I now would like to clarify on some of the issues that we discussed with the Leader of the Opposition and the two committees. These issues already fall into two categories - One is about issues that are specific to Mulago National Referral Hospital and two, general policy issues at the Ministry of Health.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to remind all of you that as our country celebrates the golden jubilee of independence later this year, New Mulago will make 50 years of existence too. In 1962 when that hospital was first opened, the population of Uganda was less than 10 million while the current population is estimated at 33 million. In spite of the increasing population and disease burdens, the hospital capacity has remained the same. 

Most importantly, due to the breakdown of the referral system over the years, the hospital has continued to be congested, year after year, by patients that should not in the first place be coming to Mulago as their first point of call. This loan is aimed at remodelling Mulago Hospital to focus on its mandate of specialised care, training and research.

The first issue was about what the Ministry of Health has done to improve governance and accountability at Mulago National Referral Hospital. Change of management at the top is not enough. Are there any structural reforms or systems in Mulago to strengthen accountability and patient care?

The response is as follows: the Ministry of Health changed top management in March 2011 to ensure efficient service delivery at Mulago Hospital. The new management has since embarked on streamlining management systems to promote efficiency and accountability.

The following are some of the reforms being undertaken at Mulago: 
Procurement Management
A new initiative of integrated intelligent computer systems has been introduced. This involves computerising the entire chain system from National Medical Stores through the hospital stores and pharmacies up to the end user. New stores and procurement staff have been posted and are working efficiently.

Financial Management 

The hospital, in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, has introduced the integrated financial management systems to streamline accountability and transparency in managing financial resources. A new financial management team has also been posted from the Ministry of Finance and has improved efficiency at Mulago.

Assets Register

Management has registered tremendous improvement in assets management through the use of electronic assets register. The process involves registration, engraving/labelling of all assets that enter the hospital. 

Customer Care

As far as customer is concerned, an information centre has been established at the entrance of the hospital. This serves to guide all hospital visitors including the patients on a 24-hour basis.

Management has also introduced other services like Interactive Voice Response (IVR) through which hospital users are able to access information about the services offered at the hospital by dialling the number 09020000100 or SMS to 8888. Magazines, pamphlets and hospital websites also exist.

Electronic display boards are being procured for easy and quick identification of patients and staff on duty at all times.

Security

Management has put emphasis on security by introducing surveillance systems - CCTV electronic cameras, walk-through metal detectors and enforcing discipline among the security officers at the hospital.

Honourable members, you can realise from the above highlights that a lot of systems have been introduced in Mulago to streamline transparency and accountability. 

Issue two was about how Mulago has used the previous loans. I would like to say that under the ADB loan that ran from 1994 to 1999, US$ 28 million was provided and used for renovation of upper Mulago, formerly Old Mulago Hospital. 

It was also applied to the renovation of wards, plumbing and the construction of the sewerage system in the new Mulago complex, remodelling of the main theatre, construction of an assessment centre at Old Mulago to screen outpatients coming to the hospital. The paediatric unit was expanded and taken to upper Mulago with walkways constructed to link New Mulago to Old Mulago into one Mulago Hospital Complex under one management. In addition, about US$ 4million was used to equip the hospital.

Underutilisation of some of the existing facilities like theatres:

The response on this is as follows: 
All operating theatres that were not in use including the one for ear, nose and throat; assessment centre; and surgical outpatient theatres have been reopened and are now in use. This has greatly reduced on the waiting time for patients for operation.

The Casualty Department has been availed a dedicated theatre for orthopaedic trauma. The trauma patients are worked on as they come in. This has also greatly reduced on patient stay. 

Efficient utilisation of theatre space has also been emphasized giving two shifts per theatre per day, thus ten operating lists per day in the five operating rooms. This has also reduced on patient waiting time to get operated on.

The main labour ward was moved to a bigger space with 21 beds and an adjacent labour ward for the critically ill and two dedicated theatres. This also has greatly reduced on the maternal mortality that would otherwise be registered. A new building was provided for the sickle cell clinic, day care and health education.

Inadequate Human Resource at Mulago Hospital

My response on this issue is that the staffing levels at Mulago Hospital stand at 92 percent of the current structure. However, this structure is under review to provide for appropriate staffing norms for the hospital mandate. The major challenge, therefore, remains the low remunerations for all cadres of staff, inadequate staff accommodation and a constricted structure.

How are we handling other facilities upcountry and KCCA to decongest Mulago National Referral Hospital? 
On this issue, I would like to say that the Ministry of Health is aware that to decongest Mulago will require a lot more intervention including improving services in regional referral hospitals and the health centres within the KCCA area, and those in the districts of Wakiso and Mukono. 

The Government of Uganda is already improving on the infrastructure and equipment status of our regional referral hospitals through the Government of Uganda Development Budget though with support from the health development partners. Examples include: rehabilitation of Masaka and Mubende hospitals under the JAICA support; rehabilitation of Mbarara Hospital under ADB, which is in its final stages; the rehabilitation of 19 hospitals and 27 health centres under the World Bank Project, which was launched recently, on the 3rd day of this month, by the Third Deputy Prime Minister on behalf of H. E the President.

Hospitals under this project in districts near Kampala, include, Entebbe Hospital, Kawolo Hospital, Mityana Hospital and Nakaseke Hospital. Part of the ADB loan will be applied to construction and equipment of two hospitals in KCCA which, in addition to the recently completed Naguru Hospital, will go a long way in decongesting Mulago Hospital. 

These developments are intended to improve health service delivery in the entire country so that only conditions requiring tertiary care are referred to Mulago.

What are the Ministry’s future plans to make Mulago Hospital provide hi-tech services, including private services, in order to reduce referrals abroad? 
The response is as follows: Through this loan whose approval is being sought, we intend to remodel and re-equip Mulago into a modern hospital that can provide quality specialised care to the people of Uganda. 

There will be extensive modernisation of the lower Mulago Hospital, including complete rehabilitation of sewerage, electricity, water, mechanical systems and re-organisation of space. Modern hi-tech diagnostic equipment and ICT systems and software will be provided. All these should help to provide facilities and the environment that should reduce referrals abroad as much as possible. 

It is important to note that both the Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Cancer Institute are being expanded in terms of infrastructure and medical equipment. In addition, construction of a 320-bed new maternal and neonatal hospital is scheduled to commence next financial year after Parliament approves the loan from the Islamic Development Bank that Cabinet endorsed recently and it is due for presentation to this House. 

The African Development Bank loan will also cater for the training of bio-technicians and engineers required for proper maintenance of medical equipment. This is a cadre that is lacking in the country at the moment.

Construction of a new oxygen plant to serve the hospital and the entire country, 500 staff units, a nephrology unit and an orthopedics’ institute are part of the planned development under a proposed master plan.

General policy issues in the Ministry of Health 

The honourable Members of Parliament of the two committees also asked for clarification on a number of policy issues in the Ministry of Health in general and I would like to respond as follows:

One of the issues raised was: what are the Ministry of Health’s plans for an ambulance and referral system? The Ministry of Health is streamlining the pre-hospital emergency care and referral system in the country with support from our development partners, especially the World Bank, ADB, and the United Nations Fund for Population activities, not forgetting the Israel Government. A pilot programme of 10 ambulances and call centres will be established in Kampala metropolitan area through a public private partnership with St John’s Ambulance and Uganda Red Cross. 

Also, under the World Bank, we will be implementing an ambulance service for upcountry districts. An appropriate model will be adopted in a very short time. One of the proposed models is to have ambulances at call centres in districts rather than at health facilities. We are also working with the Government of Israel in this regard and they have offered support. 

Has the Ministry of Health established the staffing requirements for Kirudu and Kawempe hospitals and how will these be recruited?
The two hospitals to be built in KCCA will be developed as secondary referral hospitals and staffing norms of regional referral hospitals will be applied. The Ministry of Health will submit the requirements to the Health Service Commission for recruitment. The Ministry of Health will budget for these hospitals with effect from financial year 2013/2014 for human resources, medicines and health supplies and operating costs. 

The Ministry of Health will also submit a request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for vote status for each of the two hospitals to enable them to be self-accounting and semi-autonomous institutions like all regional referral hospitals. 

Is this loan adequate for all Mulago’s needs or is it partial funding? The committee discourages piecemeal loan requests for the same institution. Our response is as follows:
The loan will go a long way in addressing a number of the hospitals’ infrastructural challenges. As I have already mentioned above, the loan will also be supported by a US$ 30 million from the Islamic Development Bank for the women and neonatal hospital to improve Mulago Hospital complex. 

The Islamic Development Bank loan will soon be presented to this House for review and approval. The IDB loan was conceptualised at the same time with the ADB loan to support the National Maternity and Neonatal Centre. The ADB loan will also assist develop a comprehensive Mulago Hospital master plan and this will guide any future developments and will address human research development including training. 

With this loan and the Chinese grant for Naguru Hospital, four of the five KCCA municipalities will have been covered by hospitals.

What plans are in place for Rubaga Municipality? 

The Government of Uganda has a plan to have a hospital in each of the municipalities of KCCA except the central municipality. The Ministry of Health is still sourcing for funds to cater for Rubaga Division.

What is the fate of the PPPH policy? The Public Private Partnership in Health (PPPH) policy is before Cabinet and will be discussed very soon.

When is construction of the two hospitals starting? 
The designs for the two hospitals were finalised during the project preparation stage and tendering for the works will start immediately the project is approved by this House. Concurrently, the development of Mulago Hospital master plan will also start and thereafter, we will see the remodelling of Mulago Hospital.

During the remodelling of Mulago, some of the hospital blocks will be closed off and patients channelled to the expected completed Kirudu and Kawempe hospitals by that time. 

Why are there issues between the Ministry of Health and KCCA in managing Naguru Hospital? 
Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, there is no stalemate in the management of Naguru Hospital. There are a few administrative issues that we are still discussing with our colleagues in KCCA on the best way to manage the hospitals we are developing in KCCA. 

To explain briefly, the Ministry of Health believes that if we are going to divert patients from Mulago, we should develop KCCA hospitals at a level of referral hospitals with specialised services, adequate human resource, including specialists, special diagnostic facilities and adequate funding. I believe we are in agreement with our colleagues in KCCA about this. 

According to the Ministry of Health policy, referral hospitals are self-accounting and semi-autonomous institutions managed by hospital boards appointed by the Minister of Health but nominated by the local authorities. The creation of KCCA as a central government structure introduces a new dimension because it is not a local authority. I would like to request that Parliament gives us a bit of time to continue our dialogue between the Ministry of Health and KCCA on this and we shall update Parliament on what we will have agreed. 

What is the progress on implementation of interventions to reduce maternal mortality under the Word Bank project? 
Under the World Bank Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project, there is a US$ 30 million component to support maternal health services over five years. Most of this money is planned to be used for procurement of equipment and supplies that will strengthen delivery of maternal health services in the country. Accordingly, most of the relevant procurements have commenced such as the procurement of Mama Kits - about 422,000 of the anticipated over 1.2 million kits - emergency obstetrical and neonatal care medicines and health supplies, 20 ambulances and family planning supplies and equipment. 

Other activities that had been prioritised and have commenced or are about to commence include registration of pregnant mothers by the village health schemes; maternal and prenatal death audits; community sensitisation including, among other people, by honourable Members of Parliament; and the reproductive health watcher system. I beg to submit. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this loan has been addressed by two of our committees, the Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Social Services. So, I trust you have done a good job. I would like that we finish with this loan by 4.00 p.m. at the latest if possible. 

3.26
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for what you have given us. I have three major problems in the health sector. In your submission on page 6, you said you are going to provide modern hi-tech diagnostic equipment. Which is this - because there should be very many types of equipment? There should be equipment for haematology, equipment for x-raying, for looking into your gut and so on. So, I would be very interested to know what this modern hi-tech equipment is. 

I have looked through your submission and this handover from, I think, the Director of Mulago Hospital. This is what the director says about equipment; it is on a page unnamed but towards the back. I think he was asked a question about why Mulago Hospital medical equipment is not functional and he said, “We do not have biomedical engineers to maintain this equipment and we also lack some of the equipment.” If you are going to provide modern hi-tech diagnostic equipment, what is your training programme for those who are going to handle this equipment? It must go hand in hand if you are going to provide new equipment. 

My other issue is that I have browsed through the big document you have given to us and in there you say that you have been training some postgraduate students. Does the Ministry of Health have a human resources development strategy for the health sector? Currently, how many neurosurgeons do you have and how many of those neurosurgeons are about to retire? How many general surgeons do you have and how many are about to retire? How many nephrologists do you have in Mulago Hospital – those who work on the kidney? There is hardly any. What is the strategy? If you are to construct buildings and you provide equipment in a medical setting, they must be accompanied by experts to deal with the issue. 

My third issue is about drugs. The Director of Mulago Hospital was asked a question in this unpaged booklet given to us about why the supplier of drugs and sundries is not available. His reply was, “We do not control supply of drugs and sundries in the hospital, but the NMS tries to deliver. However, there are gaps.” If Mulago Hospital, a specialised hospital, cannot control the drugs they use like chemotherapeutic drugs, and the NMS sits in an office somewhere and determines what to supply, then there is danger. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think I can give you one more minute to conclude. He is a professor of medicine. 

DR BUKENYA: This is my fourth maiden speech. (Laughter) I am also very worried because this subject matter is very important. All of us seated here, our first port of call is going to Mulago Hospital. If you collapse, before a helicopter or a plane takes you out of here, it will be Mulago Hospital. Therefore, I am worried about the way drugs are being distributed. 

I have two health units in my constituency. One health unit is very rural and another is peri-urban but when they get the kits, it is the same. The disease patterns are different and some of these drugs expire. They are even being given diabetic drugs without any diagnostic equipment to see the blood sugar levels.  

I am worried about the management of hospitals and Mulago Hospital particularly. In my old time, we used to have hospital secretaries. They were trained to manage the day-to-day non-medical running of hospitals. You train a doctor at postgraduate level and put him in an office to manage supply of toilet papers and if they are misused, you hang him for what he was not trained for! That is something that is very wrong. (Applause) So, there must be a programme for management. The past is not always bad; some past is worth taking note of. There must be hospital administrators and allow doctors to play their role of looking after patients. 

Finally, I would like to ask this, hon. Minister: you have not mentioned nursing officers or midwifery; what is the ratio now of a nurse to patient especially if you go to Mulago at 10 O’clock at night when most of the patients are collapsing? How many nurses do you have that look after these patients? What is your strategy for training nurse human power? 

If you go to the fifth floor where the deliveries take place, how many midwives do you have per woman in the delivery? You will find one midwife running from one lady to another. How many incubators do you have on the fifth floor delivery? These are very crucial especially if your staff is small and children will be delivered a bit tired and they need resuscitation. 

What is happening? These used to be there when I was young; they are not there when I am an old man. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR OTADA:  Madam Speaker, I have a procedural concern here and I think I am seeing this for the first time in this House. When a loan request is brought and the committee produces a report such as this one, normally debate would ensue before a minister responds. What has happened today is that the chairman of the committee first told us that time is not on our side. We then had a committee report, which I believe we should debate. We also had the minister’s response, which to me looks like a ministerial statement, which is now attracting debate like you can hear the very good debate that was put up by Prof. Bukenya in response to the minister’s statement more or less.  

So, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to have done what we have just done a few minutes ago, to allow the committee to present its report and allow the minister to respond and almost close the debate by that action. May I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had asked the chair to remind the members about the report because it was presented on the 15th of December. I thought that many members had probably forgotten what the loan was about. Along the way, he also said that the minister had issues to respond to raised as a result of the issues raised. 

You know, when it came, the chair of social services objected to this loan and we sent them back. So the minister was responding to the issues raised by the joint committee of national economy and social services. 

3.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I think one of the issues, which was really fundamental, was that we have got so many loans in Mulago for development purposes. The minister should have explained to us how much from those loans was used for development purposes. What part did it contribute and what are the gaps? 

Basically, the minister is trying to explain that they have got only one loan of US$ 28 million and yet in our minds we know there is more than one loan and many grants which have gone to Mulago Hospital plus Government money for development. He has only talked of the loan and not money that we appropriate in Parliament for development. So, I think the minister was trying to hide the facts so that we can approve the loan but he should have answered the exact questions we had asked him to deal with. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you are taking issue with his response? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. I am sure he has mentioned that he interacted with me, which is true, though we interacted with his staff. One of the issues we raised was that we were given money under the Spanish loan, but what did it do? I have not heard him talk about the Spanish loan. Members, you recall the case where we were even penalised Shs 10 billion for the delayed payment? He has not talked about the money which was given to Mulago in form of grants; what did it do? 

He has not talked about the accommodation of staff in Mulago. If you go to Mulago and see where the staff are supposed to stay, even a pig stays in a better place. He has not talked about that and yet this minister has been in the Ministry of Health for over five years. He is even lamenting, which maybe confirms to us that in his five years there, he  has not done anything because he would have come and said, “During my five years as a minister, I did x, y, z and I am now doing such and such”. This also confirms that he has not done anything.  

I am getting worried as to why we should keep on borrowing money for health and yet it should be the first call on our budget because everybody is sick. There is nobody that is okay. This is worrying me - (Interjections) - I am happy they are saying they are not sick but falling sick does not warn; you could smile like Prof. Kamuntu and get out of here and collapse -  God forbid. I know you are sick.

Mulago is our referral hospital, and I would like to thank the Vice President because he has said, “Mulago is our first call before helicopters fly us out”, which is very important. I am very happy that the former Vice President can now see because he is on the backbench. Earlier on, he was not seeing but now he is seeing very well. (Laughter) I am very sure Prof. Kamuntu will see because if you went to Mulago Hospital, it is in a very bad state. What did the earlier money do? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are mixing up oversight issues with the loan. I informed the House that I made a proposal to the rules committee to separate education from health so that we can focus on them separately. Why don’t we give these things you are raising in all these loans to the health committee, if approved, as their first assignment? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and our chairperson presented a report to this House and he has given a one-page summary today. However, we have also been supplied with documents, including the one Prof. Gilbert Bukenya was referring to by the Executive Director of Mulago, raising questions that were asked in the committee and answers provided. The minister responsible for this loan is also doing the same things, giving us questions that were asked in the committee and providing answers. 

The procedural question I am asking is: is our report not sufficient to have covered what went on in the committee that it has necessitated the minister to come and repeat what happened and the executive director to send a rejoinder? I must have missed one or two meetings of the committee but I do not remember some of these answers being tabled in our committee.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I will ask the chair to explain how the documents came here.

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. While I appreciate the concern being raised by the honourable member, I would love to report to this honourable House that what he is seeing as an anomaly arose out of what transpired on the Floor of Parliament. As earlier mentioned, this report was presented to this Parliament and was actually partially debated; it was not concluded.

Secondly, I would like to agree with the honourable colleague that we have a document that has been presented to us, of which members have copies, but this document was presented to us as a committee when we visited Mulago Hospital. That was a presentation to the members of the Committee on National Economy. Today we also have another document that the minister is presenting. 

I think it was a blessing in disguise that at that time when we presented the report, the debate was not concluded. This is because in that short time when I presented this report on this Floor, we realised that there were serious concerns or gaps that possibly could have been omitted. 

Outrightly, in that one-page synopsis of whatever is embedded in the report that I presented today, I mentioned that as a committee, we found it prudent that we meet with the Committee on Social Services to try as much as possible to sort out what we felt were the gaps. It was during that interaction between the members of the Committee on National Economy and the members of the Committee on Social Services plus the relevant ministry officials that these other issues were raised. That is why we have a written response from the Ministry of Health. So, I felt I needed to come up and clarify on this issue. Thank you very much.

MR SSEMUJJU: In that case, Madam Speaker, what are we going to debate and pass? Is it the response of the minister? Is it the one of the Executive Director? Is it the old report of our committee, and I am sorry to my chairman but that has now been overtaken by events?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think anything has been overtaken by events. Let us separate the issue of the loan from the other issues, which the minister has brought up and which we shall send to the committee. For now, let us concentrate on the loan, but all that is good information for us.

3.48
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairperson of the committee. My concerns are many, but let me specifically turn to page 13 of the report where they say that one of the referral centres is going to be located at Komamboga. I wanted to know the criteria they used because originally, this facility was along the way in my colleague’s constituency, which was almost at the centre of the entire division. I do not know what considerations they put in place. 

At one time I was commiserating with one of the commissioners of health about these issues and he said he was also not aware how it came about to be shifted from where it was originally planned to Komamboga. I had a lot of phone calls from the stakeholders. If you are talking about decongesting Mulago, in this case you are not going to do so because you are going to leave the population behind and you are taking it to the periphery of the division, which is sparsely populated. Therefore, I am inquiring as to how the chairperson came to this conclusion. Originally, the plans, according to the commissioner, were for the other place. What did you put into consideration because I know the bottom line was- (interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I am under pain to give information to hon. Sebuliba Mutumba because we represent Kawempe Division; he represents the Kawempe South and I represent Kawempe North.

The issue hon. Sebuliba is raising is: why are we shifting or what necessitated the committee to have this kind of recommendation that we shift to Komamboga? For your information, both health centres are in Kawempe North constituency but of course, serving the entire division. However, when we went out with my colleagues on the Committee of National Economy, we found out, and it is very true, that there were so many issues concerning the land where they wanted to locate this facility. 

Also, the land they wanted to use was only one acre or less as compared to four acres in Komamboga. Komamboga is just a stone’s throw away from Kawempe health centre. So if we wanted a bigger facility of this nature, the only space that was available and that could fit in this kind of arrangement was Komamboga health centre.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I want to give more information about Komamboga. Komamboga is a very good location for a hospital. It is spacious and there is room for expansion for future plans. Kawempe Health Centre is so congested and there are land wrangles. So the information I wanted to give the honourable Member of Parliament for Kawempe South is that Komamboga is even near Mulago Hospital. Therefore, it is better located. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am thankful for the information given but I think it falls far short. I think most of the stakeholders were not consulted. Yes, we can talk about the area being big but when you look at where Mulago Hospital is today, it is not on five acres. I am talking about the original Mulago of independence, the referral hospital. 

Even the people who are running the maternity health centre where we are were phoning me. So, I think there is something that was missed. We could have influenced things in the committee because even if you asked the Permanent Secretary, their original plans are there but I think there was some kind of political juggling somewhere to influence this decision. 

As I wind up, if you want to decongest Mulago, the move you have taken is not going to do it. People are going to come there because we cater for Wakiso highway accident victims - Kawempe South - because it is in the centre. I do not know when you last visited Komamboga; it is good but if your plan is to decongest Mulago, you will not.

3.54
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the social services committee -

THE SPEAKER: No, if you are a member of that committee, this is your report. It is your joint report. I want someone who is not on the committee.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, this report is from the Committee on National Economy.

THE SPEAKER: But you sat down together; didn’t you? (Interjection) Okay, since you are the consumer, proceed. (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, as a clinician, I am standing on this Floor to support the loan for Mulago Hospital and I have reasons. This is a wonderful hospital as long as it is handled well. The new team at Mulago Hospital has inherited a problem, which must be removed; otherwise, they will encounter problems in Mulago. 

The deliveries in this hospital are over 40 per day and you find women sleeping outside. Premature babies produced in Mulago do not have enough oxygen because the pipelines were stolen. The new person at the helm has a very big task; in fact, at some point in our committee we told him to look for Police escorts to provide protection. 

Currently, some people who were mismanaging the hospital were given transfer letters to go and work in the health ministry but they have refused to leave. I have documents from the Permanent Secretary, which I got from my own source. They indicate that the person he told to leave Mulago so that a proper team could be brought in to manage that hospital has refused to leave. She has even petitioned some people in order to be left alone. The person I am talking about is Madam Kantarama. These are things we should bring to this House so that if the Ministry of Health is getting problems, we should be able to help them. This is because here we shall speak the truth, which will set as free. 

If the Minister of Health has failed to report this issue to us – I would like the minister to report to us what has happened to this person in charge of support services in Mulago. Under her, a lot of drugs and machines were stolen from Mulago. Now she is refusing to leave and you are keeping quiet! What are you, as the Minister of Health, going to tell us? Why is this woman not going and yet she has been in Mulago for 25 years? Madam Speaker, what can this Parliament do to remove this lady so that Mulago can function? Right now, Mulago has two parallel administrators. (Applause)(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from you after this very good revelation is: What is the relevance between what you have said and the loan request that is in front of us? How are the two linked? (Laughter)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, this is the relevance of my contribution to this loan: You know that we are going to procure equipment in Mulago with this loan, but the bad machines which were previously procured were procured under this person. How sure am I that when this lady remains in Mulago, she will not bring in more fake equipment and Government money is wasted? I think now I have made my point to you. (Applause) 

If we want Mulago to function very well, we need to rejuvenate it. Let us not refer to the past because we now have a new team. I have a conviction – and we have actually visited Mulago and we feel it needs this money – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please focus on the loan because the committee will take up the other issues. Do we agree to give the money to Mulago; should we decongest it? That is where we should focus on.

3.59
MRS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I support this motion, I would like us to separate money which is going to Mulago and that which is going to KCCA hospitals. Sometimes we may fail to make a follow-up if we do not know which money is going where. Besides that, Mulago is a national referral hospital but we all know that – I support Mulago to get the resources because I know how much it consumes. Moreover, all the districts of Uganda depend on that place. 

However, we are all here based on the Constitution of Uganda. We want to decongest Mulago and build other referral hospitals in Kampala, but we also need regional balance in development. We come from different villages; why don’t we, if we want to decongest Mulago, decongest Kampala City, develop other places? (Applause) We have Kawolo Hospital, for example, that handles many accident victims; why don’t we put equipment there? Is the Ministry of Health aware that we have islands like Buvuma and Kalangala? We do not sail on water, we cannot even swim - at least some people can move for short distances - but this is money put in a place that is fairly okay. Let us give – (Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, my sister, for giving way. Actually, the primary reason why Mulago is congested is not because a large population is moving in; it is because of the non-functionality of the lower health centres and the concentration of the consultants in Mulago. Arua Regional Referral Hospital, for example, lacks five specialists, so in any case, you will be referred here. 

What we need to do is to increase the effectiveness of the lower health centres starting from health centre I up to health centre IV and the regional referral hospitals. By the way, if you look at the statistics – the health minister and her Permanent Secretary are around – how many people get referred from the regional referral hospitals to Mulago Hospital? All the specialists and consultants are concentrated within Kampala. So, the bigger problem to address is the issue of personnel, resources and functionality of the lower health centres. Otherwise, you can remodel Mulago but the problem will not be solved. Thank you.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Egunyu, for giving way. We have been talking about the loan to improve health delivery in the city and especially in Mulago, which is actually a very good idea. I will definitely support the loan, but my problem is how many of our patients are referred to - for example, I come from the East, from Ngora, and our regional hospital is Mbale Hospital, but most of the patients are referred to Mulago. Now, the information I want to give this august House and the minister - I am glad I can see the PS seated the other side - is that in the district where I come from, Ngora, we do not have anything like a doctor -(Interjections)- we have a maternity ward. Yes we are talking about maternal health here. We have a maternity ward - something like a maternity ward - but no doctor. Women die there and even when they are referred to another private hospital in Kumi it is death. 

While we improve the situation of health delivery in Mulago, there must be a very clear strategy on improving the health delivery systems in the upcountry institutions from this very loan. We should now be focusing not only decongesting Mulago, but at what strategy we are putting in place for those other regional hospitals so that someone from Ngora can access Mbale easily, someone from Kanungu can easily access Mbarara; someone from West Nile, Arua, can easily access Arua Referral Hospital, and someone from Kampala can access Mulago Hospital. That way we shall be serving the interests of the people of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS EGUNYU: I want to thank all of you for that information. It is really good. Let us also look for other places. For instance, like in Buvuma we have one health centre IV and without a doctor. Women are delivering using candlelight. (Member timed out.) 

4.06
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Madam Speaker, thank you. I rise in support of the proposal to borrow 46 million Units of Account and 10 million Units of Account for health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and the City of Kampala. As I support this motion, it is important to raise some of the issues at Mulago Hospital for the minister to take note of. Members have commented on consultants in Mulago Hospital. I want to put it clearly that if you go to Mulago Hospital, you rarely find the consultant. If he is there, he will be there for one hour and you will find him in his clinic. But you would have paid for his services. In some cases, when you find him in Mulago, he refers you back to his clinic. I, therefore, pose a question to the minister, how are you going to avert this?

The second issue is the issue of payment. The minister has said in his report that there is inadequate human resource at Mulago Hospital, but he has gone ahead and said 92 percent of the current staffing structure is at Mulago. To me, 92 percent may not be called inadequate staffing. This is sufficient staffing. But as I have put it, you go to Mulago and find no doctor there. 

He also went ahead and said the major challenge is remuneration of these people, but he has not put his proposal of how these people are going to be remunerated. That is the second question minister. How are you going to remunerate them to ensure that they are in Mulago and we access them, and we do not pay for their services in their clinics as we are sending this -(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you for the Rwenzori solidarity, honourable member. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, last year, we talked about a business plan for Mulago Hospital and the argument that time was that we needed this Mulago Hospital to begin generating income for this country like we have seen in other hospitals like Nairobi Hospital and the hospitals in India. What does this mean? It means that the priority that we should have as a country is to attract, as much as possible, the human capital that will be necessary to handle cases within Uganda. We have seen visiting experts who have come to this country and handled heart conditions - they have carried out complicated operations within Uganda without even necessarily having these facilities in place. So, this means that if we can put to good use this huge amount of money and we invest, when you calculate properly, it comes to almost $80 million. When you look at all this huge amount of money that is going to be invested in this hospital, we want to know the return on investment. How are we going to really guarantee to the future generations that we took a loan of this magnitude and this is what we have got out? This is why the business plan is very essential and the mechanisms of seeing that this money is properly utilised should be taken very seriously. That is the information I want to give. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, hon. Ruhunda, and thank you, Madam Speaker. Lastly, we were talking about decongesting Mulago Hospital. I want to inform the minister that one time I stood on the Floor of Parliament and I said Kilembe Hospital, which I also count as a referral hospital, for the last five years has not had an X-ray facility. And when there is a patient, the patient is referred to Mulago Hospital. When they are talking of decongesting Mulago Hospital, you must think of equipping the upcountry hospitals because people are referred to Mulago in the absence of facilities –(Member timed out.)  

4.11
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the loan for Mulago and for the two hospitals in Kampala City. Before I support the loan, the minister mentioned the wrangles between KCCA and – now what happened was that the hospital in Naguru is not functioning. They cannot commission it because of these wrangles. May I know from the minister when they are settling this problem so that people from Naguru and around Kampala can benefit from this programme? Because we are going to build more hospitals in Makindye and Kawempe and if this problem is not properly settled, it will also affect the two hospitals. 

Madam Speaker, these hospitals are important if we are to decongest Mulago Hospital as mentioned, but I would like to see that in this loan, we have enough money for recruiting staff, for drugs and for equipment so that they can become really hospitals which are functional and people will not leave them and come to Kampala.

We have been giving money to Mulago Hospital year in and year out, but the service delivery in Mulago is still wanting. The women are just delivering on the floor; there are no beds for the women; staff and midwives are not enough, and even the mother kits we are talking about hardly reach the women. When we pass this loan, shall we have these services improved? Shall we see that the delivery beds are enough and also those that are moveable to cater for women with disability? We would like to really see services for our people.

Secondly, maintenance of our equipment; we are going to buy a lot of expensive equipment, but without maintenance, they will break down and our doctors will be hand-tied and we shall be referred again to other hospitals. I would like to see that we put aside money for maintaining our equipment, especially the ones for the heart, the ones of scanning the head and so on. We need to include money for maintenance for all this equipment -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Do you want a motion now?

HON.MEMBERS: Yes

4.15
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker -(Interjections)- I have the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MR KYOOMA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Just a while ago, you guided us that this debate would go on up to 4 O’clock and it is now actually a quarter past four. Considering how the debate has been going, I think it was in the same direction even for the two colleagues who had differences about the location and not about the loan. For that matter, I would like to move that the question now be put. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do approve the request by Government to borrow UA 46 million and UA 10 million from the African Development Bank and the Nigerian Trust Fund for financing improvements of health service delivery at Mulago Hospital and the City of Kampala.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion Adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I will give the other Members opportunities on the other reports.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE   COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

4.17
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges presented the report to this House on 7 December 2011. This matter is coming up for debate and adoption. You may be pleased to call debate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members the report was read and left in your custody since December and I am assuming that you do remember the contents and we requested you to internalise it. We even put it on your mail in addition to giving you the hard copies. So, I am really expecting that we are ready to move to the next stage. Are there any contributions on the rules?
Let us start with your proposed amendments. There is no debate on it. I have asked and nobody is standing up –(Interjections)-  when will they come? Because when you do not stand, I assume everybody is satisfied.

4.19
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I was actually still assembling my papers, but I am interested in the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, three minutes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I thought the others are not raising any issues so you could give me five minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Do not negotiate, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee on rules for giving us that report which we have studied over time. The committee on rules makes a number of suggestions which for me are suggestions that directly impact on many other things including the management of the Opposition in the House. 

What I want to submit tonight is simply looking at how the Opposition runs its business in the House; it is important that we underpin the principle of the official Opposition. I want to refresh the House by telling Members that in 2005, this country held a referendum which made us get back to multiparty politics and, therefore, we are no longer in a Movement system of governance in this country.

Therefore, what I would like to tell the Chair of the Committee on Rules is that those are proposals in the report that attempt to bangle the Opposition, an attempt to revert the constitutional provisions that allowed the country to move to a multiparty dispensation. 

So, I would like to argue here that the committee and, therefore, the report, should at every stage of these amendments be cognisant that this country actually has an official Opposition recognised by the Administration of Parliament Act, recognised by the Commonwealth practices and there should be no attempt to narrow that space. 

Therefore, it is important that we know who constitutes the official Opposition in this House. The official Opposition is the largest party in minority and in this case, it is the Forum for Democratic Change for just this evening. It is also the party, therefore, which is not in Government. It is also viewed as the alternative Government. When the people the other side fail to run the issues of this country, this country should be able to call on us, the official Opposition. But also, it is that party which is tasked to check on the government of the day and so the proposal, therefore, to amend, for instance, the designation to the Parliamentary Commission in my view, undermines the recognition of the official Opposition in this House. 

I also think that the proposal not to recognise the need for space for Opposition business undermines the same principle. My prayer is that since we have been in this House under the multiparty dispensation for the last - almost eight years now, I have heard repeatedly from the government side that you need to know the alternative policies that the Opposition has. That has been the arrangement. That has been the concern. I have heard it from my colleagues and it is my prayer that this space that we have asked for the Opposition business, be granted by this House so that the assumption that Opposition has no alternatives to present to this country will be weighed accordingly. So, you give us time on the Order Paper; you recognise the Opposition has business and we fail to use it; so then, you take us on and you say, “The Opposition are just a loud batch of a group that has no ideas.” But if we fail to create time, it will be understood that we will have undermined the institutionalisation of the Opposition business. 

I, therefore, suggest that the attempt to amend matters of designation to the Parliamentary Commission is also an attempt to amend the Administration of Parliament Act. I will be advised by you, Madam Speaker, on how we will amend that Act by amending the Rules of Procedure because the Act clearly defines -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was just asking if the Administration of Parliament Act as amended in 2006 made that recognition; how we get to the Parliamentary Commission and how we are designated. I am wondering if the proposal in the rules by the Committee on Rules is carried tonight; how do we reconcile the two. The Act speaks of one thing while the rules speak of something else. That guidance is what I will benefit from, Madam Speaker, if you gave it to us. But I implore my colleagues to give us an opportunity to be the leading Opposition party, the official Opposition in this country and we will give you the alternatives that will move our country forward. I thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: I just want to make a correction. I do not want the insinuation that my office has not given you an opportunity to speak. There is always a reply by the Leader of the Opposition to the State of the Nation Address in which you state your policies. There is always a reply by the Shadow Minister of Finance presenting his alternatives. I do not want this insinuation that you have not been given space.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, if I made that insinuation, I am truly sorry. What I am asking for is space designation so that we are not being pre-empted by the Minister of Health but we know, that on such and such a day, the chair of the House has allotted this time for the honourable Dr Epetait, the Shadow Minister of Agriculture, to bring in anything that he feels is important for this country. That room to manoeuvre, that room to originate, that room to be creative. That is what we are asking for, but we recognise that the chair has been giving us opportunities to respond to anything on the Floor. I thank you.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Through observation and interviews with a few Members, most Members do not have these reports. They have not carried them. I want to propose and request you that we stay consideration of this report until tomorrow when we are prepared with these reports. [HON. MEMBERS: “Aye.”]

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should also be fair to my office. I wanted us to start with the rules report, but in the Business Committee, I was requested by the Leader of the Opposition that we defer it for one week. But I put it on the Order Paper as business to follow. I am required to convene this House to elect EALA Members in less than two months. I do not have the rules. People want to campaign -(Interjections)- no, I have other work for tomorrow, honourable members. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recognise the urgency with which these rules should be dealt with, but I would like to beg your indulgence that you allow just one day, Thursday, tomorrow -(Interjections)- because there is an urgency. If it cannot be tomorrow, then Tuesday. But the issue is that most Members do not have this report. They should be given an opportunity to look for this report in their records and then two, for those who may not be able, maybe, we could be given an opportunity to have more copies here. These are our rules. We all need to participate in this debate. I thank you. 

MS BABA DIRI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. I am really very surprised that the Members of Parliament do not have this report. This report was given to us two weeks ago -(Applause)- and on the Order Paper of the day before yesterday, yesterday and today, it has been there and the Members again want to have another day. Please, give the opportunity for those who have read the paper like me to contribute. I have the paper here. (Laughter) Thank you very much. [HON. MEMBER: “You are welcome.”]

4.30
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, we held a Business Committee meeting last week on Monday and all chairpersons are members of the Business Committee. I know my brother Milton Muwuma is a member. In that meeting, we agreed that we take one week, then after that, we start the rules. We all agreed and believe that we should have started these rules yesterday. I can assure you that we are ready. I am very certain that there are also Members across who are ready. As hon. Baba Diri has said, it has been on the Order Paper. It would be very unfair to the House if you never saw the Order Paper and it was talking about rules as one of the items to consider. Having said that, since we agreed, I think it is important that we continue with the agreement. I thank you.    

4.31
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICA (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Madam Speaker, these rules are very important and we cannot have a House which has no known rules. I also note your frustration that we have not moved fast enough to have these rules in place. However, looking around, I can see most Members are not ready to deal with this important subject -(Applause)- some are – I said generally. I appeal for your indulgence that we do the last and last postponement of the discussion of this important document and the first thing we should discuss on Tuesday should be these rules, we complete them and put them on plate. That is my prayer. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you are disrupting my work, but since the rules will govern this House for the next five years, I would reluctantly -(Laughter)- defer debate on them until Tuesday. By the way, if you come without your rules on Tuesday, I will just proceed. [HON. MEMBERS:”Aye.”]  So, the debate on this report is deferred until Tuesday. It will also displace other business I had planned, but that is the price we have to pay. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I thought that you had drawn the line in regard to a general debate and that is why you allowed hon. Alaso to say what she had to say. You had made a general distinction between the report and the amendments. I thought that the amendments in their own merit is where the Members are not ready and need some more time for consideration. But for the general debate, I thought you could allow that to go on because some of us have general statements to give and they are not exactly on the amendments –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I am addressing the chair and I thought some Members of Parliament would be more honourable. 

Anyway that is the point I wanted to make and I believe the Members have understood it anyway. So, Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the message I am getting is that Members do not have the text of this report and even in the general debate, they may want to refer to the observations and recommendations of the rules committee. So, everything is deferred to Tuesday. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I respect your ruling, but there are two things that I would like your chair to guide me on and to get commitment from the Members of this House. One, it is important that we understand that there is a time cost. When we come here and keep on postponing business for two days, there is a serious insinuation. The insinuation is that we Members of Parliament are not serious. 

Madam Speaker, it is only your chair that can save this House from that image –(Interjections)– I am a very good heckler, but I do not want to get diverted. The second assumption that I want to make is that you will give us opportunity, since this part of the debate has been cancelled, we shall get back to the Hansard properly for the sake of future readers; otherwise my submission will be lost. 

But I want to be portrayed as a very serious Member of the House who reads the Order Paper three times and comes here to make my submission. I do not want to be portrayed as lazy just because I am part of a big group. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are a very serious person and your submission is on the Hansard and it will remain on the Hansard for posterity. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION TO HABA GROUP OF COMPANIES LIMITED AND RHINO INVESTMENTS LIMITED IN FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/10

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report was presented here on Thursday and I really hope you are ready for the general debate –(Interjections)–  on the report of the Public Accounts Committee. I am waiting for Members to stand up to debate.  

MR BIHANDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee, but since there was nobody standing to debate, I propose that Parliament adopts the recommendations as they are in the report –(Interjections)– yes, because nobody is standing up to debate.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter. We are going to debate a report which directly involves two of our colleagues and when I look around, I do not see any of them here. According to the rules of natural justice, I believe they should be given an opportunity to defend themselves before this House. So, I request for guidance from you, Madam Speaker; is it procedurally right for us to continue debating this report which involves two of our Members, yet according to the rules of natural justice they should be able to listen in and be able to present to this House their side of the matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this report was presented here and those Members were seated here up to the end.  They were here. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, this afternoon, as we checked in and signed the attendance register, one of the persons who is at the centre of this report came in and signed the attendance register and had an opportunity to see the Order Paper and knew that his report will be tabled today. So, really, I do not see that as a justifiable ground in the claim that it is against natural justice. The person came in and signed the attendance register; you can verify that at the table. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear; if there is an issue which touches on a Member, that person has to go to the committee and make his or her case. I am very sure these Members appeared in the committee and made their cases. The report of the committee now belongs to the House and we should either debate or we adopt it without debate. 

I do not want us to apply delaying tactics; this report is very important to all of us. If possible, we should be able to pass it today because it is a very serious matter in which a few individuals are involved. It would be wrong for us to say that the ministers should be here before the report is heard. If you say so, then the Governor Bank of Uganda who is mentioned should also be here and the person who was paid should also be here. I do not think that is the right way to proceed; Parliament should be ready to debate.

4.43
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker and colleagues, first of all, I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee of PAC for the work well done. It is long overdue for this report to be debated in this House. In my opinion, it is the cry of Ugandans that a few individuals can collude to rob this country of a huge sum of money. We have just been talking about loans – I do not know why we need to talk about loans when a few individuals can rob such huge sums of money. Honourable colleagues, Shs 169 billion is not little money. I, Ogwang, talking here, comes from a very remote village where up to now, old women have to walk about a kilometre to access water and we are here joking around. We must get serious in respect to the issue of corruption when we are here to discuss it.

I want to request honourable colleagues to get serious. Some of us have been given names, but I want to challenge the country today and tomorrow. In respect to issues of corruption, in respect to issues of censuring the two ministers, I want to request the House that other than us wasting a lot of time on this, let us adopt the recommendations as they are. (Applause) What is one person here going to say against this report? What are we going to say against this report? 

For us to save time in line with this report is for us to agree that what our colleagues did was entirely erroneous to the country and we should not even be debating what to be done and that is why  -(Interruption)- I will take the information.  

MR MBAHIMBA: I thank you honourable for giving way. The information I want to pass is that this report was duly debated by the Public Accounts Committee basing on the Auditor-General’s report, which is an institution that facilitates us. This report was given to us, duly presented before us by hon. Kassiano. I was here and I have read it and my little submission in form of information is that we adopt this report the way it is. I thank you so much. (Applause)

MR OGWANG: As I summarise my submission officially tomorrow, Madam Speaker, I will be in your office in line with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to move under Article 118 of the Constitution. My few honourable colleagues and I intend to petition His Excellency the President through you for the named ministers to officially take personal liabilities on what they acted on in respect to these huge sums of money that the country has lost. 

I am also told that there are games of people going to court. These hide and seek games of some of our honourable colleagues beginning to think that the only way to delay aspects of corruption is for us to take Parliament to court to stop us from discussing this report are not going to save the country from the problems we are having. Let us ask ourselves; where you come from, are such deliveries to their peak or the way they are? So, my only request to our colleagues here is that corruption is a key to any if at all - it is the one causing us a lot of challenges in UPE, USE, NAADS – you name it. It is everywhere and I am happy there has been talk in the country that we are only looking at the small fish while leaving the big ones. 

Now this is the time; I am on the Local Government Accounts Committee and I want to bring this to the attention of my brother from Sembabule. My chairman, hon. Jack Sabiti is here. The way money is squandered in Sembabule District is like there is no local government in Sembabule. (Laughter) Now, where are we heading, there are districts like Buyende and Moyo - where are we heading as a country if we do not begin saying “No” to corruption - my own district Bukedea – in my own opinion, as I sit down, I want us to totally pass the recommendations the way they are. I thank you. (Applause)

4.48
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, allow me to thank the hon. Kassiano Wadri’s committee for a well researched report presented to this House.  

As the previous speaker, hon. Ogwang, has put it, what is there in this report that you are going to question? Because whatever is there is based on documentary evidence, letters written and analysis of documents and I request that we adopt the report as it is.

Secondly, there are other issues which also come out of this report when you look at the letters written by the Governor, Bank of Uganda, the Haba CEO, and then the letters were also bringing out something more – more fraud. One of the letters was also used as it is, to defraud Government of 23 acres of land belonging to UBC. One of the letters quoted in this report – these comfort letters written by the Governor like the one written to Tropical Bank of $10 million was used to defraud UBC of 23 acres here in Bugolobi by again Basajjabalaba and his companies. 

Looking again at the speed at which it was handled, we have got compensation of our cooperators whose money was taken during the liberation war, property was taken and up to today, they have never been compensated. We have got school children who were involved in an accident with an Army truck in Masaka at Kyabakuza in which their limbs were cut and some died but up to today, nothing has ever taken place. Those are students, but now look at the speed of compensating one person.

Madam Speaker, there is also another issue which we need to look at as we forward some of these issues to be investigated by the CID. Were these documents which were used in compensating Haba authentic? Because at one time in the report, the former Town Clerk of Kampala, Mr Gordon Mwesigye, denied writing a letter and we are seeing the team compensating basing on that letter that is forged. As an NRM cadre, I cannot subscribe to that –(Applause)- I cannot because in our revolutionary discipline and methods of work, one of the issues there –(Laughter)- yes, in our revolutionary methods of work and discipline, one of the issues is that we must fight corruption to the core. (Applause)

I want to conclude by saying that we adopt the report, take it as it is and then forward it to the President to take action against the ministers. He should also take action against the two officers of State House because there are laid down procedures in State House. According to the report, if you are writing a letter for His Excellency the President’s signature - these people did not follow the laid down procedure. What was behind it that they did not follow? As we take action on our colleagues the politicians, the President should also take action against the other two officers who drafted letters which caused loss to Government.

The Governor should also go. One, he wrote letters as if he was writing to market vendors and here we are not losing only money but also land – 23 acres along Kibira Road in Bugolobi because of the letters. So, where are we going to end with this corruption? Where are we going to end with the fraud? Where are we going to end with abuse of office?

I think this is the right time, as Parliament, to show and stamp our feet down as we act. (Applause)

4.54
MS GRACE ISINGOMA BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to express my gratitude to the committee for the job well done. I also applaud the committee for the patriotism that it exhibited. This is real patriotism. I am saying this because out there, a number of things were being said of the members of this committee. When they went to compile this report, some of us had our fingers crossed because we thought they would fail us. Now that they did not, I would like to thank both the committee and its chairperson for standing up and being true sons and daughters of this country. (Applause)

I have read through the recommendations that were made by the committee and realised that they are very clear. I looked at the evidence they used and the signatures that appear on it. I want to say that since I joined this Parliament, I have never seen a report that has been signed by almost the entire committee; I have never seen it. For that reason, after doing such a very good job, I beg you, Madam Speaker, to lead us into getting a unanimous resolution to adopt all the recommendations of this committee so that we can have all the ministers implicated give way. That will help us to save this country.

4.56
MS KYABANDI NAKATO (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that for us to be fair to the parties concerned, we need to discuss this report in details. I am saying this because I understand there was some additional information that was given to PAC by the President, which the committee members did not consider. On the basis of that, I would like to suggest that we discuss this report and agree to each and every resolution. I beg to submit. Thank you.

4.57
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all I do not agree to the argument that because the two Members named in the report are not here, we should not debate it because if we do, we will have infringed on the principle of natural justice. The Members named duly and effectively presented themselves before the committee; they made their arguments that are well articulated and presented in this report.

Second, as you ruled before, the Order Paper contains the items relating to this report. They should have known that this report was going to be debated today. Therefore, I plead with the Members that we proceed to debate this report effectively.

My people of Bubulo County East are extremely disappointed and angered with the content of this report, particularly now that it implicates very senior officials of Government. I want to say that my people have asked me to directly and effectively support all the recommendations of this report. (Applause) And so, I would like to urge the Members that by the act of this Parliament, we should demonstrate that we do not tolerate these levels of corruption. This is institutionalised corruption caused by people who consciously and deliberately want to enrich themselves at the expense of the People of Uganda.

Since this report was written on the basis of a technical study, forensic investigations by the Auditor-General and amplified by members of the committee, surely it should go unchallenged in this House. I support it in its entirety with the recommendations. This will help us to teach those who maybe beginning to think in similar ways.

I rest my case by urging all Members to support the report entirely because we are exceedingly convinced that the report is proper and correct. Thank you so much.

4.59
MR KYEWALABYE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank hon. Kassiano Wadri and his team for presenting this report. I am in total support of the recommendations that hon. Khiddu Makubuya, hon. Syda and Mr Mutebile should go –(Interjections)– they should go, but as Members of Parliament, we should go a little beyond that. Just removing these ministers from the Frontbench is not enough. The only thing they will miss is a Prado Car, which I also own.

As Parliament, we should get very strict on institutions like that of the IGG. On several occasions, we have been frustrated by some of them; we can remove them from the Frontbench, but they will come to the Backbench and begin to enjoy their loot. It is in this spirit that we should be very strict on these institutions. These people have to be punished.

Two, I would like to say that the report is a little soft in regard to recommendation number three. This recommendation is just telling the President to take note of the violations, guidelines and procedures by his subordinates and move to rectify them. Yes, but that is not enough. The designers of the looting are still there working. What I am saying is that this recommendation should be very clear and precise; to ask the President to ensure the these Members cease to be members of Cabinet.

Let me say something about recommendation number seven on the Solicitor-General and Ms Lwabi Harriet. This recommendation is also soft. These people are still in office. We should first relieve them of their duties before we call upon the IGG to take over the matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.02
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some of us who are 100 percent opposed to one-person pocketing Shs 159 billion when pregnant mothers are dying in hospitals and deliveries being performed without gloves; when teachers don’t have salaries – you remember we were here looking for Shs 75 billion to help Government increase teachers’ salaries, but we could not get it. The custodians of the ministries ate these ministries to their bone marrows and left those ministries with nothing and now, Ugandans are suffering.

I am reliably informed that some of our honourable Members of Parliament take a lot of trouble to lobby the President to appoint them ministers, after going through the elections. Is this the reason why people lobby for ministerial appointments; to steal the country’s resources? What is your problem? (Laughter)

From the bottom of my heart, I would like to express my appreciation in regard to the work of hon. Kassiano Wadri and his group. Thank you so much. You have made us proud. This Parliament will always remember and I know Ugandans will never forget you in their lives. The only important thing we know now is that we have to set a mark. 

At the beginning of this year, I sent a message to every Member of Parliament, including you -(Laughter)- that I was very determined to fight corruption, and I should not be corrupt myself. That is what I said. I have no option. The people of Mbarara Municipality who are listening to me and who are seeing me now on TV – I went to Mbarara and they told me to come here and I appended my signature on these documents so that the two ministers can leave these ministries as soon as possible. We are very worried that even where they are now, they must be making some mistakes. They have not repented properly. They were denying; they were saying that somebody told them to do the work. 

My advice to the Frontbench – I was kindly reminding all of you that in case your appointing authority errors and he wants you to make a mistake, isn’t there a possibility for you, in a humble manner, to advise that this is not possible. Will somebody sack you in case you say there is a problem here? 

Now, in view of whatever I have said, I urge honourable members of the Ninth Parliament to adopt what PAC revealed and send these ministers out of their offices. To me, they should be in Luzira and not anywhere else. Luzira was meant for human beings and I believe that they should be there. I cannot imagine seeing them seated in front of me when –(Member timed out.)  

5.05
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Members of this august House, across the board, for coming out very boldly to answer the call Ugandans have been yearning for. I thank you and I salute you. (Applause)

I thank you, the members of PAC, for guaranteeing security for this country because your noble cause is one of the steps that is going to enable us walk freely in public, and they will say they elected leaders who are there for people’s interests and not for their stomachs. 

I thank the Ninth Parliament for going beyond partisan levels and speaking to the nationalistic issues that should put our country forward. This report has been well written, carefully designed, comprehensively analysed and I think they have left no stone unturned, and Ugandans out there are waiting for the final verdict, which we should make here in the august House. 

Honourable members, enough is enough with corruption. We all have to rally - we have to show the solidarity that we deserve. The solidarity that makes us noble; that solidarity that makes us honourable; the solidarity that should enable us uplift this status of being honourable members and to make Ugandans for once say, now they have leaders under the guidance of the Rt Hon. Speaker, to make sure that they save this country from vampires. This is a threatening issue. If you go to South Africa and some countries in South America, some of the affluent people cannot walk on the streets. Their children cannot even go and study freely. They have to be escorted. You cannot even jog on the streets. Why? Because the very few have just aggrandised wealth and have got this obscene wealth wrongly by exploiting people at the expense of the majority. What are the results? The results are that nobody can be happy in those countries. We want Uganda to be a place for all of us to enjoy and walk freely. And this is one of the noble duties and noble call that you are going to see today. 

When the people of Fort Portal Municipality were sending me here, I made it very clear to them that my biggest concentration will be to get rid of corrupt people in this country, using this august House and nobody can compromise –(Member timed out.) 

5.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson together with the members of the committee for having produced this report, which is not accompanied by a minority report. That means that they had absolute consensus on this report. (Applause) 

Secondly, the report has given some of us an in-depth understanding of the genesis of the mess. We have read the report; I have perused through the witnesses; the committee really endeavoured to call the relevant witnesses, which made the report what it is. 

We now know that the President of this country has been making an effort in making sure that the market vendors or the sitting tenants of these markets were the best qualified people to get the contract to use these markets. I have read through the President’s report and the committee is in agreement with the fact that the President has been on course in making sure that one person should not be awarded a tender to the detriment of the majority of the people. That is on the record.

The other thing that is on the record is that we have seen members of the Public Accounts Committee doing investigations on ministers who have not stepped aside, and the report has come out with recommendations without any intimidation. That is on record. So, it is not always true that when you are investigating Nankabirwa, who is still in office, you will be intimidated or that you won’t be able to produce a very good report. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, may I be protected? 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I thought I was stating a fact that the committee has not indicated that they were in any way intimidated by the two ministers and a sitting Governor Bank of Uganda, who is still in office while they are investigating him. That is the point I am bringing out. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister, hon. Nankabirwa, for giving way. You are right, there has been no intimidation because these ministers are still ministers, but they are not holding the portfolios that they were in when they committed the crimes. A Minister of Finance is a very strong person. I am sure by now if Syda Bbumba was in Finance, she would have changed a lot of papers and we would have had a problem. Likewise, that applies to the Attorney-General. So, it is important that those who are influential should always step aside when an investigation is taking place. For example, Hilary Onek can call Police and tell them not to investigate him. I thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: There is no disagreement hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I was stating a fact that investigations have taken place when sitting ministers are still in Government. I also remember when there were cases here and we wanted to investigate people on allegations that they committed crimes when they were still holding offices, which they had left. So, it is also on this record.

I was explaining that when we set up procedures and we follow them –[DR BARYOMUNSI: “Clarification”]- can I be allowed to finish at least this sentence. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Nankabirwa, for giving way. I just want to be clarified whether PAC as a committee indeed investigated ministers or it was examining the report of the Auditor-General and whether those two are the same. My understanding is that the work of PAC was to examine the Auditor-General’s report and the names of the ministers came up, but there was no investigation on them. I just want clarification on that for the record. 

MS NANKABIRWA: I thought the Speaker was going to clarify on that because we set the terms of reference for the committee and the recommendations indicate that you have done thorough investigations. That is why you are coming up with these recommendations on the ministers and you have found them wanting. If you have not done investigations, what have you done? You have called them as witnesses and you even tried to peruse through documents which they hinted in their submissions and a lay person like me calls that an investigation, but for a lawyer, it may be something else; but I am an assessor. 

I was talking about procedure; when we were in Kyankwazi in January, Members wanted to be given an opportunity to debate this issue, but some of us were of the view that having heard the plea from the chairperson of PAC calling upon Members to at least hold on until they finish the report and then we discuss - so, at Kyankwazi, we agreed to let PAC finish the report so that Members of Parliament are given an opportunity to debate and it has been smooth. So, the point I am bringing out is that it is important that when we set procedures and rules and follow them, things run smoothly and at the end of the day, we achieve what we want to achieve. I beg to submit. Thank you very much. 

5.16
MR TOM ALERO AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Madam Speaker and my honourable colleagues, when all is said and done, PAC members have decided that the two ministers must go. Some of the Members of Parliament have also decided that the two ministers must go. However, there is only one step left for the two Members to come to a full House on the Floor of Parliament –(Interjections)– allow me finish; and we get their final word. After that, we shall go ahead and get our supplies and pangas and slaughter them to act as deterrent measures for other Members who are on the Frontbench here for -(Interruption)

MR OTADA: Hon. Alero, I believe that you are aware that these two ministers are not only ministers but Members of Parliament and they are, therefore, obliged to be in this House everyday including right now. So, I don’t know whether you are trying to suggest that this House should extend a special invitation on a certain day inviting them to make a rebuttal. I just want you to clarify that. 

MR ALERO AZA: Thank you very much, honourable member. In a football pitch, when the referee gets out a red card for a footballer, the referee will first explain to the footballer that you have made this mistake and, therefore, go. Let them come here and we say it to their face that they have misbehaved. Therefore, leave - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aza, what you are saying is going on the Hansard. You are giving the impression that the Members were not here when the report was being presented. They were here. Don’t say things that will damage the reputation of this institution by portraying lies. They were here. (Applause)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to say this, unfortunately, my colleague on the other side is not here. A debate of this nature and issues raised, more especially by the colleague who has just left the Floor, would need the input of the Attorney-General. I don’t know why he is not here, whether deliberately or otherwise, but now that the Attorney- General is not here and I am here, I think my colleagues may benefit from what I am going to say. This House is not a court of law that we shall constitute ourselves and start taking evidence from either our own colleague or even any person being mentioned in that report. The only opportunity a colleague has or any person who has been adversely affected by this report was to appear in the committee or eventually to challenge the findings of the report. I know the background from where we are coming, that this House some time back made a very big mistake during the CHOGM, and in fact it offended our Rules of Procedure that after the PAC report came here, we started hearing evidence, unprecedented. It has never happened. So, let us not make the same mistake. I think what we can do is debate the report as it is because this report is not about only our colleagues who have been mentioned. So, what of those people who are not members of this House? Hon. Alero, are you going to ask the Governor to come here and explain himself? Are you going to ask the businessmen who have been adversely affected by the recommendations to come and explain themselves here? What will be the justice, that the politicians who sit with us have an opportunity to explain themselves and those who don’t sit with us are out there? Will that be justice to you -(Interjections)- I don’t know whether the honourable member wants to give information; I will take it, with due respect, but the most important thing is to imagine that we shall call our colleagues here and try them. Really, it is shabby, but also pains our Rules of Procedure. 

5.24
MR NULU BYAMUKAMA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the wonderful report. On recommendation number five, I would beg to amend and add some other interesting paragraph that: “The individuals/directors of Haba be personally investigated and prosecuted for their fraudulent actions against Ugandans.” Because it has been left out and we think they should also be brought on board and answer the questions. I know by whichever means they influenced here and there. So, they should be investigated and brought on board. 

Secondly, this is a shame to the government and the individuals appointed by the President. I would think that these people wouldn’t even be here. They would have already honourably left Parliament, but why are they still here? (Applause) They should also be out of Cabinet. I beg that once this report is passed, the appointing authority should immediately do the needful. Thank you so much. 

5.25
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My district gets only Shs 5 billion for the whole financial year. Talking about 169 billion; that money would help Buvuma for the next 34 years. We have had a number of discussions and it is now time for key issues. So, my humble request is that as we are emphasising these issues, we should maintain the tempo so that when we get out of here, we don’t say things contrary to what we have said here. (Applause)  

When we mention the Members involved, it is not only the two who are Members of the House. What about the others who are non-members of this House? I managed to attend one of the cross-examinations and one of the persons that had been invited and is suspected to have taken some of this money, was saying, “When you give me the balance, I will give you back your market,” and yet this is a person who took huge sums of money. 

What is the way forward? Now that the committee has recommended that action may be taken, how do we recover the money? The person who was paid according to the documents is still around despite the fact that somebody should take political responsibility. How soon do we get back that money because that money can create a big impact in this country? I think the nation is watching and when we recover, the whole country may be in position to say, “My MP deserves a car of Shs 500 million and not Shs 103 million only.” (Applause) So, my humble request to especially the members of NRM is to – we have this slogan of “paka last” -(Member timed out.)

5.29
MS MABLE BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Public Accounts Committee for this report because as I went through it, it raised one question in mind, whether as a country we know our priorities. Why should the government have rushed to pay hundreds of billions to individuals whose claims were doubtful? This thought crossed my mind because I have a group of about 3,000 people in my constituency who were illegally evicted from Mpokya sub-county in Kabarole District in 1992, and their property was destroyed. The government instituted a Cabinet committee to probe their eviction. The illegality of the eviction was confirmed by that committee and the High Court and in turn, the Government of Uganda opted for an out-of-court settlement with this group. It undertook to pay them Shs 21 billion for their property that was destroyed. It is now 20 years down the road and nothing has been done for this poor group. How could this same Government with its agents go ahead to compensate these people who are well to do and whose claims are even very doubtful? 

I would like to support the recommendations of this committee that these doubtful expenditures authorised by the government agents should be recovered from the individuals concerned. And this very money should be used to compensate these poor people who are not even asking for too much. 

5.32
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. First of all, I would like to congratulate the committee for the wonderful job done. When there was an appeal to stand on the censure motion for the two ministers before this report came on board, I was one of those who volunteered to sign. I actually came all the way from my constituency particularly to sign. 

When we went to Kyankwanzi and there was a soft approach, that we hold on until when this PAC report is presented - I have actually all along been itching to have this report tabled so that we can have what we had begun on earlier, concluded. I am happy that the report is here.

I don’t really think there is a lot that I want to add. Mine is really to give fragrance; the report is properly laid both with facts and in content. You know, during the proceedings of the report as evidenced in what is contained here, the committee interfaced with all those who were named as suspects and those that volunteered as witnesses.

But I want to hasten to note that the chief witness in this matter was the President of the Republic of Uganda, and I want to invite you to page 52 just to crown it all. Page 52 (148), “While interfacing with the committee, the President also wondered about the motive behind the hurried matter in which hon. Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Syda Bbumba acted on the so-called directive when the same people had actually failed to implement his directive to compensate Aramuseli of Katikekire, Amudat district whose 298 cattle had been confiscated by UPDF wrongly.”

The President further indicated that even if he had given directives towards claim to settlement, if he was wrong, the ministers should have refused to implement this directive.

I think that crowns it all. I know on the 12th of May last year, while swearing in, the President informed the whole Republic that in this government, tenure of the five-year term, the only monster ahead for him to fight was corruption. Actually, he told the whole country that he was done with Kony and the only problem now left was corruption. We are only waiting to see any Member either from the Opposition or from the ruling party who will stand up and claim otherwise that we do not have this as our biggest bottleneck -(Member timed out.)

5.35
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank you for clearly answering my procedural matter, which I had raised. I am now comfortable that the Members are actually here and they listened to the report.

I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the Public Accounts Committee for the good report. I would also like to thank the President of this country for the humility he displayed in accepting to interact with the committee and also, in giving the committee more information.

But on matters to do with corruption in this Parliament, we have only been able to open the book of Lamentations. We have been lamenting since the Eighth Parliament when I joined here. We lamented about CHOGM, made recommendations; we lamented on NSSF, made recommendations; recently we were lamenting on oil and we made recommendations. Now we are lamenting on the Shs 146 billion, and tomorrow it will be another lamentation about UBC. When are we going to act as Parliament? 

In China, mismanagement of funds, corruption and embezzlement of funds attracts a death penalty. I want to implore the legal minds of this Parliament to help us and come up with a Bill that makes corruption, embezzlement of funds and mismanagement of public funds punishable by death. If we are not going to do that, we will continue lamenting.

I am not saying that the Members here in this report be subjected to that because the law is not yet in place, but if we have to stop lamenting, that is the only way to go. If corruption has to stop in this country, that is the way to go. It should be punishable by death.

In the meantime, whoever is found to have embezzled, let this money be recovered from that person. Whoever is found by law or in the courts of law to have embezzled, let the money be recovered even if it means selling their assets. That should be the way to go. That will send a message to those who are also intending to do the same because now you steal, you are indicted then you go back and enjoy your monies. So, that is my contribution. I want to thank the committee once again for this good report. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.39
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the job well done. I happen to come from a region nicknamed the land of jiggers and when I look at Shs 169 billion, given to one person as compensation - I come from a district - Mayuge, which does not even have a hospital. One wonders, how poor or rich Uganda is if this money can be compensated to one person?

I want to agree and support the report and recommendations therein. The people of Uganda outside there are crying of poverty and we cannot gauge Uganda as a rich or developing country when billions of money are going in the pockets of a few. We are here for a national cause. We are here to represent the people of Uganda; the voiceless.

Our interest as Members of Parliament would be how we recover this money, because the money was already shared. I was reading the report with some statements that said, “Nyama ntono okaayana elimu nkwawa.” That justifies that the money was already eaten. What does, “Nyama ntono okaayana elimu nkwawa” mean? It is in the report. It means whoever took however small it was, should take that because that is what they shared.

I stand to support the report and recommendations therein with a view of making strategies as Members of Parliament to recover this money. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.42
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the job well done and I stand to support their recommendations in totality.

When you look at page 26, you find that the Chief Government Valuer declined to participate in this deal and if a junior person can decline to participate in this and we have the whole Bank of Uganda Governor okaying this kind of deal, then it means that we have a very serious problem. It either means that he is weak or he has been compromised. Why should I say this?

I remember when we were investigating the bicycle saga for LC I and LC IIs, the same Bank of Uganda Governor identified some errors, but went ahead to okay this thing. What does this mean? It means that there are some technical staff in Government who have learnt or mastered the idea of hiding between technicalities and this is very serious for our country.

Another very serious issue that we have is the issue of directives from the President. Yesterday, for example, we were discussing something which originated from the Speaker, the commission of inquiry into UPE and USE. The issue of the bicycles saga was also a directive from the President. This means that as Parliament, we have to sit down, dissect this matter so that we can understand what is happening with the presidential directives. It seems that members have found a way of hiding and stealing money whenever issues to deal with a presidential directive come up. 

I also have an issue to raise about Basajjabalaba. Every time, this man runs to the President; what is behind all this? We have state agencies but why is it that whenever he has issues, he runs to the President? It means that there is something wrong somewhere and we must discover it as Parliament. This is a lot of money and remember we are supposed to be compensated – those who lost their cattle during the Karimojong insurgency. If this kind of money was to be channelled towards this cause, the Government would have done a great job for the people of Northern Uganda who lost their cattle – (Member timed out_)

5.45
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my friends in congratulating the committee for the wonderful work they did to come up with this concise report. 

I was in the session of this House when the President performed his noble duty of delivering the State of the Nation Address to this Parliament. In it, he stated that the NRM remains committed to zero tolerance to corruption. When he mentioned that, many people doubted him and in fact some of them walked out. Some of us thought to ourselves: “Well, time will tell whether it is so.” I believe this is the time and it should tell us now whether the NRM side, especially the frontbench, supports the President. Now is the time to tell if the statement the President made is true. 

I believe that someone does not need to be a chartered accountant to understand this report and appreciate that the figures herein have a big problem. Perusing through them, I was able to see that there were a lot of monies paid for something called “intrinsic value”. 

Another item on which a lot of money was paid was the project of developing the Constitution Square. That project aborted but compensation was made for “loss of business opportunity” to the tune of Shs 3.7 billion and yet Shs 22.4 billion was claimed for intrinsic value lost. Intrinsic value refers to the value of something which is embedded within - that a business earns by its very continuity in existence. Now, a project which never took off is paid Shs 22 billion for intrinsic value! Somebody wonders why all this money is to be paid. 

In fact, when you go through all the figures, you will find that almost 50 per cent of the money paid out was for “intrinsic value” and yet we do not see anywhere in the contracts that these companies were made to pay for goodwill of these markets. I support the recommendations of this report especially the recovery of the money from the people who are affected by this – (Member timed out_)

5.48
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for their good work. 

I am perturbed by the rate at which these ministers are swallowing our money. Every time we talk about lost money, it is a minister involved. Has this job become a pipeline for these people to swindle our money? Moreover, if you went to the constituencies of these ministers, you would not find anything that they take back to their people. How can one person take Shs 144 billion and you do not consider the people of Uganda? What have we become as Ugandans? We are becoming like refugees in our country while refugees are considered as the owners of this country. 

But I know where the problem lies; it lies with the President. Look at what we were talking about yesterday – UPE and the Youth Fund. It is the President who supervises them but there was no report given to him. Moreover, they keep on extending terms for these commissions. 

I think everyday the front bench is losing a minister and if we are not careful, by the end of the year we shall have no minister with us here. (Laughter) I consider them devil worshippers – (Interjections) – Yes, because the way they take this money, they never think of Ugandans yet hospitals do not have medicines – (Interjections) – Order for what? Women are dying every day and Mulago is suffering and you are here saying “Order” yet one person has taken Shs 142 billion! (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, this country is really sick. So I support the committee’s report and suggest that the implicated ministers should be taken to jail. If they are left here, like someone else said before, we might find that even the microphones in this House have been taken. Thank you.

5.51
MR  PETER  OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join others in thanking the committee for the job well done except that I wish to differ with their recommendations. If we recommend that these ministers take leave now, we shall have done the right thing as the situation demands but ultimately, we shall have done a wrong thing because this country would not have been saved.

The biggest problem we have is facing the truth. In our village, there used to be an old man who used to tell us that in case your father’s pair of trousers is torn from under exposing his genitals, as a child you are not supposed to point it out to him. Instead, you should go to another child from the neighbourhood and ask him to pick the lungs of a slaughtered chicken and take them to a place infested with red ants. He then brings these lungs with a few ants on them and drops around the old man. Thereafter, the ants will take action and then the Mzee will know there is something wrong around him. But for you a child to tell your dad that his trouser is torn, they will say you have seen your father’s nakedness which is an abomination in our culture. 

Likewise, most members find it a problem to say His Excellency is wrong at times, and that is why when they say, “The President is the cause of the problem”, they say, “Ah.” (Laughter) One of these days, you will find a letter in your house written by the President. These are private issues, but one day he will write a letter to your house telling your wife to leave you because he has become very personal. He goes to private issues, which should not be his responsibility. So, he should distance himself from some of these private issues. 

If we recommended that these ministers leave their offices, we shall have set a very bad precedent. Like somebody said, the front bench any time will be empty and we shall have helped him achieve his objective of killing institutions in this country. A country without institutions functioning normally is not a country; it is like someone’s home. That is the ultimate objective - that institutions should be killed and then he remains the only person giving instructions. We should not accept that. 

I would have expected my muko as chairman of this committee to recommend that number one should also take leave - (Member timed out_)

5.55
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. It is such a wonderful job they have done. However, I need to say that to some extent I do not think the President is the problem. I think he is misguided by some of these officers who seem to be helping him in most of these kinds of challenges. 

The problem is – I have tried to analyse it - that it seems that all the time it is senior officers or ministers involved in these scandals. However, this kind of disease is going to carry on and catch the junior ministers, which is going to be a very big problem for this country. So, if we do not actually put these senior ministers in their right place, I think they are going to mess up the whole country. 

I have observed one thing from this report related to the recommendations. I sit on the Committee of Local Government and whenever we go out for fieldwork, we do recommend to the CAOs involved in such corruption issues to make good the loss and pay up in a fixed timeframe. The report does not seem to recommend this kind of practice. Instead, we are looking at getting rid of them. Yes, we should get rid of them but ask them to pay back in a fixed timeframe and probably even arrest them for embarrassing the country and keeping the people in misery yet they are supposed to be benefiting from this country. Thank you very much.

5.57
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for a good report, which should now be looked at by all the concerned people handling funds; they should go slow on embezzlement of public funds. 

I have one strong concern as regards to this committee. It is through this Parliament and through the Appropriation Bill that we disburse funds to the Executive. There is nowhere in the report where they are reporting to Parliament how this money was procured. If Parliament did not give this money to the Executive either through the Appropriation Bill or a supplementary, how was this money accessed? It is here that Parliament should be concerned with plugging the loopholes through which money is siphoned from the Consolidated Fund account.

Madam Speaker, you recall I was the deputy chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee and this issue was raised seriously on the Floor of Parliament, and different institutions came up to advise Parliament. The Solicitor-General advised Parliament, the President, the Governor Bank of Uganda and the Secretary to the Treasury that they should not touch the Consolidated Fund account. But it appears, if you look at this report, they have ignored that area and –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my big brother, hon. Sabiiti. The true story is that this money has not been charged on the Consolidated Fund. What has happened is that Bank of Uganda, which is our entity, is the one which is charging the account and it is now waiting for you, maybe at a later date, to authorise it to charge the Consolidated Fund. So they have not charged. 

That in itself is very serious because under Article 162(2), it is very clear that in performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall conform to the Constitution but shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority. So, the issue is: where did the Governor Bank of Uganda get authority, when he is independent, to charge a lot of our money?

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much for that information. The issue is that if the Governor Bank of Uganda can issue that money, who is pushing to get that money out? The money in the Bank of Uganda is part and parcel of the Consolidated Fund account and, therefore, there is no way the Governor would just dish out that money without being directed. If the minister or the President directs the Governor, it means they are illegally directing these people to get that money out of Bank of Uganda. 

The President of the country should therefore desist from continuing to direct the Governor and the Secretary to the Treasury to get the money from the Consolidated Fund account. Therefore, this report should have mentioned the President - (Interjections) – Yes, they should have mentioned the President. There is no way minister Bbumba or the Secretary to the Treasury or the Governor Bank of Uganda would have touched that money without the President, and the letters are clear in this report that- (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for accepting this information. I refer you to paragraph 151 which states, “In view of the above findings, the committee observed that the President played an evident role in the compensation process.” He played an evident role and it is stated there in the report, and we made recommendations to that effect. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I want to seek clarification from the honourable member and also to guide this House. This is a report of the Public Accounts Committee to this House and once it is presented to this House, the House is free to make specific recommendations if we find that the committee was lacking in any specific area. 

Now that the honourable member has told us that a lacuna within the law, which enables the officers in Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance to appropriate without coming to the House, was exploited, may I seek clarification from him. Given his historical performance as chairperson of PAC, is he making any specific recommendations so that we can guide debate and close the loopholes other than us coming here to lament every time. Are you making a specific recommendation so that we can close up the gaps?

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much for that information. I am proposing, Madam Speaker, that instead of referring to the President, as the chairperson of the committee has stated - it was just in passing - he should be mentioned so that we put a halt to this. I, therefore, recommend to the House-(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way and I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to my colleague. If you look at our Constitution, Article 162(2), it reads: “In performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall conform to this Constitution but shall not be subjected to the direction or control of any person or authority”.
 
This provision is very clear. Much as the President could have directed, the Governor was supposed to advise the President and act in accordance with this Constitution.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the President has an Attorney-General, the President swears to this Constitution and he swears to protect the law and the Constitution. You remember when we look at the Article on removing the President, they look at whether he has performed his duties well - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: One minute. Let him finish.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, we have had one of the highly educated presidents in this country. We used to complain of people who are not educated. He swore by this Constitution, he swore to protect it and he swore to protect the laws and to direct. As you heard, when the ministers were being cross examined, you saw that really they were saying they were directed. Therefore, I propose that the name of the President be clearly put in this report. There is no way we can stop corruption in this country unless we stop it from the top. That is my recommendation, Madam Speaker.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Dombo rose on the Floor and pointed out that there is a lacuna in the law. There is a challenge here because usually Parliament approves but now these advances come from Bank of Uganda and go unnoticed and we come and do the post-mortem. I think we need to find a solution to this problem. This is what we really need to recommend, such that we can come up and pronounce ourselves as Parliament that no money should be released from Bank of Uganda without the approval of Parliament. I think this would really be good justice to this country.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think it is only fair that I explain to my colleagues the method that was used to access this Shs 142.6 billion. 

This compensation was not held through the normal process where the Solicitor-General, after receiving a compensation claim either through a court award or as a result of an out-of-court settlement, he or she requisitions money from Ministry of Finance against their own vote. No single coin ever left the Consolidated Fund through Ministry of Finance. The whole process was circumvented. Instead of using the traditional approach, what they used was to request the Governor Bank of Uganda to write letters of comfort guaranteeing commercial banks to give money in a number of ways. 

Therefore, there was no money removed from the Consolidated Fund through Ministry of Finance but in turn the minister assured the Governor Bank of Uganda that, “Go ahead and secure this money from the commercial banks; in my ministerial budget, I will make arrangements and as soon as I get this money, I will offset through the normal channel.” So, they shortcut the whole process and that is the reason why in this report, you will find that the technical staff of Ministry of Finance came out very clearly. They even advised the minister that, “You are treading on slippery ground, please do not take this path” but the minister went ahead. 

The Minister went ahead and had a lot of letters directing the Governor Bank of Uganda, “You see, do not worry. I already have money there; it will come and service it.” So, at the end of the day, the Governor Bank of Uganda found himself having written letters for US$ 46 million, which now he cannot even service.

When we asked the Governor Bank of Uganda, he told us, “If Ministry of Finance does not give the money it will be a bad debt and that means Bank of Uganda will have to pay it.” Of course, Ugandans come in but it will be Bank of Uganda. It means, in one way or another, we as the tax payers of this country have lost money but the loss has not be realised through the normal transactions that civil servants would have handled. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think Members of Parliament should look at Article 159 (2). It is very clear: “Power of Government to borrow or lend.
Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.” 

There is absolutely no lacuna in the law and the Governor Bank of Uganda clearly is an independent person. By the way, he was the former Secretary to the Treasury and he is also now, I am told, a professor. Parliament never authorised. I also want to agree with hon. Jack Sabiiti that it is true, that is also part of our money in the Consolidated Fund, but not the normal one where we appropriate to run Government. You can call it a subsidiary Consolidated Fund account. He is right and I want you to agree with him, and we have authority over that one also and that is why he brings Article 159(2).

6.12
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to also add my voice to the rest of the members who have extended their appreciation to the Public Accounts Committee. I want to also say that, I salute strongly the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee for his wonderful work that he did for this House. 

It is very unfortunate that some of our colleagues who are being mentioned in this report have been in this House for quite long and because they have been in this House for quite long, I think they have taken it for granted. Article 115 talks about the oath that ministers take when they are assuming their offices. When they are taking oath as they assume offices for their different ministerial positions, they state clearly that they will give their allegiance and that they will defend this country and they will defend the interests of Uganda. Unfortunately, what they do is very contrary. 

I have been talking to hon. Imam Ssebagala and he told me that according to the Sharia law, when you steal for the first time, they cut of one arm; when you steal the second time, they cut off the second arm so that you are left redundant and can no longer have any opportunity of stealing (Laughter). I want to say that these honourable members, some of them are Muslims and some of them are Christians. For the Christians, when you read the Book of Deuteronomy Chapter 5, stealing is one of the issues which is mentioned strongly. Stealing is bad! It is one of the 10 Commandments in our Bible. I want to say that what they did was very contrary and there is no excuse for that. 

I want to also add that if we forgave hon. Syda Bbumba, hon. Makubuya and the Governor Bank of Uganda, we would be doing selective justice. This is because the other day, the hon. Kabakumba was crucified for only Shs 67 million- (Interjections) - on just a mast, but here we are talking about Shs 169 billion!
 
I want to tell you that the other day, we were in a meeting of Rwenzori-Luweero Triangle plan and the budget we had before us for the 40 districts was only Shs 3.0 billion. What does that imply? It implies that if you added up this money, it would mean that 120 districts would take only Shs 9 billion - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Since you are very short, I will give you one minute. (Laughter) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 79 of the Constitution is very clear. Members of Parliament shall protect the Constitution of Uganda. Article 164(2) states that whether you are in office or not and you are a public officer, you shall be held responsible for your actions. Article 164(3) mandates Parliament to monitor public expenditure. 

My prayers are two: One, in all the subsequent financial years, in audits that have been conducted in this country, the previous ones, Basajjabalaba and his companies have been featuring so much, to the extent that he has  been compensated where he is not supposed to be compensated. I want to tell you, Madam Speaker, that if it is in agreement with this House, Basajjabalaba as a person and his companies be blacklisted and should never feature in the contracts of Uganda. 

Secondly, I pray that given that the consensus seems to be that indeed we are in agreement with this report, I beg your indulgence that the question be put.
 
I beg to move.

6.18
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for a job very well done. I also wish to thank the committee for compiling the annexes of all the letters and communications that went with this compensation saga. 

Though some members do not want the President’s name to appear in the recommendations, I honestly feel under recommendation 3 that we should have an additional aspect where the President reviews his directives. This is in line with a lot which has happened. Just now, we have been debating the issue of the Governor and his role. However, the committee attached a letter from the President on the 13 November 2010 addressed to the Attorney-General and in the fourth paragraph, and I wish to read verbatim, it says: “By copy of this letter, I am directing the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to liaise with the Governor Bank of Uganda with a view of settling all the outstanding claims in respect to the above matter.” 

Almost every letter by the President which has been attached has a directive. The first directive was to the Attorney-General to resolve the matter in 60 days. The letters keep on coming with directives to ministers, officials to act to compensate, although the figures are not included. Also, in the written report, which is attached, which the President gave when he met the Public Accounts Committee, he clearly states that he was not sure of the figures, but in the letters there are directives. 

There is a concern that there were people conniving, possibly in the President’s Office, to do the drafts and hand them over for signature. It is these directives, which have brought us to where we are. Ministers were directed to liaise to sort this matter out as quickly as possible. The President admits he did not know the figures until after the facts. However, if it is possible on the President’s directive to take Shs 169 billion and literally it just vanishes, we must ask the President to review how he issues his directives - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: One minute only

MR AKENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We cannot get round the issue that this money was paid out based on directives. Although the President said he did not know how much he was asking to be paid, it is his directives that caused this money to be paid. Unless we address that loophole, we may find out in future that there are more directives which have been issued on various aspects and people are cashing in on these directives. So, the President will have to review, within his Office, how he issues his directives and how the letters which come out of the President’s Office are handled. So, I request the House that let us not leave the President out of this recommendation. Let him review directives from his own office. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, are you proposing an amendment? 

MR AKENA: I am proposing an addition under recommendation 3, a bullet point that, “The President reviews directives from his Office.” (Interjections) I will take the amendment from the youth member of the west; an amendment to the amendment. 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I want to propose an amendment to your amendment that, “The President should desist from making communication that would otherwise be interpreted as directing public officials who in the law enjoy” – (Interjections) – I am only offering an amendment. Let me be allowed to finish – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is only helping us to improve the report. He is assisting hon. Akena who is contributing to the report.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I am aware of the rules. The amendment I am proposing is that: “The President should desist from making communication that would otherwise be interpreted as directing public officials who by law enjoy autonomy in their official capacity.” 

MR AKENA: I think it improves the language.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we ask the clerk to take note of that proposal. 

6.24
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

Honourable members, I think we are moving forward in the fight against corruption. We are going to see so many sad faces, but I am sorry we will enjoy them as they come by because we are not going to tolerate corruption in this country. I know that some of us are not going to enjoy our years here because of the sad faces, but we are not going to be scared by that. 

Honourable members, I support the committee recommendations with an amendment on page 56. Hon. Akol Rose said that we have been lamenting, and indeed we lament; we make recommendations and resolutions and people go to court to block Parliament’s resolutions and orders. 

My colleagues who are victims in such circumstances, I do not wish to see you going to court to block any action that Parliament recommends because so many people have interfered with Parliament using the court. They stop the IGG and Parliament from doing their work. So, I appeal to hon. Syda Bbumba and hon. Khiddu Makubuya, the Governor and even Mr Basajjabalaba to take this Parliament serious and not indulge themselves in court and other things. We are not going to allow them. If they try to do it, we will use the public court; we will use the Ugandans to go against them everywhere they go until we recover the loss they have caused this country.
 
Why is Mr Basajjabalaba in every fraud in this country? Is he the richest person we have in this country? Is he the only investor that we can deal with as a country? I think the IGG should act very fast to recover these losses from Basajjabalaba. He has investments and we can attach them. There is nothing much to investigate; the committee has done its work. 

The ministers should also not just vacate their seats but they should contribute to the recovery of this money. They should sell their homes or whatever they have to recover this money. We need hospitals to function, we need roads. In Butambala, we cannot move around because our road was postponed to I do not know which year. My people cannot transport their goods; this is the money that is supposed to work on our roads yet people are swindling it and pocketing it. 

So, I want a timeframe for this action from the IGG. We should require the IGG to investigate and within two months, they should tell us the action to take or what they are going to do as IGG’s office. We should not leave it open; otherwise, they will go to court or even bribe him because they have much money. We should not give him a lot of time to act – (Member timed out_)

6.28
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the first place, I want to thank the NRM Members of Parliament who went to Kyankwanzi and came back with independent minds to fight corruption. People had developed a fear when they saw you bull roasting but now I think the nation is happy because of your contribution today.  

Madam Speaker, in the same spirit, I want to thank PAC for their wise recommendations. If all committees can work like you, this nation is going to move forward.

We are tired of corruption. Honourable ministers, if you cannot do us a service, please save us from this humiliation. Hon. Prof. Khiddu Makubuya, if your conscience tells you that you ate this money or that you facilitated the move, can you please honourably apologize to the nation on the Floor of this House. I can see you seated on the back bench; if you mean that by your action, please tell us now because people are suffering – (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In order to maintain decorum and decency in the House, the House is presided over by the Speaker and we must address everything through the Chair. We should avoid dialogue because if a member tries to respond, it may result into repercussions which are not good for this House.
Therefore, may I propose that we follow the procedures as laid down in our rules that we address everything through the Chair and whoever is not satisfied should also respond through the Chair?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member, follow the rules.

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Through you, I wish to ask our honourable ministers who know that they have ever involved themselves in any corruption scandal not to waste our time. Please, tell us the truth and run out of those offices. 

I want to thank some of you who have never been named in any corruption scandal for being patriotic. Otherwise, we are tired of this man Basajjabalaba. Who is Basajjabalaba? (Laughter) I want to see him. Where is he – (Member timed out_)

6.33
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my comrades who have seconded the motion and I believe that the decision that is being reached by the House is a manifestation that we are here to fight corruption. For all members who went into the campaigns, I believe that on their agenda or manifesto they must have taken a lot of interest in fighting corruption. One day I came across the NRM Manifesto and on page 60, so much is said about zero tolerance to corruption. This is now one of the items that we are speaking about today - fighting corruption in this House. 

Honourable members, the monies that we are talking about are monies that sometimes can run a whole district for a period of almost 10 years. Like the district of Busia where I come from, the budget for a full year runs to a tune of about Shs 16 billion. Now you are talking of Shs 169 billion! That is a period of 10 years and a district is comfortably covered - (Laughter) - We speak about one particular person taking money that would really cater for the sustenance of the people within the country! I think this is being unfair. 

I join all the members who have contributed in saying that it is very good that we have not got any objections that have come up on the committee’s recommendations. Let the ministers who are already implicated in the report save our time because there is already a petition that is coming. Let them just save our time early enough so that we do not have a petition coming to the Floor for more discussions. 

Members, we are also not going to leave our President out of this scandal because he has written several letters. However, I believe the laws have also given the people within the technical departments a lot of autonomy that sometimes they even undermine the directives of the President. So, in circumstances of this nature –

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER IN CHARGE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): I thank you, honourable member, for giving way. This question of the President giving directives should be clear. The President does not beg anybody under him but he gives orders - (Applause) - he gives directives. However, it does not mean that if the President gives directives, those under him break the law. You must have directives within the law. One should not use an excuse that because the President directed they could, therefore, ignore or break the law. (Applause)

In fact, in this very report, two incidences are quoted. One is of the former Attorney-General, Bart Katureebe. He was given directives by the President but he advised the President that the directive could not be implemented because of the law. The second and most recent one is the current Executive Director of KCCA in regards to giving away the house to Seya – (Laughter) - (Interjections) - I do not know if he is honourable, but Ssebagala. Again the lady was strong enough to say this directive cannot be carried out because of the law. So, the President directs but it does not mean that that directive must be done outside the law. (Applause)

MR MAGANDA: I thank our elder for the guidance and clarification. However, the issue we are trying to talk about is not to put the whole blame onto the President. We are also trying to establish as to why the President has made several communications that the people within the system take as maybe an order. This is not the first time that we are getting such communications from the President and we have found people still persisting and going on with the corruption.

Honourable members, as I conclude, this is an issue on which we are all manifesting to the country that we are fighting corruption. I just call upon all of us that we should not relent, come what may. This is now the right time to stand and say “No” to corruption. I think we are only voicing what the President has spoken about several times. I call upon you that we follow the resolutions in the report, and also ensure that the two ministers and the Governor give way so that investigations can be taken up as we also look for alternatives of recovering the money - (Member timed out)

6.39
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also very grateful to the members of PAC. If you can recall, we have had various committees coming up with reports accompanied by a minority report. We have had various conflicts here and there and at times members get divided along various lines, but this is not the case with this report and I am very grateful.

Many colleagues have talked about Basajjabalaba. Hon. Haruna Kyeyune has been asking who he was and also wanted to look at him. I stand to be corrected, but as far as I know, Basajjabalaba is one of the strong members on NEC and he chairs the trade committee – (Interjections) - I stand to be corrected. He is the chairperson of the business committee of NEC – (Interjections) - Okay, that is why I said that I stand to be corrected. 

As far as I know, in as much as we are speaking to our colleagues who are here, we are sending the same message to the authorities where Basajjabalaba is to also act. I am going to act as the Imam. Basajjabalaba has really been trouble, even in the Moslem community. As we talk now, Basajjabalaba wants to take the whole piece of 11 hectares of Clock Tower land that belongs to the Moslem community – (Laughter) - He has taken it. When we go to William Street, our mosque was sold by Basajjabalaba. So, that is the person called Basajjabalaba. I think nobody is above the law and we must come up and ensure that Basajjabalaba –

MR BADDA: I thank you, hon. Latif Ssebagala, for giving way. I want to also give information that the institution of NRM, the party where Mr Basajjabalaba is in a high ranking office, is headed by the President. The President has on a number of occasions said that we should give zero tolerance to corruption. So, this is a time to help him. Recall that when we were swearing-in, we asked God to help us and now God has helped us through this report - (Laughter) - and this is the time to help the President to get rid of corruption in its entirety. (Applause)

MR SSEBAGGALA: I thank you very much for that useful information –

MR SSIMBWA: I thank you very much for giving way. Hon. Latif Ssebaggala has tried to describe who Basajjabalaba is and I want to give more information. Mr Basajjabalaba is not only involved in the properties which you have talked about; he is also involved in UDB issues where he has got a debt of Shs 5.6 billion that he has never paid. He is involved in UBC land where he was allocated 18 acres fraudulently and went on to transfer 23. He is also involved in Kansanga land. So, if we are to talk about this person, Madam Speaker, you realise that he is involved in every fraud.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, that is the little we can use to describe Mr Basajjabalaba, the person. 

Let me say that the principle of compensation would not be contested, and I think we are together on that. What we are contesting is the amount that was given to him. Can’t we think about the other avenue? Those who valued his compensation at Shs 169 billion erred in the first place. Therefore, let us constitute a new committee or let us go with what was supposed to be given to him by the valuers and then compensate Basajjabalaba – the Shs 50 billion or plus - and then the balance should be taken back to state coffers. That is a recommendation.

Madam Speaker, you remember about three days ago, there was a letter that alleged that the President was trying to change his position on this matter. Those are the tricks that are being used – (Interruption)

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, allow me clarify to the House that the letter read that was published in the newspapers was actually a misinterpretation of what the President was trying to put across most honestly and sincerely. I have a copy of that letter with me and if you read it, you will believe what I am saying. 

The President was only expressing the fact that after receiving the committee, he also received hon. Khiddu Makubuya, hon. Syda Bumba and Mr Basajjabalaba all of whom said that the figure they gave was actually a fair one. That is what the President was talking about in that letter, not that he had changed his position. Thank you very much.

MR BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to give you information on the what you said that some independent organisation should be engaged to  do the work in order to find out exactly how much Basajjabalaba should have been paid. 

I would like to say that when you look at page 2 of the report, paragraph two, you will realise that the Auditor-General engaged a private firm called KPMG to do some work on his behalf. This is an international audit firm, which carried out a forensic audit of the entire business. According to its findings, actually instead of Basajjabalaba being compensated, he owed Government of Uganda Shs 999 million. It was him who should have paid Government of Uganda. This was because after getting those markets, he ran them for some time and benefitted. Government owed Basajjabalaba no money.

MR SSEBAGGALA: My final word to the ministers present in the House now is, you have seen how your colleagues have gone – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Latif Ssebaggala, you are intimidating the frontbench. (Laughter)

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, my word of caution is that the moment, as a minister, you see any communication from the President, please have the courage of writing to him what you feel is the best for our country. Please, have that courage and have that response on your file so that next time you do not get into all this.

6.49
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I did not have any doubts that the chairperson of this committee would produce for us a good report. 

When I looked at the figures that were given to us as compensation to an individual, I was so disturbed. I come from a region that has gone through a lot of problems. From 1986 to 1987, our animals were raided and human beings were killed, but up to now – (Interjections) – somebody is asking, by whom? I would like to say that government forces, the Karimojong and the rebels participated in killing our people and raiding our animals. Up to now, no compensation has been paid to our people despite the fact that they have been asking for it.

During the campaign period, the Government of Uganda gave relatives of those people who were burnt in the wagon a mere Shs 200 million, which has not even reached some of them. Can you imagine Shs 200 million being given to compensate relatives of those people who were suffocated and killed by government forces in a wagon? You can imagine! Here somebody who goes and starts running markets, next morning he asks for compensation and he is paid over Shs 160 billion when he never even invested any money into those markets. Is our Government being serious? Are the people at the front bench serious? 

I think something must be done. This is the right time for us to handle those we have got being involved in compensating an individual while some of our people who lost lives and animals have not been compensated. Actually, some of the orphans of these families cannot afford even UPE. If their parents were alive and they had their animals, these children would not be suffering like this. Here we are giving one person billions of money, year in year out, with the people doing that sitting with us within this House with a hope that this Parliament should leave them to go free. (Member timed out)

6.53
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me a chance to talk about the issue of Mr Basajjabalaba. First, I would like to thank the committee for producing a very good report and I support it in its entirety. I also support the amendment of hon. Akena, which I was going to propose myself because I think it is very important if we want to help the President work well.

Mr Basajjabalaba is a big investor in this country. He has made a contribution to our economy, to our education – (Interjection) - he is a Ugandan. But Mr Basajjabalaba has also exploited his proximity of friendship with the President to take money from the public unlawfully and he has invested money, some of it maybe in those ventures we see. 

The point is, Basajjabalaba is not a straightforward person. The first deal where he got money was some time back, when he claimed that his company was in economical distress. He used his friendship with the President to have US$ 11.5 million given to him from Bank of Uganda. He was given that money. Basajjabalaba presented land titles as security. After he got the money, he went and forged new land titles. Bank of Uganda was keeping ebicupuli and he had his genuine land titles. He then sold the land. That is Basajjabalaba for you. The Government of Uganda has not recovered that US$ 11.5 million. The matter was taken to court but there was collusion with the registrar of the courts and the case was terminated. 

Basajjabalaba is a dangerous investor. He has stolen from this country but he has used his friendship and proximity to the presidency -(Member timed out_)

6.56
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I feel completely confused by the level of debate in this House today because of the following reasons: First of all, the trend of debate reminds me of the saying that when a coward sees a weakling, he feels hungry for a fight. Secondly, I am also reminded of the saying of the rats who sat and agreed, and after having identified that it was the rat that was the problem, the problem now was, who will now go and tie the jingle belt.

I am aware that in this report there was tremendous work done. We have actually been given clear direction as to who was wrong and who might be right. I do believe that from the President, the two ministers, the Secretary to the Treasury and the Governor of Bank of Uganda, these five people and the Solicitor-General, are so inextricably interwoven in the whole thing that you cannot take one or two without the whole and you think you have solved the problem. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Ayena, for giving way. If the Secretary to the Treasury was involved, we would have charged the Consolidated Fund. So, since it was not charged, he is not part and parcel of this. So, do not bring him in, you might make other rats escape. You are right; the people involved are the ministers and the Governor with up there, of course you know. 

MR AYENA: I thank you for that information. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The information I want to give the member is that the Secretary to Treasury wrote to the Governor Bank of Uganda that if you are paying Basajjabalaba, please remember that there is US$ 11.5 million owed to Government and also Shs 3.5 billion to Uganda Development Bank. That information was communicated by the Secretary to the Treasury.  

MR AYENA: I thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, why should we crucify only two people in a chain reaction? If you look at Basajjabalaba, how do we define him? Basajjabalaba has been defined as a dangerous investor. But there is also this saying that in business, you do not get what you deserve but you get what you negotiate. So to some extent, I think Basajjabalaba is a sharp businessman. So it is the duty of those who deal with him to handle him with care. 

If I were Basajjabalaba and had the opportunity to be near the President, and I was the chairman of a very important committee of NRM, I would exploit that opportunity. Where is the problem? The problem is he who ought to have controlled. The appetite of Basajjabalaba - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to talk about the appetite.

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker, there is this great thing about changing goalposts. I have seen two things that happened. One, there is the letter of the President making an about turn which my brother, who was my OB in Livingstone Hall, was trying to justify. This is just an intelligent manner of actually justifying a position. 

This is just like the proverbial great man, the preacher who came to Africa and baptised somebody. He was called Ebuku and he poured water on him and he said, “You are now John and you are a Catholic. For you to be a good Catholic there are two things you should not do; the first one is that a good Catholic does not eat meat on Friday and the other one is that a good Catholic does not tell a lie.” 

He went home but the next day he returned, Ebuku was eating meat. He had killed a rabbit and was eating meat. He asked him, “Are you still a good Catholic?” He replied, “Yes, Sir.” He asked him, “Why are you eating meat?” He said, “This is not meat, this is fish.” He asked, “How do you say this is fish.” He said, “You know, Mr Preacher, when you came to Africa, you poured water on me and from Ebuku I became John. So, when I got this meat, I also poured water on it and said, ‘from meat you are now fish’, so I am eating fish.” (Laughter)

This is an intelligent way of changing goalposts because somebody is at a high level. Unless we have the temerity of taking the bull by the horns, we shall not solve this problem. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya is very uncomfortable. I saw him going out about three times, perhaps to the toilet - (Member timed out_)

7.02 
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The talk about corruption among leaders in this country has become a daily menu. Members of the public are ever crying about people in high position who have abused their offices. I think the time has also come for us to recognise those who have, despite being in their offices for a very long time, kept their names clean. On this note, I recognise hon. Kategaya here on the front bench. (Applause) I think he is the longest serving minister. 

A few days back, people were laughing at him that he could not even buy fuel but he can walk with his head high. Why can’t you emulate him? He has been there longer than all of you. He has been there longer than all these ministers who have been named. He even had a recess, but when he came back we have not heard his name mentioned anywhere near having stolen government money.
Young people who have just got into Parliament and into public office have got involved in stealing masts but here is an elder whom we should be able to emulate. We should learn from him. I think time has come for us to also recognise those who have lived clear of this scourge in this country.

Madam Speaker, I do not know how the President’s directives are implemented. Whether it is through selective implementation or not, I do not understand. My colleague, hon. Ochola, raised the issue about Teso. The people of Teso have suffered a lot. Their things were taken. In 2001, hon. Alice Alaso, hon. Dr Epetait, Dr Amuriat and I took Government to court in order to compensate the people of Teso. Up to today, nothing has happened. We were even asked to get out of court for an out-of-court settlement but there is nothing. 

On 4 January 2011, during the heat of the campaigns, H.E wrote to the hon. Khiddu Makubuya, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and here is the letter. I am going to lay it on the Table. He wrote to him for the people of Teso to be compensated because there was a case and he said it is useless wasting time going to court. This has never been implemented. This was 2011! Why has this not been implemented if it also was a directive? People are trying to allude that it was a directive; why has it not been implemented? 

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: I thank my colleague for giving way. I also would like to thank the committee members, led by their chairperson, for the good report. 

I also wish to give information to my colleague that in 1996, the ADF attacked Kasese and the entire Rwenzori region and a lot of property was destroyed. I will give an example of the vehicles that were destroyed in town - St John’s Seminary vehicles were destroyed, the Bishop’s car was destroyed – and the President gave special directives for these properties to be compensated. They did, in part, towards elections for a few but all of them have never been compensated. 

The Luweero veterans up to now still complain and directives have been made to compensate them. Nyakatongye Co-operative Union, their trucks were taken and directives were made to compensate them but no compensation has been made. I do not know whether these are special. Who is Haba?  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I was talking about the directives and the letters that the President writes to the people who are responsible for compensating people. You have heard from colleagues here from Kasese, Luweero, Northern Uganda and Teso but none of those directives have been implemented. Why selective implementation of these letters? 

On 11 January 2011, His Excellency the President wrote to hon. Khiddu Makubuya, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Attorney-General of Kampala. The case number is HCCS No. 230 of 2010, Eutu Garson and others v. Attorney-General: “I have been briefed about the above case which concerns claims by the people of the Teso sub region. The claimants are represented in the courts by Kampala Advocates. The case concerns claims brought by over 10,000 claimants from Teso sub region where livestock and other property was lost to the UPDF and other groups during the insurgency in this region. 

In view of the fact that some claims have largely been verified and in order to avoid implications of pursuing this matter in the courts, you are directed to negotiate an out-of-court settlement in the following terms: 

i.	Prioritise payment of the fully verified claims by paying the same this financial year.

ii.	Pay the rest of the claims in not more than the following two financial years: 2011/12 and 2012/13.

iii.	 You should constitute a team to verify the unverified claims and those found to be genuine should be paid in not more than two financial years. 

The verification team should comprise the officials of the Ministry of Defence; the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and representatives of the claimants or their lawyers. 

The verification exercise should not take more than four months. No other claims of similar nature should be entertained in future from this region. An out-of-court settlement should be finalised immediately. 

Signed, Yoweri Museveni, President.” It is copied to the Prime Minister; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the Minister of Defence; the Solicitor General/Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Kampala. 

Madam Speaker, I want to lay this on the Table and ask the people concerned why there is selective application in implementing President’s directives, unless there are sinister motives, or did they want a kickback from the people of Teso or from the people of the Rwenzori region or the people of Luweero? So - (Interruption)

MR AYENA: Through you, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my brother holding the Floor that during my humble contribution, when I went to negotiate peace for the country in Juba, one of the things that we agreed on and was signed by the Government of Uganda under comprehensive solutions, Agenda No. 2, was compensation for the livestock lost in northern and eastern Uganda. That was way back in 2008. I do not know why so much capital would be given as a priority to compensating an individual soul than addressing the issue of thousands upon thousands of people who suffered because of rebellion in northern and eastern Uganda! 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you can now see that the speed at which this office was handling this is unprecedented. Based on this directive, the Ministry for Teso was created and hon. Aporu was appointed. Maybe you do not want hon. Aporu to come back here because people are on her case that this is the strength which was used to have her get back to Parliament. She was appointed a minister. Unless the interests of the Government fail my sister, hon. Aporu, by not paying this money here - Even when you look at the budget to facilitate that ministry, it is very meagre, just Shs 200 million! What can you do with that, and yet she is supposed to follow up this stuff here. Please, I think the government should be very serious on the issues of claims. 

Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to the conscience of my brother, hon. Makubuya, and to hon. Syda Bbumba and those who are not in this House, to just do the honourable thing. You have seen the mood in this House and it has been going on for long. Please, even if in your hearts you think you have not done the wrong thing, I think it is just right and timely for you to say, “I am giving way.” Save us, like Princess Kabakumba did here. She saved us all these unpalatable words we are saying about you here. You are our colleagues and you have been with us for all this time, why should you put us in this tempting situation to say all these words against our colleagues who have been in the House here? Save us those unpalatable words coming from our mouths. We are only pleading with you.

DR  EPETAIT: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. A few days ago, it was stated that hon. Khiddu Makubuya had written a letter to H.E. the President pleading with him and begging for forgiveness. It also stated that just in case he is over pushed on the wall, he will also spill some other truths. So, I really think that hon. Khiddu Makubuya is going to help us by spilling more beans. Thank you very much. (Laughter) 

MR OKUPA: Finally, that is the humble appeal I am extending to our colleagues who have been named in this report. You have seen that the report is unanimous; there is no minority report. When hon. Kabakumba got out of the thing by stepping aside or call it resigning, immediately the media coverage changed to other issues. She was saved from that hustle. We want your families to stay comfortable without all this hustle day in day out. I hear my colleague here saying that she was gender sensitive and possibly that is why she gave in. So, that is my appeal to you.
 
This goes to H.E. the President; when he is signing some of these letters, he should be conscious. You know, if you have been in an office where you have juniors or technical people, there is a tendency sometimes when you are so tired for them to bring you something for your signature claiming it is a very urgent thing to sign. So, the President should learn from this, otherwise we shall have no option other than to think he is part of it. So, that is our appeal to H.E. the President as he signs his documents because so many have been coming out.  

I would like to finally end by saying that I support the motion and the committee report in totality and as amended or proposed to be amended in this House. Thank you.

7.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Mr James Mutende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the committees for the work they have done. I had two issues but fortunately or unfortunately, they have been overtaken by events. Whichever way, let me introduce them because I have been given the opportunity. The time when I got this report, it did not have the attachments and so I was going to raise an issue of clarity on the attachments because I did not have them, but my neighbour gave them to me and so I am now fully informed. Thank you very much.

The other was on the issue of presidential directives. Again, before I came up, my senior colleague came and made it clear that really we follow the directives from H.E. the President but we also have to synthesise them before we implement them. So, it should not be taken that a presidential directive has to necessarily be taken wholesale and not at all give advice to the President. So, that is my contribution.
 
7.17
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I give my reasons why I entirely support this report, I would like to first clear my name from the press reports that have appeared in the Observer attributed to myself and seminarian, hon. Kassiano Wadri. They said that I brought a letter to his office attempting to stop the debate on this particular report. That was a false report. I was not privy to the contents of that letter and I never went to Kassiano’s office with it. I am always clear in my fight against corruption and I can never condone a wrong, whether it is committed by a brother, a friend or a relative. (Applause)

I entirely support this report but I will only propose one amendment as I conclude. Before I conclude, the report clearly gives  not only the evidence of guilt on the part of the ministers involved but also tends to show that this thing called “compensation”, where the claims are lodged in State House and passed by the Attorney-General and Minister of Finance and Bank of Uganda, needs to be regularised. How will a person who does not know anybody in State House bring his claim for compensation? Why are we bypassing known institutions called courts and tribunals and then laying claims to State House? Why do we leave it to the Attorney-General to unilaterally decide so many claims on his own and award monies which are not legitimate but others which pass through legitimate means like courts and tribunals are never paid? 

We have our Ugandans who won cases in court dating as far back as 1991 for little monies like 20 and 30 million shillings but are never paid. But a person lodges a claim in billions and is paid in four months! What kind of unfairness is this? Something must be done if we are to save even the presidency from some of these things. 

The amendment I intend to propose is in respect of recommendation No. 9 on page 57. You will actually realise that monies have been channelled from public coffers under the guise of compensations and this is because we do not have a law. There is no law and so it is the President to decide who gets compensated, the Attorney-General will decide on how much to pay, the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda pay, and some people run to the banks while others are yawning. 

I would propose an amendment that says that until a proper law is made to regulate compensations - there is a law regulating claims against Government under the Government Proceedings Act - there should be no payments of compensations made. This will help to curtail stealing of public money under the guise of compensations.
 
Lastly, Madam Speaker, I invite colleagues, including ministers, who have not signed the papers for censure of the two ministers, since they have become resilient and resistant to see morals and sense, to sign so that we lodge our motion with the Speaker tomorrow and move forward to stamp out corruption from this country. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I note that a few more members would like to contribute but I would like to allow time to reflect on the proposals for the recommendations and we shall eventually have to hear from the government. So, I would like to adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. We shall complete this matter tomorrow. House adjourned to 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.21 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
