Wednesday, 17th February, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).


BILLS

SECOND READING
THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to start by correcting one little error which was carried by Radio Uganda and which, if left uncorrected, may mislead our people.  It was a mistake in an otherwise very well covered report.  What was said on Radio Uganda was that I said, ‘the parties will be represented at every Polling Station’.  I think this is wrong and I did not say so.  I said that, ‘each candidate who will be allowed to station his/her representative at every Polling Station in that electoral area’.  The two are different.  What I said in respect to the parties in this country - and we recognise that the question of political parties will be specifically addressed by the Constituent Assembly when it meets, and it is a Constitutional matter. It will be unwise of Government not to admit, amongst the Constituent Assembly; there should be two representatives of each party that participated in 1980.  I know many partisans will be elected in their various areas on their business; it is politics and they should in their own right have two representatives.  I know there are more than four parties in this country, but we had to make a cut-off point.  So, we decided and we propose to you that only the political parties that were in existence at the time of the 1980 general elections should send nominated Members to the Assembly.  I repeat once again that I did appreciate the coverage by Radio Uganda, but I felt it my duty to correct this little but otherwise misleading report.

When we adjourned yesterday, I was drawing Members’ attention to the Bill and to some omissions.  On page 3 is the short Title: ‘The Constituent Assembly Statute 1992’.  Then there is the long Title - ‘A Statute to provide for the establishment of a Constituent Assembly for the purpose of considering and enacting a new National Constitution for the Republic of Uganda to provide for the composition and functions of the Assembly’; but there should be the following words:  ‘to establish a Commission for conducting the election of delegates’.  (Interjection)

These are dropped in some copies.  But for those who have them, there is no problem.  For those whose copies are missing, this phrase should be add in order for it to make sense.  On page 12, it should be 17(b), ‘every delegate other than the Chairman shall have one vote’.  Now here the printing is ‘a casting vote’, which does not make sense.  What hon. Members have there is ‘shall have a casting vote’.  That ‘casting vote’ should be replaced by ‘one vote’.  The next error is on page 23 -(Interruption)- somebody is commenting on (c).  (c) simply states, ‘The Chairman shall have neither an original nor a casting vote’.  The next one is on page 23.  Rule 1, the third line, the word should be ‘paragraph’.  I hope that is clear.  The next is on page 41, it is stated, ‘we the undersigned registered voters in the electoral area of.... hereby…’ not ‘nominate’ but ‘propose’.  So, replace the word ‘nominate’ with ‘propose’.  Below figure 1, the last one on the bottom ‘names and signatures of persons proposing’.  Here we should use the words ‘supporting the nomination of a candidate’.  The word ‘proposing’ at the bottom should be substituted by the word ‘supporting’.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to go back to the first correction on page 41.  The Minister said ‘hereby support’.  How about the word ‘nomination’ then?

MR. S. NJUBA:  The word ‘nominee’ is being used everywhere without a definite meaning.  Because there are Government nominees and party nominees.  So, here we are using a different terminology for clarification.  Since this Bill has been with Members for the last four months and one day, it was last published on the 16th October, many people have had the opportunity to read through and I will not go Clause by Clause.  I have already highlighted some points.  But I wish on behalf of Government, to thank Members for the keen interest they have taken in this Bill.  They have taken it upon themselves to debate the contents with their constituents extensively.  This Government has been monitoring these debates all over the country and they have been very encouraging.  I feel that these debates and exchanges and in many cases, written resolutions sent to me, have strengthened the Government proposals on this Bill.  I hope Members have come with their packages from their constituents, which they should put across to us and enrich the debate.  

However, I would like to talk about one or two points that have been central, and some of my colleagues in the House have commented on them.  One of them is what we call in Constitutional Law, ‘the doctrine of supremacy’.  You will recall that in the Press there has been a long debate about the supremacy of Parliament and the argument that no other body can go above it.  With respect, this concept has been a misguided one, basing on the situation that prevails in England about the British Parliament.  The British Parliament is supreme that is agreed.  It has no law that defines it like ours.  In fact, it has been said that it can do anything under the earth except turning a woman into a man. (Laughter) I said that deliberately, because of recent, it has been possible to authorise the change of sex from male to women.  However, the point I want to stress is the fact that under the British Law, Parliament is supreme and that is ‘the doctrine of supremacy’ as I understand it.  It can pass any law.  There is no law, which limits its powers, and there is no part that created it.  What is the position in Uganda?  The position in Uganda is that the Constitution is supreme.  The Constitution gives this House power to enact.  Article 63 is the defining point and it states thus, ‘Subject to this Constitution, Parliament can make....’, which means that the Constitution is above Parliament and it limits its powers.  Under that power it has not provided that that Parliament will enact the Constitution and the reason is clear.  The Constitution will not provide for its own death penalty.  To go against the Constitution and enact another Constitution will be killing the very Constitution that gave Parliament this power.  So, that is the difference between the English position and our position.  That is why throughout, probably the Commonwealth and beyond, Parliament because it is created and get powers by this Constitution, when they are making another Constitution, they use a Constituent Assembly or a Convention.  Therefore, we should not be derailed by the argument of supremacy of this House.  Who is supreme?  I think the population of Uganda, which now wants to have its Parliament.  We should look to the people who will create the supreme body to do this.

Mr. Chairman, Members had wanted to get the statistics with regard to the views expressed by the population regarding the Constituent Assembly.  That is answering the question of whether the new Constitution should be debated and enacted by NRC or by a new body.  Those statistics were causing them to be submitted to them within the next two days at most, should they find it necessary.  I have proposed an Amendment regarding a certain combination that should come to this House and should be added.  I think I should make a remark even if it is in passing.  All these combinations were considered by Government at great length.  But at first, it was dismissed because as you know, this Government is committed to a fundamental change.  When you decide to make the old NRC take up the responsibility of passing the new Constitution, then even if you add other bodies, people will not see that fundamental change.  As I said yesterday, Members are democratic; they can subject themselves periodically to the will of the people for a fresh mandate.  So, in the opinion of Government, the retention of the present NRC in total will not convey the fundamental change that is necessary.  We must demonstrate that we live by what we preach.  We are democratic, and we must face the electorate as often as it is necessary.  Secondly, of course, there was a question of numbers.  Numbers in the House would amount to something like 600 or 700.  In our view, we thought these were very big numbers that would be very expensive in terms of time spent.  Because, everybody wants to speak.  There would be a problem of control by the Chairman, and there would also be a problem of sitting capacity.  We thought it was also on economic grounds that it was necessary to leave the two Houses separate, bearing in mind that we do not want to hurt everybody.  We made the qualification for membership to the Assembly, as broad as possible, to include those who cannot speak our language.  Thirdly, there were the working hours.  The working hours of the Constituent Assembly will be different from this House.  We hope to start at 9.30 a.m., continue through to 12.30 p.m., have lunch break, come back at 2.30 p.m., and continue until 4.30 p.m., and have a break for one hour, at 6.00 p.m. or around there, and come back till 8.00 p.m.  It is an intensive programme so that we finish in the shortest period possible, and so that people can be released to go and do other creative work.  

So, we considered all these combinations.  Lastly, when you bring the formula whereby the sitting MPs will continue and be added to 150, there is again a problem of fundamental change that those of us who were not elected and those who were indirectly elected would be much more than those delegates who are directly elected.  There was also a problem of transparency.  They will claim that we used our numbers to subdue those who are ‘democratically elected’.  So, as I said, when you debate, you should consider those views.  We should also recall what messages we have from Members’ constituents and see how we proceed.

Lastly, people are waiting for this Constitution and it is the duty of all Members to support this Bill so that they demonstrate by example what they have been preaching.  

In addition to the list of donors I read out yesterday and saluted, I wish to add the Governments of USA and Canada, for assisting the Commission and the Ministry in general during this serious and heavy exercise.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Seconded.

MR. SSEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Are you going to contribute or you are just seconding the Mover?

MR. SSEBAANA KIZITO:  No, I am going to contribute.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for -(Interruption)

MR. SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, the issue I was to raise arises out of our Rules of Procedure and I wanted to move something in accordance with those Rules of Procedure before opening the Debate on this Constituent Assembly Bill, 1992. (Hear, hear!)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Rule number what? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Rule No.85.

MR. SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity.  I beg to invoke Rule No. 85 of our Rules of Procedure to suspend Standing Orders to enable me to move the following Motion.  That a General Debate on the Constituent Assembly Bill, 1992 be delayed until the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs has supplied to the hon. Members copies of the Constitutional Commission Report and the Draft Constitution, since the same hon. Minister has made important references to these two documents during the Second Reading.  I beg to move.  (Hear, hear!).

MR. KATEGAYA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I think the Rule invoked required the Chairman to give his consent before the Motion is proposed because it says; ‘Any of these Rules of Procedure may be suspended with the consent of the Chairman and -(Interjection)- Yes, I am asking that -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. KATEGAYA:  Order, we are not students here, we are not just schoolboys.  Okay?  They say, consent does not mean just silent. Mr. Chairman, I would like your ruling on this question.

THE CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Member is quite in order.  Proceed, please.  

MR. SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  This Motion is a very simple request to the Minister and it is arising out of his address in submitting this Bill to the House.  As I have said in the Motion, he has referred on several occasions to the two documents we want him to present to us.

We are going to debate and to give an assignment to a group of people, but we do not know how big that assignment is.  We should know how big the assignment is if we are to decide who is qualified to do that assignment (Hear, hear!).  In the Bill, there are several qualifications required for people to be elected to the Constituent Assembly.  If we do not know how big the Constitution is and what is in the Constitution, how shall we be able to tell that such and such a person can be equal to the task before him.  

I wish to appeal to the Minister to take this simple request and accept it without much debate, because it is the consensus of Members of this House that they should get this document in order for them to be able to debate this Bill intelligently as they should.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move -(Hear, hear!).  

MR. KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Motion.  There is a complete Ministry in charge of Constitutional Affairs in this country; rather a complete Minister of State with a Ministry.  This Ministry has not just been created; it is a long-standing appointment.  The assignment to discuss this very important Bill has not been abrupt.  It has been ongoing for more than three years.  Surely, we have been informed by the hon. Minister of State in charge of Constitutional Affairs that he was grateful to the Ugandan taxpayer, that he had been availed money from the taxpayer to prepare himself for this important historical occasion.  He also went beyond, yesterday, and talked about seven friendly nations, which had come to the Ugandan taxpayer to prepare him to have this Debate proceed in a proper fashion.  This afternoon, he has added on another two countries which helped him to prepare for today.  Surely, it is not fair to this House, which is being told that after all it is not supreme, not to have all the facts availed to it to enable it to pass an important Bill like this one.  I do not think that it is really fair for the taxpayer, this House and to those people who helped this Ministry to carry out this work, to have this Bill debated when Members are not prepared.  Why is the information not being availed to us?  Is there something the Minister would not like us to see in that Report before we debate?  Who should tackle that business?  I think if we continue asking these questions, we shall get all sorts of answers using fertile imaginations, and we do not want that.  To save this situation from getting worse, let us support the Motion moved by the hon. Member from Makindye and then we proceed with other business until the Minister in Charge of Constitutional Affairs is ready. (Hear, hear!).  

It is very disappointing that this state of affairs is taking place.  We have traversed the countryside, talking to our people about the oncoming Constitutional Debate.  They are very expectant, and they are waiting for us to tackle this subject so that we can set our country on a correct footing.  Why all of a sudden are we being surprised that a document which should be laid on the Table is not being circulated so that the debate can continue?  Can we ad hoc?  Members are not prepared to ad hoc, not at this stage in the historical development of our country.  Thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF INDUSTRY AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr. Wapakabulo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Motion of course will receive the response from the Minister responsible for Constitutional matters, but I thought I should make a simple and humble contribution.  In view of this - and I have a lot of respect for hon. Sebaana Kizito, Member for Makindye, he is normally a man of consideration and he does not normally raise matters lightly.  He thinks them through and I am sure he has given great thought to this matter.  Having said that, I want to express my difficulty here.  My difficulty is that we are asking that before we do our job we should get some other people’s document, this is really what is -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Mr. Chairman, I fear that we run the danger of setting up a procedural framework for enabling the discussion; I mean, of setting up a mechanism for debating the Uganda Constitution or Draft Constitution. I fear we might begin debating the Constitution and Draft under the guise that we are debating this Bill. That is a very, very serious fear.  My fear is that, once we have this document with us, I am not saying that Members should not have them, but I think we should not tie it; the document should come to the Members when they are ready to make references to them other than when they wish; after all, it is necessary.  But I do not think, it is right that we should tie the two together.  That consideration of framework legislation should be tied to the discussion of the substance which we are saying should not be discussed here, but the Bill anticipates another institution to discuss them.  
So that, if we now say to the people of Uganda, we have adjourned debate on this Bill because we would like Members to begin actually debating the Constitution by receiving the documents -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  

MR. KIGYAGI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give the person holding the Floor, hon. Wapakabulo (Interjection)- hon. Minister, that in the proposed Bill, for example, in Section 2(C), it is stated that the proceedings will take four to seven months.  Now we need to look at this document and see how big it is to be able to decide on the time frame it will take.  

Secondly, there are matters which are referred to in Section 18, matters of local nature and those of district nature; contentious matters.  We need to look at these matters and decide whether they are really contentious and whether they need a Referendum or not.  So, we definitely need to refer to this document, the Draft Constitution, to be able to arrive and pass this Bill, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Continue please.

MR. WAPAKHABULO:  Mr. Chairman, the information I have received exactly proves my point that the hon. Member would like to discuss the contents of the Draft Constitution to see which matters are contentious and which matters are not contentious, and I am saying that we could easily get side tracked instead of concentrating on establishing a mechanism for discussing and promulgating the Uganda Constitution, if we begin diverting ourselves and get carried away by discussing how many pages are there in the Draft Constitution, or which matters are contentious and which matters are not contentious.

Given the fundamental point which has been made, that it is important for the NRC to measure how much work is there, would it be okay if we borrowed the only copy that the Minister has or the President’s copy which were given to him on the 31st, and we table them here, so that Members can see how big it is to determine the nature and time required?  

I wish to humbly beg the Members that even from the information we received yesterday, it is expensive to pass legislation here, given the fact that we need to move fast towards resolving the question of the rule that will govern our society.  I would like to appeal to the Members that we proceed with the debate on the Bill and that we urge the Minister concerned to move fast in bringing the copies here, and give them to the Members, and for immediate guidance, he can borrow the President’s copies or borrow copies of the Chairman and his Commission, so that at least the Members are satisfied once there are documents for which they are creating the body to debate and they can see them, and at the same time be able to urge the Minister of Finance to release the money which is necessary and the printers be given all the necessary instructions so that the documents are brought here without delay, but at the same time we do not delay this very important job. I think we should do that.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity.  I do support hon. Sebaana Kizito’s Motion.  I support it on the following grounds, first, that despite the fact that we are in this House, we are Ugandans; we are not foreigners, and so we are supposed to know what that document contains.  In fact, when we came to this House we were entrusted by the people, to come and analyse things for them.  So, it does not make sense; it does not make political sense for the hon. Minister to give us this Constituent Bill here before we get those working documents.  We would like to know, because there is some vital information, which will lead us to make a decision.  For example, we want to get the people’s views because he is alleging that this House is not competent enough to discuss - that is the feeling, which he got. But we want to get the people’s views, and the working papers, which were made by the Constitutional Commission.  We must be informed, because we are the people to guide this nation and if we are not informed, who is going to be informed?  So, why do we do things in darkness? 

MR. KASAJJA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  As a way of emphasising what hon. Kabuubi has said, we have statistics but the overwhelming views that were expressed to us by the hon. Minister were just a sample.  The terms of reference given to the Constitutional Commission did not contain anything to do with the Constituent Assembly, but for him yesterday to say that overwhelming majority. This is something which we want to get the statistics on, and the statistics which we have give contrary figures to those that the Minister gave. That is why hon. Kabuubi, I think is right in what he is trying to tell us.  

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  In fact, Mr. Chairman, many Members have a feeling that, maybe, our government wants to do things which are rather -(Laughter)- fishy otherwise, this document came out and we are about 170 Members.  We have the money; I do not see why we cannot get copies?  Even the Minister himself admitted that he talked to The New Vision one time, and he said that before we resume, and before we start on this important debate, we shall have been furnished with the necessary documents. But they are not in place.  So, Mr. Chairman, I support the Motion overwhelmingly. (Laughter)

MR. PINTO (Kakuto County, Rakai):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I speak, first of all, I would like to recognise the people of Uganda and the government, for the very good arrangements that were made for His Holiness, the Pope.  Having said that, I share very heartily the views expressed by hon. Karuhanga.  The Ministry of Constitutional Affairs was given all the necessary support by our Government and by the donors to produce these documents.  It is in our right now, to demand proper accountability of what those funds did, because the cardinal point was to produce a report -(Laughter)- if that report is not here, the blame should go to the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs and I think we must demand, while we want the documents to come here, for a full explanation.  

We shall not stand here and be taken for a ride while the whole country is mis-directed from the major events, because these documents have not been made available.  

Having said that, I would like to appeal to my fellow Members. We know that a lot has been said about mismanagement of the funds that would have enabled this report to come; it has been in the papers, let us accept that.  But because somebody or some people have made that mistake, shall we all suffer in the same way because of that delay? That we do not proceed with discussing the Constituent Assembly Bill because of those reports?  I know how important they are, and I am appealing to my fellow Members so that we proceed, because we are now discussing the establishment of a Constituent Assembly, and we need those points for reference, and I am sure after the demands by the hon. Members here, Government will expedite their issues and they should be brought to us as soon as possible. But I also believe that it is proper for us to continue debating the Bill on the establishment of the Constituent Assembly. (Applause)  If we do not, may I complete this, the people of Uganda will not excuse us for this failure to start on a democratic process of direct election using secret ballot as proposed in the Bill.  

MR. BARIGYE:  Point of information.  May I inform the Member holding the Floor that it is not possible to reach a logical conclusion about this debate without knowing the reasons, which led the Constitutional Commission to recommend as we have so often been told? In fact, as recently as the 6th of February, when His Excellency the President addressed the soldiers, we have been told that the Constitutional Commission recommended in one of its reports that this Body was not suitable for debating the Constitution.  Now, how can we reach a conclusion as to the suitability of this organ of this august body to debate the Constitution when we have not seen the report of the Constitutional Commission and the reasons they advance?  I wish to inform the hon. Member that it is only logical that we first see this report before we can debate as to which body should debate the Constitution and promulgate it.  Thank you.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Mr. Chairman, hon. Pinto may not be interested in the document we are requesting for because he may not be answerable to anyone since he has already decided to become a Civil Servant. (Laughter)

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Chairman, the informer is an uninformed as can be.  I have not become a civil servant.  I have been appointed to take on that task; a task which is a matter of life and death. I have been appointed to take on that task.  I did not go under any civil service terms and I remain a Member of this House, elected by 80,000 people and no wish of such a Member will divert me from my noble cause.  

I appreciate the sentiments expressed by hon. Barigye. They are very valid, and he is talking about a logical conclusion that we may not reach.  I believe there is time for us to digest and reach that logical conclusion.  I am No. 96 on the list and I know in your wisdom, Mr. Chairman, you are going to give us much time as there is for people to thoroughly debate this Constituent Assembly Bill.  There are others who are in Nos. 137, I am saying ‘let us make a start’ because, if we abruptly take a decision like this to shelve the debate on the Bill, will the people of Uganda not think that we have torpedoed the process of democracy?  Will they not think that for self-interest we have faulted that voice, and have denied them the liberty to have a Constituent Assembly and instead given ourselves the opportunity to go and renew our mandate, then come back here and discuss and debate the Constituent Assembly?

MR. MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I have of late been going around my constituency to do nothing but to discuss the Constituent Assembly Bill.  All the time I have been asked, ‘where is the Constitution?’  People have been asking me.  In fact, in one of the meetings, people said, ‘Look honourable, if you have no Draft Copy of the Constitution, it does not serve any purpose for us to begin talking about who is going to discuss the Constitution. You go back and let us have a look at the Draft Constitution so that we know whether what we proposed is actually in that Constitution. But even before we know what is there, how do you begin telling us that we have now to set up a new body to discuss the Constitution’.  

So, really, the point hon. Pinto is trying to make is that the concern for the absence of the Draft Constitution is not only in this House, but is also in the countryside, and I give my constituency as an example. I even spoke to the Minister and asked him if he could request the Vice Chairman of the Constitutional Commission to let me have copies of the Draft Constitution so that I can actually go and discuss it. He said they were not available.  I spoke to hon. Obwangor, because he served on this Committee, and I asked him to get me at least one copy of the Draft Constitution so that I could actually read it and discuss it with my people?  But he said he did not have a copy.  So, really the question he is raising does not arise.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Chairman, I am going to wind up.  I agree entirely that it is important to have that document.  We cannot stand here and say that, that document alone is holding us.  I believe in the past four to five months, every newspaper has serialised these documents.  All I can do is to appeal to the reason of my fellow hon. Members, and I will do that, with the best of intentions.  Hon. Members, I am worried.  So that we do not get out of here and people think of us as torpedoing the process of democracy; as if we are the ones who are stopping the democratic process.  I stop there, Mr. Chairman.

MR. E. KATEGAYA (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members.  Mr. Chairman, if you could protect me, I have heard the concern of the House about receiving copies of the Constitution as a report because the production of the report and the Draft Constitution is there and I think the only question is having enough copies to go round.  So, one cannot argue that there is no report. There is report, but not enough copies have been produced to go round, and there is nothing we are hiding from the House.  It is not the intention of the Government to hide anything. Why do you hide the whole thing?  I am more concerned about how we are going o go about our business.  We have committed ourselves as a Movement and a Government to produce a Constitution by the end of this year so that next year those who want to stand and become Presidents can do so freely, and I do not want us to give the impression that we are delaying the whole process because, I am sure the Minister will promise to produce copies as we debate this Bill, rather than saying, suspend everything and come back until the Draft Report and Constitution is in place, and hon. Wapakabulo has raised a question which I feel is coming through.  Are Members proposing that we should look at the Draft Constitution and if we are satisfied with its contents, then we pass the Bill?  What was Hon. Kigyagi saying?  He said he wants to see which ones are the contentious issues.  Something like that, what was he saying?  That this House should pronounce that, ‘yes we agree that the proposals in the draft are contentious and, therefore, we should pass the Bill, because you must be very, very clear’.  We are leaders here, we must be very clear.  Personally, I do not like mixing up things.  The only duty that we are supposed to do here is to provide a procedure of how the Constitution is going to be passed.  The content of the Constitution should be left to the body which we shall decide here.  This is its duty. 

On the question raised by hon. Barigye that, why do they propose to change or have a new body,  I wish we could be allowed the debate, because I would explain, the only question is not to form the Constituent Assembly alone, but there is a principle involved as far as we are concerned.  Yes, there is a principle.  This data gathered by the Constitutional Commission was just an additional reason confirming what you believed should have been done, like - I do not know how the Minister explained it but the question was not only because of the formation of the Constituent Assembly, but we had earlier thoughts about why we think we should create a new body, and if the debate had been allowed to go on, I was coming here to explain why we thought we should have a different body, apart from the statistics which are now distributed on the Constituent Assembly.

I would not like to give the impression that unless our interests are taken care of, nothing should be done.  Yes, I want it on record - I would like to work with the majority and the most popular, but at the same time, to say the truth, I have been hearing reports, and I have even got some resolutions, and deputations from hon. Members here - why were we sidelined, and I have explained several times. 

I am not so convinced myself, that the idea of postponing the debate is probably due to lack of enough of copies of the Constitutional proposals and report, no! It is something else. I want it to be on record, I oppose it. 

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Atuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I fully agree with sentiments; very strong sentiments which have been expressed by all the speakers that they would like to have these documents in order to have an intelligent discussion on the Bill before us.  

I do realise that this suspension of the Motion by hon. Sebaana Kizito has taken the Government by surprise and I believe that it is an important political decision, and that this country has been waiting for us to debate this Constituent Assembly.  In fact, it was postponed, if I can remember, sometime back in November/December.  With a very humble and clear heart, I want to come with a proposal which may bail the Government out of this complicated situation.  The fact that the only business we really have in this Sitting is the Constituent Assembly, and that it may take a bit of time to produce these thick copies, I believe that Members while taking their political responsibilities very seriously may agree that the Government;-

-	Commits itself to giving us copies of this document.

-	If the Government can commit itself then they may give a period of time ranging from two weeks to three weeks, and I think this is a very good compromise because having listened and talked - the Motion may go through and it will not really be good, politically, for us.

So, I think that Government should commit itself that we are entitled to this - after all, they have been serialised in all the papers, even foreigners have them, and people have gone to read them on the Commission’s places, there is nothing secret about it.  

So, I propose that let Government: (1) Commits itself to giving us copies of these documents; and (2) let it spell out the time, and I do believe that we should go ahead with the debate.  

Let me also alert you that at the appropriate time during this Sitting, I intend to move a Motion to suspend the rules so that we can debate the Luzira tragedy today.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Whilst I agree with the sentiments expressed by hon. Sebaana Kizito, I find it extremely difficult to support the Motion. (Applause)  What we have done today, yesterday, and what the people have been doing, is to express disgust with the way things are being managed by some people in certain offices in Government, and I think having done that, this House should decide once again and accept that the business must continue.  

I think the message has been delivered, heard and I hope those to whom it has been aimed have received the message, and that in future, we may not be able to tolerate shoddy business.  There has been a lot done and said to drive a wedge between this House on one hand, Government on the other and even the people on the other, and I do not think, if we suspend business of this House, I do not think we are going to bridge those gaps that are being created.  My fear is that if we suspend the debate, we may lend credence to what has been going on.  People have accused Members of this House for having - you know, for being - people have claimed that Members of this House are probably illegitimate children, and that they were not properly chosen and, therefore, they are not competent to debate this Bill, the Constitution. But I would like to appeal to my Colleagues in this House to reject the temptation; and not to give our detractors more arsenal to tell the world that, ‘there they go again’.  In my view, I would agree with what Members have expressed, but I think the consequences or the misinterpretation is going to be counter-productive for this House, and this country as well.  Therefore, I would like to appeal to my Colleagues that since we have said what we would like, those responsible to know, let us continue with the business.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Motion.  

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Having listened attentively to all the hon. Members who have contributed for and against this Motion, I am tempted to say that democracy is a very expensive affair.  It is so expensive that it can go with the sentiments of the majority.  The interpretation varies.  One could say that they are detractors who are trying to delay the good proceedings of this House in as far as debates are concerned.  When there are procedural matters which pertain to the smooth contribution and running of this House, it is also important as far as democracy is concerned to play a fair game.  There are some Members who may not of necessity be informed and it is true they are not informed.  There are some Members who may be disassociating themselves from hon. Sebaana’s proposal because they happen to have been exposed to this information more, especially Members of NEC, who got some of these copies -(Interjections).  Yes, I have it.  

So, I request that the fair play of democracy, which has been the NRM policy, to preside and, therefore, we should not go by sentiment to say that if we postpone for some few hours or days, we shall be supporting the detractors.  It may not be true.  It might be reinforcing our point because if Members have requested for mere information so that they follow the proceedings, I do not see anything wrong with that.  But it is up to Government now to print out these copies as fast as possible and as soon as time can allow. The hon. Minister has said we are going to have a marathon meeting; and we could even extend it to midnight if we are short of time because we are going on up to six o’clock from 9.30 p.m.  So, I propose that the opinions of the majority be listened to.  I would like to support (Hear, hear!).

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Nominated Member):  Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I feel very proud and rejoice that we have a Parliament that is actually a Parliament. (Laughter)  Because, the liberty and supremacy of Parliament depends on those who are in it and if we can aqueous in a situation, which we disagree with, if we can sweep the dirt under the carpet, we shall not really stand up and defend the rights of those whom we represent.  

Having said that, there are two sides to the coin.  It is never one, and you remember when Christ was shown a Roman coin, he said, give Caesar what belongs to Caesar and give to God what belongs to God.  So, when we are here, let us as representatives of our nation not be petty minded; not make criticisms because we want to score points, not to attack someone because we have disagreed with him, but to stand up as we have, and say we want this done and ensure that it is done.  I would like to agree with the last three speakers that we are really confusing two things.  We are very unhappy about not having received the Constitution.  In fact, I can say this in this hon. House, 

I put a question to the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, asking exactly what has been asked, but the point was that was not good enough.  Here we are!  We are summoned to discuss the Constituent Assembly Bill.  If you look at the Constituent Bill, almost 99 per cent of the articles of the Constituent Assembly Bill is not related to the Constitution.  So, I want you to separate the two; that there is a Constitution which by right we demand that we should have and by misfortune we do not have, but the Constituent Assembly Bill is distinct, it is totally separate and distinct from the Constitution.  I will submit, by reading very quickly through the Clauses, and you will see exactly what I mean.  But I think I am entitled, Mr. Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are.  

MAJ. KAZOORA:  I am entitled to hearing, Mr. Chairman, and I am sorry, I will not give the Floor, but if the hon. Member could wait; we are here to discuss; to allow people to talk, not to suffocate discussion.  If the hon. Member could wait and hear what I am going to read, he will perhaps correct me or correct himself.  

This is the Constituent Assembly Bill, 1992/1993.  Apart from the short title –  commencement interpretation, Part II states the establishment and composition of the Constituent Assembly.  Do you need to read the Constitution to agree on this?

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Now, Mr. Chairman, let me read very quickly because -(Interruption)- I thought that hon. Members are in the spirit of ‘give and take’, who are also willing to listen because if it is not that, then what is being done here, is merely to criticise Members of the Cabinet who may have done perhaps what they should not have done without understanding exactly what we are discussing.  

So, the Constituent Assembly Bill is clear.  If he has a copy he can read it. It merely sets out to establish a Constituent Assembly whose function and duties will be to discuss the Constitution.  If you separate the two, although you rightly demanded and you are entitled to receive the Constitution now, one could say first of all, to set in a motion the Constituent Assembly and at that time, you get the Constitution.  But the point is, it is really neither here nor there.  The mistake was made; there are reasons for it. I am sure that is why the Constitution has not been given to us. But when we come to discuss the Bill, I would challenge any relevancy that would suspend this meeting and wait for the copies to be supplied, although as the Minister responsible has said, or rather the Deputy Prime Minister has said, we are going to get copies.  But we are here!  Look at the timetable.  We are now in February, and we are going to have an election of Members to the Constituent Assembly. (Laughter)  

I thought - if I am mistaken, I stand to be corrected.  I thought the President mentioned that we are going to have elections in August.  We could have elections before the budget and money will be put in the budget in order to have the elections.  Am I mistaken or not?  If August is not the month, let us look at the time schedule we have.  We are now in February. We have to discuss the Constituent Assembly Bill and pass it, and then we have to campaign for those who are going to stand and have an election -(Interruption)- I am surprised that we can laugh in the middle of a serious debate, because laughter or humour is the soul of the spirit but, what I am trying to say is that, first of all, the Constituent Assembly Bill can hardly be discussed without suspending the sitting, and I have consulted the mover of the Motion, he agreed with me. (Laughter)

MR. D. LUBEGA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, as a matter of procedure, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to say that he has had consultations and that the Mover of the Motion has accepted without the Mover having withdrawn formally according to the Rules of Procedure?  Is the Member in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes, the Member is in order.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. with due respect, is not correct.  He will be answering the point, but I thought I would - since we are not here to play games, I thought I would mention it.  What I am saying, and I must invite for indulgence of hon. Members, is that there are two issues to discuss.  First, the Constitution that will be coming; the Constituent Assembly Bill, we can discuss it.  We do not have to suspend the Session.  We can discuss it without actually incurring the wrath of the public to say that we are not serious, and we should really go ahead today or tomorrow and get on with the job that the Parliament has given us.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Mr. B. Katureebe):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to say from the outset that I sympathise with the views given by hon. Sebaana Kizito, I sympathise with the views, seconding his Motion by a Learned Friend, hon. Karuhanga. But I also want to say at the same time, that hon. Members cannot come and say they spent the last four months in the countryside explaining this Bill to their constituents, without first requiring to get copies of the Draft Constitution, and then come here and say they may not debate the Bill because they have not been supplied with a Draft Constitution.  That is a double tongue. (Applause)  

Furthermore, the Constitutional Commission was set up by a Statute of this House.  It was set up by law and we are the ones who enacted that law.  That law clearly spells out the terms of reference of the Constitutional Commission and it also spells out to whom the Constitutional Commission is supposed to submit its report.  If we had wanted as a Parliament, the report of the Constitutional Commission should come here first before we decide on the next procedural point, we would have put it in the Statute.  We did not put that in the Statute.  So, the law as it is, states that the Constitutional Commission has complied with the law that we gave it.  If there is a request being presented to the Minister to give us copies of the report of the Constitutional Commission, that is another matter.  It must be distinguished from a mandatory requirement that this must come here.  In any case, where are the grounds being advanced that we must now suspend the debate until this report is submitted to us?  There are no grounds because we can go on and debate.  Those Members who are ready to debate can contribute.  Those who want to wait until they have been given copies of the report -(Interruption )- I am perfectly aware that some newspapers have already been theorising copies of that draft report.  Those hon. Members who are keen to debate this Bill, those hon. Members who have been telling their constituents about this Bill must have read this and they are ready to debate.  I, for one, I am ready to debate.  Those who are not ready to debate, at best, we can go with what hon. Omara Atubo has suggested, a commitment from the government that this report is going to be available to Members within a certain time frame.  This commitment has already been made by the Minister for Constitutional Affairs and the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister.  To suspend this debate, Mr. Chairman, is at best childish.  I beg to support.        

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr. C. Adyebo):  Mr. Chairman and hon. Members of the House, I have listened to the sentiments raised by hon. Members and I have taken note of these sentiments.  While taking note of the sentiments, I would like to just remind the hon. Members that they, themselves have been waiting for quite a long time to discuss this Bill.  It is a Bill seeking the establishment of a Constituent Assembly for the purpose of enacting a new Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  They are aware, that is why they are here.  They have left many other businesses pending just to converge here to discuss this Bill.  However, there are certain pre-requisites for the democratic discussion of this Bill.  Several Members have already said so.  One of the pre-requisites is that they need some information, which they can’t get.

First, in the interim report, which is ready, but not yet distributed to many of them.  As a Government commitment to this effect, I do assure all the Members, that they will be supplied with the Interim Report within a few days from today. (Applause)

Secondly, they also need copies of the Draft Constitution, which are several volumes, and they are big.  Production of these volumes I am talking about requires not less than 99 million shillings, which we must secure.  I do, therefore, pledge that the volumes shall be supplied on production after three weeks from now.

Thirdly, because of the importance of the discussion which will take a lot of time, many Members registered to discuss this Bill.

As I stand now, there are over 200 Members ready to contribute, and taking the average time of ten minutes per Member. We, therefore, need over 2,000 minutes for discussion here on average.  The 2,000 minutes are equivalent to weeks and we are talking about months.  On the basis of this information I am giving, there is, therefore, a lot of time you are going to spend here discussing this Bill.  This Bill is very important.  The nation has been waiting for it, and you have also been waiting for it.  There are other things which you have even foregone in order to come and discuss this Bill.  For example, there are certain things which Government must do to hon. Members for the Council which, because of constraints here and there, are not yet fulfilled but you are here.  It would, therefore, be unthinkable and very unfortunate for all of us at the end of the day, to be seen not doing what the whole nation and the whole world has been waiting for.  I know hon. Members have resentments; I know they are correct in certain cases, but Members should also understand the constraints the Government is having financially.  In fact, I am reminded that the Interim Report on the Constituent Assembly will be ready next Tuesday. (Applause)  That is the first step and commitment of Government.  

Therefore, let us start discussing the Bill and I would like to make sure that the Minister conforms to this kind of promise -(Applause)- because it is a commitment.  That is the compromise, Mr. Chairman; we would like to strike this afternoon.  With these remarks, I thank you very much and I wish you the best of deliberations.  

DR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order, Mr. Chairman.  Is the Mover of the Motion not required to reply?

THE CHAIRMAN:  I call upon the Mover of the Motion to reply.



MR. SEBAANA KIZITO:  Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for this opportunity and I also want to thank the very many Members of this House who have been eager and have given me overwhelming support. (Applause)  Mr. Chairman, before I conclude, I want to say that in bringing this Motion, there was no ulterior motive at all.  I brought this Motion on behalf of the people I represent because they asked me to do it and also on behalf of the people who are here in this House. (Applause)  I have no ulterior motive and I have no reason to have any.  Mr. Chairman, you have seen yourself that this Motion is not mine.  This is a Motion of the House. (Applause)  The House has heard from no lesser than the Prime Minister giving an undertaking and the reason why we brought this Motion is to get an undertaking or a reaction from the Government regarding this issue.  It is not in vain that we seek to have the Constitution with us.  It is not merely because we want to have documents on our bookshelves, that we desire the Report of the Constitutional Commission.  We need these documents because we think they are useful in our job and we do not want to do a job that is half done.  We are beyond that.  However, many points have been raised and the Government has heard.  They have seen the concern that the House has regarding this issue.  The Prime Minister has given us up to Tuesday, which means the day after tomorrow as far as meeting days are concerned.  I think my fellow hon. Members can accept one day.

HON. MEMBERS:  We shall accept.

MR. SEBAANA KIZITO:  As I have said, Mr. Chairman, this Motion was moved from my hands and it now belongs to the House.  Therefore, although it is normal for a Mover of the Motion to withdraw it, having expressed his sentiments, but before I do that, I have to seek the permission of the House under the Rules of Procedure.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I just want to inform the hon. Member, the Mover whom I seconded, that the decision on whether to proceed with the Motion or not, entirely depends on how he winds up.  If he feels that his intentions have been adequately catered for and taken care of, he is free to inform the House that in fact he has accepted the feeling which he has seen in the House and he is free to recommend that his Motion be withdrawn.  It is not that he has not got that power.  He has the power.

MR. SEBAANA KIZITO: I thank the hon. Member for that information.  Mr. Chairman, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has told is that these documents will be here on Tuesday.  Can we take him on his word?  Therefore, if we do not doubt the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, I would like to give advice to my fellow Members that we accept the promise of the Prime Minister and that if we do not get the documents here by Tuesday, as he promises, we shall revert to the situation in which we are now.  Otherwise, if that is not acceptable by the House, I only want to thank them for the support they have given the Motion and you will do your job.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you withdrawing?

MR. SEBAANA KIZITO:  No, I am not withdrawing because I have been prevented from doing so by the House.  Now, I am saying that you can give the vote that you were going to do.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you withdrawing, because you cannot give conditions?

(Question put and negatived).

THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr. J.W. Wapakhabulo):  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for giving me this historical opportunity to second a very important Motion in the history of our country.  It is an honour that I have this chance.  Seeing from what has already taken place over the last one hour and a half, and seeing what the attendance here is, this I can say is a very important occasion.  It is an important occasion in the sense that at last, the people of Uganda are having the right to make their own Constitution.  But more importantly, is that those of us who are here today are playing a very crucial role in that process, because this Bill is a very important one in so far as it seeks to put together a mechanism for determining the future governance, not only of ourselves now living, but I am sure the Ugandan generation to come.  Before I go further, let me thank the Minister and his staff, and also thank members of the Constitutional Commission, for the work that has been put in processing the documents which have been the subject of our debate for the last one hour and a half.  It has been a painstaking exercise, having to go to various parts of the country, the efforts of the Minister, the Secretariat of the Commission, and the people of Uganda generally, who came forward either in Gombolola, meetings of the RCs or by returning memoranda to the Commission.  I wish to thank them for contributing so that we are able today to stand here to discuss the mechanism for making a Ugandan Constitution.  

What is the Constitution?  A Constitution, as I understand it, is a basic set of rules of society of how it is governed and how it wishes to be governed.  Now how have these basic rules, come about?  There are many ways in which these basic rules come about.  They come about either through social development in a given society.  In my society we have our own rules which are known.  We have a Constitution of the people who call themselves Bagisu, because they are in-born.  These rules govern that society and of course one important aspect of it is that every two years we submit our young boys to circumcision.  Essentially, it was a very important Constitutional rule, although recently the importance of some of these rules is changing.  But it is a very important rule of our Constitution where I come from, that before you could get yourself into a position of being called upon to fight for the people, you must have achieved this important aspect.  Before you could hold office and dominate other people and give them directives, you had to go through that process.  I know that hon. Karuhanga’s Constitution, I am told, is more around a cow than it is in other societies.  That is one way, and it is a method which has worked, and in Uganda you can, therefore, say there are as many small constitutions as there are communities which are identifiable.  

Otherwise, constitutions have been made either through conquest by some society fighting another, and it takes over and declares a constitution.  This process of making a constitution can be found in places like, for instance, in the U.K. and other places where you had Kings or parts of the Ireland fighting others and eventually creating a bigger kingdom which eventually they call the United Kingdom, eventually taking in Scotland and England.  There was an attempt, to also begin ruling France.  For those of you who remember Shakespeare’s Henry V.  He went, but eventually he never took over, although he was provoked by a set of tennis balls that were sent from France.  

Other Constitutions of many of the colonies, were a result of a mixture of conquest and trickery.  They come and use a gun here, then they had over a bottle of whisky there, then they tell a lie there and eventually they hand you a Constitution which, for instance, in case of Uganda, the British by conquest and trickery were able to take over our country and ruled it until 1962, under Constitutions which were favourable to them, because they had the Buganda one, the Ankole one, the Bunyoro one and others.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, in point of the fact that under the Standing Orders, there is no Motion before the House, is the Minister of Tourism in a position to work on a thing, which is not before the House formally? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which one?

MR. OBWANGOR:  The Motion was suspended.

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no, no.

HON. MEMBERS:  It was lost.

MR. WAPAKHABULO:  The Motion, Sir, was not suspended as you have rightly ruled.  Maybe the hon. Member was still remembering the good old days.  But I was talking about ways of Constitutional making.  I had reached at a stage when I want to say that in some ways Constitutions are by trickery and conquest and others are by direct conquest like Japan where MC Arthur wrote the Constitution and thanked them for having accepted it.  Others are by rebellion and then subsequent negotiations like the United States, Mr. Chairman. But one other method of making a Constitution is by either you giving it to yourself or by dialogue.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the Minister to discuss the Constitution making as if we are in the Constituent Assembly when we are discussing the Constituent Assembly Bill?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Not quite in order.

MR. WAPAKHABULO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was saying that communities can, therefore, choose to give themselves a Constitution by dialogue and when you choose that method, it is now the most preferred method and the most acceptable, instead of using the methods I have otherwise mentioned apart from the natural one.  Mr. Chairman, therefore, in the Ugandan Constitution of 1962n and we have the subsequent ones by other methods which hon. Obwangor knows better.  We now have the people of Uganda asking the question of how best the Constitution was made, which was not properly answered.  The question was not properly answered because we tried the combination of some of the methods out there, by conquest, by deceit, by trickery.  Now, what the people of Uganda - the benefit of the NRM, is that a group of Ugandans, armed Ugandans, angry Ugandans, came together and brought a system or a creation which has given rise now to a process where, we can make a Constitution of Uganda based on dialogue and discussion among ourselves.  And the dialogue has now, developed through a process which you all know; through the Constitutional Commission and other mechanisms that were there to have reached the stage where we are now.  Where we are now, therefore, is a process of establishing mechanisms for discussing and promulgating a Constitution which has been subject to the people’s based Constitution.  A Constitution based on the fact that the people of Uganda, through the mechanism established by this House, has been able to dialogue with each other through the Commission and now they have come with what we are going to discuss and one of the issues, as a question goes, how do you want to proceed after you have dialogue with each other?  The previous arrangement, which is now below as you know, is that this House, together with the National Resistance Army. They will discuss and promulgate the Constitution, but for the reasons already given by the Minister, already touched on by the National Political Commissar and for reasons of democracy, it has become necessary that we are now here invited to consider this mechanism, the mechanism of the Constituent Assembly as a process of further dialogue in the process of making the Constitution as an exception to the other methods which I referred to earlier, although I was challenged for referring to them.  

So, the question is, how important is the mechanism we are going to consider.  In my view, although in general discussion, in general application of matters, it is presumed that substance takes precedence of the procedures, in this particular case, I would like to submit that the procedures we are going to set to be able to produce a Ugandan Constitution, are as important if not necessarily more important than the Constitution itself.  Why do I say this?  The point is that a Constitution should have legitimacy.  I gave the example of the Bagisu, because I cannot think of other examples since I do not know them well. But of the Bagisu, no one question, the question of circumcision, in fact, they carry it too far sometimes so that it is a legitimate matter accepted by the people by virtue of being born there.  Now, a Constitution in countries like Britain, where they have been able to bring up children taking in British customs, which they owe to their Constitution because it is not written anywhere, they just pass it on to them and it has a high degree of legitimacy, but it changes with society and they accept new forms because society is always dynamic.  For instance, in Britain, if you look at their Constitutional arrangement, everything belongs to the Queen.  The revenue belongs to the Queen.  The army is Her Majesty’s army and, therefore, it was not necessary for Her Majesty to pay taxes to herself.  So, up until now, the Queen of Britain with a lot of wealth, has not been paying taxes but the community is now beginning to say, is this correct?  They have said the Queen should make a contribution to the cost of Government.  The people who belong to her family should make a contribution to the cost of the Government. 

In Uganda we are saying that we want to set up this Constitution.  Now, the procedures we determine, will be very crucial in determining how legitimate that Constitution is and to me that is a very fundamental point.  The views we take as to how that Constitution is going to be made are very important in determining the acceptability of that Constitution to the people of Uganda, how they conceive it and how they are going to protect it.  

The point I had made earlier was that each little community in Uganda has its own traditional constitution. The customs of that community are their own constitution.  What we have done - and I wish to submit that through the Constitutional Commission; what we have done is to mobilise views from these people with their little different constitutions to come up and say the common line is this.  This is what should govern us, we appreciate our diversities in unity and our unity in diversity, that we are diverting so far as we have got our cultural background which are not necessarily, I would say, but at the same time we have got a factor called Uganda which is there.  When I talked about a Constitution by conquest it was because you expanded your territory like Bismark did and created Germany.  In Uganda today, our boundaries were not created by us, but they are now internationally recognised.  Therefore, we expect that we shall not, except by way of a federation, seek to expand Uganda beyond what it is now, nor do we expect that unless by way of agreed federation, that someone should come and take away a part of Uganda.  Therefore, having these boundaries we can therefore, now clearly sit down and say here is a unit for which we create this Constitution, which takes into account the factors of diversity.  

Now, in order that this document is acceptable to all of us, the Constitutional Commission has come up with ideas arising from that dialogue, and it is now upon us, that we do not derail that process.  That we proceed with the process in terms of what we think would ensure a continuous dialogue and, therefore, legitimacy at all stages.  What has become apparent is that whereas at one time the view was that we could sit here together with the army and make the Constitution, another view has evolved in terms of principle, in terms of democracy, and in terms of desired practice, that we should go back to the people and say, I think as a better method of dialogue and to ensure higher legitimacy of the Constitution which comes from this dialogue, you should elect delegates to come and sit together to discuss that Constitution.  That is what the Government of Uganda is putting to you, to us here in this House.  I think in my view, it is a sensible view, the Minister has given us reasons, and they have also been advanced elsewhere.  I think when it comes to the question of legitimacy of this Constitution; I know that we are doing our job well.  I know that we were elected but there are some detractors who want to reduce us from the potent of the work of the Constitution making process by saying that we who are discussing it here are not fully endowed with one, two, three, four.  We should not allow - I know it is inconvenient, elections are not popular things, elections are inconvenient but at the same time, we should not allow a situation where we leave a question mark; a question mark on that Constitution which is going to be so important in making the future of Uganda.  Therefore, the procedures we adopt here must be procedures that guide us to legitimacy first and foremost and then the rest we can follow. 

 So, I wish to urge Members that whereas it may be very inconvenient in our personal interest to look at these ideas that are contained in this Bill, we should be big enough and be beyond that because, after all, it is also very important that in the history of Uganda we are sitting here to make that very important contribution so that when the annals of this country are written that there were 280 or so people who sat in Kampala between date such and such and selflessly, they did not consider themselves first, they considered the future of Uganda first and put Uganda first and were prepared - those who were prepared to do so to go and face to be re-elected.  Those who preferred to give their views from the side chose to give their views from the side.  There are historicals here who should have said history is ours.  I understand they are saying the NRA, who should have said they took the victory and, therefore, we should rule by victory, are saying no, the future of Uganda comes first.  

So, I would like to appeal, that we look at that Bill in that context, in the context of a greater Uganda; Uganda in the forefront and our personal interest subjected accordingly so that party affiliation and personal interests, should be subjected on this occasion, other occasions may be are debatable to the future of Uganda, and moreso, to the legitimacy of our Constitution and the goal will not be a loss to us at all times.  

And, I am glad that we are proposing as a Government, a piece of legislation if passed that will begin the culture of transparency in the conduct of the affairs of our politics, that we are saying that first and foremost, there must be transparency and transparency in putting together that steam so that we do not waste our time arguing about whether or not that group of people who came to discuss that Constitution were properly put together because that also has the problem of going to the fundamental issue of legitimacy.  We should ensure that the mechanism is clear and transparent.  The people have a stake.  Any Ugandan above the age of 18 should be free to vote and any Ugandan above the age of 21 should be free to stand subject to normal exceptions as to bankruptcy and criminals, and I really think that the procedure outlined by the Minister as he introduced the Bill, the procedure of putting together the register, the openness of the register, the freedom to inspect and object the register until it is properly compiled, the procedure as to how a ballot will be processed from the time you enter a polling place until you go, and the procedure as to the scrutiny of the votes because you can be popular but lose if some people do not scrutinize properly.  

The important point is that these rules and procedures that are being put here are important because should we depart from them or abuse them, then we shall have actually given in to the question of legitimacy of our Constitution.  

We should at all stages ensure that these things do not happen and I would, therefore, wish to add that Members consider seriously the provisions here in the context of the total principle of selflessness in the process of creating a new Uganda.  If we do not come back to debate the Constitution, some of us, at least, I am happy I will have made my contribution now and I am sure it will go down in history as such.

Having said that and having urged, I am sure, my colleagues here in the House to take the views that I take, and I hope they do take my views, let me also wish to report, that the people of Mbale Municipality also discussed this document.  We discussed this document, fro RC I to RC IV; all gathered together in one spirit.  I would not like to talk as if we were in Church, but we did discuss and we did agree: 

    (i) That there is need to establish a Constituent Assembly elected in accordance with this Bill; to consider and promulgate our Constitution.  

    (ii) To make slight departures from the present draft while my hands maybe are tied by collective responsibility, but I am also, a Member of a Constituency and I would like, , to just say three things which they deferred on.

The first one was on Chairmanship.  They agreed that it would not be proper to ask people who have just come together to elect their Chairman because they do not know each other, but they think that it may be better to have a middle course, that the President proposes a set of names to the Constituent Assembly so that the Constituent Assembly elects one of them to be Chairman.  Those were the proposals from Mbale.  Secondly, they think that women representation should be higher, and they suggest one woman from every district. Thirdly, they proposed that the youth should also have their representation, and they proposed one youth from each district.  These were the views of Mbale Municipality people and also the views which I was under obligation to bring here.  Otherwise, I thank you for giving me the chance to second this Motion and I beg to second.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this special honour to make my contribution on the Bill to establish a Constituent Assembly as was presented by the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs.  First of all, I would like to express my personal thanks and gratitude to my Colleagues in this House, for having over a long period of time exercised diligence and responsibility, beyond what has been the case in the past.  

I hazard to guess that this country was privileged to have the calibre of Members we have in this House, and I only hope that the future will bring better results. But certainly, there is no doubt in my mind about the competence of the Members that sit in this Chamber, to deliberate on matters affecting this country and, therefore, I would like to challenge those who think that by any means whatsoever, they are likely to establish a body of people that can be superior to the one we have today. (Applause)

I would like to request my Colleagues to feel proud of the fact that they have contributed tremendously to the building of a political culture that has hitherto been unknown to this country.  The culture of tolerance, of frank discussion, and of even enjoying humour in this Chamber.  Even the culture of almost - and violently, I use metaphorically - disagreeing and soon after that having a drink together.  I think, this contribution is as great as any we are going to make subsequently today.  To me, it is probably more important than producing a Constitution written on a golden plate, which Constitution can be abused by those who have no respect for good things.  I am saying this because in the past, through the press and through innuendos, and elsewhere, there have been accusations leveled against this House that we do things without consulting the people, and that this House has acted unpatriotically.  

Members of this House I believe have done as I have done in regard to this Constituent Assembly Bill, and that is, they have gone to their constituencies, those who have them, and consulted their people and those who do not have I hope, have used other methods of consulting the people.  After all, consultations go beyond constituencies.  I have even consulted Ministers, political parties, and everybody that I have found necessary to regarding the making of a Constitution for this country.  Therefore, consultations have been made and proposals have been advanced.

Now, what has happened in this House a little bit earlier on creates some kind of foreboding. Fear has been created about what could happen if people do not settle down and work together for a common good and, therefore, I would like to quote what Professor Mamdani wrote in the Newspaper, I think, of either yesterday or the day before.  He said, ‘we need not only a shared definition of common goal, but also a grasp of our capacity to realise those goals.  We need a set of not only the directions of reform but also eats.’  You see, there is a tendency for people, especially we Africans, I must say, when something is said by a local person it is glossed over. But when it is said by someone from elsewhere, we believe in it religiously. However, in my own view, this is an important statement because it challenges leaders to establish common goals, and unless you have common goals, you are not going to achieve much.  That is why I am appealing to the Government, the legislature and the people of Uganda to establish common goals.  

Because, as I have alluded to an important leader before, I referred to the Constitutional Commission as being unpatriotic for having made certain proposals.  You get someone standing up and saying that this House or this Constitutional Commission is not speaking on behalf of the people of Uganda, and yet as a representative of the people of Rubabo, I want to feel proud that I speak on behalf of those people, and I hope that all other Members are doing precisely the same.  

So, I would like to throw a challenge to my fellow Members in this House that quite often, we have had those accusations labeled against us, we do not consult. We go back to the people, those of us who want to and seek, if you like to call it, a fresh mandate because I think we have a mandate here.  The only thing we are going to do perhaps is to seek a fresh one.  Those who say we do not have a mandate are wrong.  I am not here illegitimately. I was elected and others came here through certain provisions within our law.  

So, what we may do is to seek fresh mandate from the people, and I am hopping without prejudicing the electorate, that the vast majority of you, if not all of you who wish to, will come back and constitute the Constituent Assembly.  Like the hon. Minister of Tourism said, I also went to Rubabo and consulted the people.  I did not have the chance of meeting everyone in the RC I, because he comes from a slightly smaller geographical area, Mbale. Rubabo is slightly big.  So, I gathered a few people, 83 of us and we sat and deliberated on the contents of the proposed Constituent Assembly Bill, and generally, the people had no serious problems with the provisions.  But of course, as the Minister said, you know many people, much as some leaders would like to say go back to the people, the people are not terribly excited about some of these things.  No; and maybe they have good reasons because if they must replace you, they definitely do so, even if it means over-throwing you, the people will do it.  But if they have no very good reason why go through all the trouble, maybe they are not inclined to.  

So, the people of Rubabo, actually those I met, were wondering whether it was absolutely necessary to go through this kind of programme.  They were actually wondering why we here do not sort it out because they trust us.  But I told them, I said, I will take your recommendation, but I do not have to agree with you.  When it comes to my statement, I may speak definitely.  But I think personally, I am persuaded that I think it is okay, so that even the wolf which decided that the lamb drinking downstream was spoiling its water, has no chance to say so.  In other words, if we go to the people and have this direct, universal suffrage or secret ballot election taking place, what will those who have all along said we did not speak on behalf of the people say?  But if we do not, then they will continue with this thing.  So, I think we should take the challenge, go to the people and I think be returned and we debate the Constitution.  

Again, the people had problems, some with Presidential Nominations.  There are some people in this country who cannot separate the person from the office.  The Presidency of Uganda will survive all of you.  The only thing it cannot survive, I am reminding you that I am not immortal, but the only thing it cannot survive is, Uganda.  Once there is no Uganda, there will be no President of Uganda.  So, I would like, maybe, that Ugandans separate persons from office, and I think the office of the President of this country ought to be respected irrespective of who occupies that office.  

I would like to add that the risk of causing disagreement with others, that I think, presently, the person who occupies that office, deserves it.  Therefore, I do not think it is fair for anybody who equates the President of Uganda to the likes of Kagonyera.  Personally, I disassociate myself from this, and much as I believe in undiluted democracy, whose limitations we all know, I would urge that the Office of the President be respected.  After all, we all know that the President has had to use his office to nominate, to chose, to appoint, and I have no doubt in my mind that he has done it very well. He has nominated people of all political persuasions, religions and tribes.  Now, if we had a President that was so abusive of his office, that every time he tried something like that he did it wrongly, I would share the views of those who think the President should have no people to nominate.  As a matter of fact, I suspect, the spirit of this is that elections can be imperfect in their choice, like they have done before, and therefore, if there are any important Ugandans that are out there that would make very useful contribution to the debate, those people would qualify for nomination by the President, and I would like to add that those of us who think there are such people, we could make proposals to the Office of the President so that these people can be considered.  Yes, because there are those people who are important in this country and do not want to go for these elections, and by the way, I sometimes even doubt whether people elected are the best for making a Constitution, because when you are elected, a Constitution is supposed to be a covenant between you and the people you lead.  Now, why should you be the one to set the rules?  Therefore, there is good reason for those who are not going to be part of your leadership, to participate in deliberations of your Constitution, and these are the people the President should be allowed to bring in that Constituent Assembly.  

Mr. Chairman, I am proposing.  What I have said regarding the nominations could go for the chairman. But for purposes of good climate, I am willing to submit the pressure of those who think and these are amendments that probably will come at Committee Stage and, therefore, I should not go through them. But just in case my opinion may be wanted, I think we could have a look at the Chairmanship and, I think really that the President of this country with your guidance, you the leaders of the country, with your guidance I do not think the President is going to shut himself in a room somewhere and make a decision.  He should and I think will consult all the leaders that are relevant to this Constitutional process, so that when he makes a choice and if you allowed him to make this choice, he could make a choice that is very well considered.  I do not think that the President, and I must refer to him this time as an individual, is so naive that he is going to spoil the thinking of himself.  Why should he choose a Chairman who is a non-starter?  Why should he really? There is rumour that maybe, some of these things have happened before, but I think this country is moving forward everyday.  Politically at least, we are moving forward everyday.  

So, I am assuming that when it comes to appointing the Chairman, it will be a very well considered choice.  However, I am worried about the provision that decisions will be made by two-thirds majority.  I do not know whether it is provided for anywhere in the proposals. In the event of there being no two thirds majority, what do we do?

MR. GASATURA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I quote rules of debate, Rule No. 39, Section 6, whereby it is prevented, it says, ‘the name of President shall not be used to influence the Council’.  I do not know what consultation -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are out of order.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, I hope the Member himself realises that he is actually the one who is out of order for wasting this august House’s time, and I hope that in future he shall hold his peace especially if he has nothing to say. (Laughter).  Mr. Chairman, having said that, really -(Interruption)

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, that the hon. Member and Learned Professor should refer to a fellow and hon. Colleague in House with such disrepute and refer such a low rating as to have nothing to say in the House?  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman?  

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not an insult, proceed please.  

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, I think with regard to what is going on, I probably should move to the last statement about those proposals.  I was worried, about the proposals. But the question of language, as much as I appreciate that we should maintain our cultural heritage and language is part of culture, I do not know whether it has been very seriously considered, that a person who cannot speak the official language of the country will understand even the legal intricacies of constitutional proposals.  And I know the number of interpreters you are going to have to employ, and the system of interpretation with the earphones and what have you, that you are going to use, might make the whole exercise very complicated.  Therefore, for the sake of convenience and expedition of business, I would suggest that anybody who is going to usefully contribute to the debate, should be competent in the English language.  I support the Bill, Mr. Chairman. 

DR. BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  As I contribute, I wish to associate myself with the hon. Member who has just finished giving us his speech.  Hon. Members, this is a historical debate in this august House, in the sense that the National Resistance Movement is fulfilling one of its obligations in the Ten Point Programme, and that is the introduction and Consolidation of Democracy in this country.  And the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs in introducing this Bill to this House I am sure in complying with that obligation and I think, we are duty bound as leaders of this country, at this historic time in our democratisation process, to contribute to this debate, make corrections in a sober manner and contribute to the rebuilding of democracy in this country. We need to do this in an atmosphere of calm; an atmosphere not charged by emotion, but good and well-researched information.  Therefore, on the basis of that, I wish to support this Bill very strongly.  

When the hon. Minister was introducing this Bill he raised some salient issues about the Bill.  Issues I feel, remove all ill motives about the debate of the Draft Constitution.  Ill motives in the sense that certain people in some quarters have continued to dispute the legitimacy of this august House, and in fact it is along that line that I would like to point out that some of the proponents who think that this Bill is not adequate, are the very people who have been disputing the legitimacy of this House, in terms of this Constitution.  Yes, and it is on the basis of this, for people who, a few months ago, were saying that the NRC is indirectly elected, and that it lacks the mandate of the population. It extended itself, and it is the same group of people now who are turning around to say the same august House has got the mandate of the people, and that it is legitimate and it has capable people.  Why?  Are we not seeing an opportunistic tendency in this observation?  

I would like to disassociate myself from that line of people who want to take advantage of the sentiments of their fellow Ugandans.  There are some people who think that by taking a position, which looks apparently popular by getting their mood, they think they can derail the noble exercise we are trying to carry out today.  The same people who, when we extended this period of the NRM for very good reasons at that time, said we have extended the life blood of the NRM illegitimately, because we did not consult the population.  
Now, we go and consult the population about this Bill for the last 4 to 5 months, and we have concrete recommendations from a Constitutional Commission which we also set up here.  I agree the report is interim, yes. But we have got salient features of this report in our newspapers.  

Mr. Chairman, protect me from Members -(Laughter)- I would like to submit that the path we have taken and the Bill that is before us is the right and legitimate path.  We should not be derailed by part-time opportunists who are out to look for only mistakes.  There are certain people who look for only mistakes or loopholes.  We should not subscribe ourselves to such people -(Interruption)

MRS. LUBEGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the Member holding the Floor, that discussing people is a simple discussion.  We are here to discuss ideas and the Bill.  So, he should stop concentrating on opportunists, here.

DR. BYARUHANGA:  I do not see any piece of information in that statement.  Dear Colleagues as I said, when we were starting, we are at historical cross roads. We are determining the future of this country, and we are setting up an independent body which will not be questioned from any quarters, whether now or in the future, albeit reasonable amendments which are in consonance with the dynamics of changing society.  Therefore, we should concentrate on the principle, even if this principle might infringe on our personal feelings.  

Hon. Members, I beg that we should stand firm to be counted as representatives of the people who were sacrificed to make sure that Uganda becomes a democratic society.  If we do not do that, we shall have let down the people who went as far as giving their own lives to liberate this country.  Whether I, Byaruhanga today, stands and I am happy about that, nobody has stopped me from standing for these proposals.  If I stand and I lose, I will come with my head high, I will be happy that I will have subjected myself to the population for a verdict.  I will be happy about that, and I do not think, I will have nothing to do after failing to go through that election. I know, man is a political animal, and there is always that instinct of self-preservation. But this instinct of self-preservation at the wrong time, in the wrong environment, is partly to blame for the political turmoil we have been through in this country.  There was an assembly here at one time that turned itself into a Constituent Assembly, and disposed of the Constitution, I understand, within 12 hours. Imagine that, and what were the consequences?  Do we want to fall in the same category?  Shall we have carried out our historical duty to contribute to the democratisation of this country?  

Therefore, the spirit of this Bill is good.  We must support this Bill.  This Bill will once and for all silence those people who have always said the NRM has a Constitution upon its sleeves.  These people are there.  The moment we appear to say, we must hang on, I think we shall be reinforcing those people.  And I do not think we should take any chances with this very important document, the Constitution.  There will be nobody in Uganda who, after we have elected the Constituent Assembly in the manner prescribed here, nobody in Uganda will turn around to say that the document was for Museveni or that document was for NRM, or that document was for the NRC, which at times sits in closed sessions and is also a political organ of the National Resistance Movement.  

I know there are some reservations, I am sorry I have not read some of these notes but, having said that, I want to make a few observations on this Bill. First and foremost, I went through my Constituency and we discussed the essence of this Bill.  This is Kitagwenda County, Masindi District.  The people were overwhelmingly supportive of this Bill. The essence of this Bill, in political terms, and for legitimacy, we may have had some differences -(Interruption)

MRS. OKER:  Point of order.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am just asking the Member holding the Floor to change his mood of speaking. (Laughter) Because, some of us are getting so frightened.  The way he is contributing, I think he should speak in a manner in which a Member should contribute and not to frighten us.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Do not try to threaten these good ladies?

DR. BYARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry about that, but I would like to inform the Member that when I am charged, that is how I drive my point home. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that, we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until Thursday, 18th February, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.


(The Council rose at 4.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 18th February, 1993 at 2.30 p.m).
  


