Thursday, 19 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

(Debate continued)

2.26
MR JONATHAN NYENDWOHA (Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to also join the members who spoke before me, and thank the chairman of the committee for the report. However, I am reluctant –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Agriculture but I was in Jinja this morning for the workshop, which I told you about and maybe the Minister, hon. Byaruhanga, is delayed there too. That is why you may not see the Minister here. I was with him in Jinja. Proceed.

MR NYENDWOHA: Mr Speaker, I was saying that I am reluctant to call this report comprehensive because when I read through there was no mention of cotton. In mine and other constituencies, the only viable commercial crop is cotton, and when it is not mentioned in this report, we feel we are neglected and marginalised. When I was talking to some few members of the committee, they told me that they actually visited some gardens in one of the parishes in my constituency. I do not know why that issue is not highlighted here.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable colleague for raising his concern but he should carefully read the report. This is one of our reports and it does not cover all the sub-sectors. Cotton, tea and tobacco are deliberately left out but they are coming in the subsequent programmes. And I am sure that Masindi, having been fully covered under tobacco and cotton, will be taken care of in the next report. Thank you very much.

MR NYENDWOHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I can now move to fisheries. I will raise those issues when you submit that report. 

I thank the Fisheries Department for the efforts they were making to curb use of wrong fishing gear and bad fishing methods, until the President’s directive came in. This was quite an unfortunate directive because it demoralised the technical people and the extension workers. The fishermen lost confidence in the extension workers and eventually regarded them as people who were anti-government, people who aimed at frustrating the President’s manifesto. Immediately after this directive was issued we saw nets of one inch, one and half inches and nets commonly known as kokotas back on the lake. 

As you are aware –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me for a while. In the visitors’ gallery, I see the hon. Member of Parliament from the House of Commons, Ms Mackachin Liverpool. She is here to see our activities. You are most welcome. (Applause).

MR NYENDWOHA: Mr Speaker, after that the officials in the Fisheries Department and the security people who were implementing the directives from the department relaxed. As a result they have taken advantage of it. They are collecting money from people who are using bad fishing gear and people who are using bad methods. They collect money and leave them to use all this gear; it is quite unfortunate. If we continue at this rate, all our lakes, particularly Lake Albert, will be depleted of their natural resources.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Executive that before they make any directive, they should exhaustively consult their technical people because such directives given without consulting the people, humiliates them. At times the technocrats just give up.

Secondly, I would like to ask the Minister of Agriculture to persuade His Excellency the President to retract his directive tactfully because without him making a contrary directive, the people on the ground, especially the fishermen, will not accept any other directive. This is exactly what is happening now.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the lifting of the ban on the fishing of immature fish?

MR NYENDWOHA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Is it still on?

MR NYENDWOHA: Very much, because they say the President directed them. Mr Speaker, Lake Albert is the cradle of Nile Perch; most of the Nile perch comes from Lake Albert and it is transported to Kampala. By the time it reaches here, most of it has gone bad. If we are to eradicate poverty from among these people - Lake Albert covers Kibaale, Hoima, Masindi and Nebbi districts. If we are to assist them to eradicate their poverty, the Government must be very aggressive in its plans. 

What we actually need, and this is part of PMA and PEAP; why can you not bring electricity to lake Albert so that we can process the fish at the lake instead of bringing it to Kampala? If that is not done, then you will not have assisted us. 

We are also requesting the Fisheries Department to carry out more research. There are some fish, which is commonly known as mukene. Some of us think these fish can grow to maturity but the Fisheries Department says they cannot yet when you look at them critically, you see they actually resemble these mature Ngara fish, which we have on Lake Albert. I request the Fisheries Department to make more research and tell us exactly what it is.

Mr Speaker, my colleagues talked about market. Market is very important. One time in my constituency I was sensitising my people to grow Aloe Vera and a gentleman asked me, “Where is the market for it?” I said, “You grow first and then we look for the market”. He said, “No; one time they told us to grow Soya beans as they had a big market; we grew a lot of it and it got rotten here. So, unless you tell us where the market is, we cannot grow Aloe Vera”. 

So, hon. Minister of Agriculture, we are saying, please, let us know where the market is so that when we go to our constituencies we tell our people to grow it when we know exactly where the market is. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee for a good report. 

On page 15 under the Fisheries Department, the committee came up with the recommended sizes of the fishing gear, and I want to thank them for that. For the Nile Perch, the recommended size of fishing net is five inches.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Fisheries Department has been reluctant; time and again our fishermen have been advised to use various sizes of fishing nets starting from four inches and very many of them responded, because these sizes tally with the pricing. The four-inch is a little cheaper, so when the officials from the Ministry advised them that four-inch nets are allowed, people complied.  

I remember there was even a question posed in this House to the Minister. He advised that it is five inches, but there is need for the Ministry to actually publicise these sizes, apart from the kokota, which people know is illegal. But for the fishnet sizes, the majority of the fishermen are actually confused because even today if you go to the islands, you will meet a fisheries officer who will be telling you a four-inch net is allowed. So we need to harmonise the information.

Regarding the mukene, I thank the committee for also coming up with the required seine nets for catching mukene. We also know that there are various methods of trapping mukene, but apart from the seine net the Minister is still silent. I want the Minister to come up openly and tell the public whether – because some people use seine nets but there are those who use the lateen and they just collect the fish as it comes near the light - so is it also allowed? It is also another method, used by the Kenyans, because we have very many people fishing on our lake. So the Minister should guide the public.

There is one method, which was left out by the committee and that is the fishing line. Of recent almost 30 percent of the fishermen on the water use the fishing line. The Minister actually advised me that the recommended hook should be nine inches. So there is also need for the Minister to inform the fishermen because very many of them buy any size, which is available, starting from three inches. 

I also appeal to the Minister to come out clearly because if you are using the fishing line, then you must have species like haplochromine, Nsuma and Nsonzi, which are used as baits in order to attract the Nile Perch. When some of the fisheries officials we have on the waters find you with haplochromine, they would even arrest you. They say these are premature fish, yet their size, however much you leave them to grow, remains at two inches or less. 

On that note I thank the committee for recommending the catching of haplochromine (Nkejje), which is used to treat measles. So, if the Fisheries Department prevents the fishermen from catching them, then we shall be spending a lot of money on immunisation and even treating measles yet we have the medicine from the lake. So, the Minister should also come up clearly and guide the fishermen on how we can trap those species, which do not grow bigger.  

I disagree with the recommendation of the committee on page 16, which says that, “The genetically similar species should, therefore, be separated and researchers are urged to do their best to address this concern”.  

Mr Speaker, we all know the history of the Nile Perch and why it has come to capture the lake; it is because it was not labouring very much to get feeds. The moment you remove the haplochromine and other species and you just leave the Nile Perch alone in the lake, that will be a disaster. We actually know that the Nile Perch feeds on itself but as a last resort. It would not like to feed on the young Nile Perch, but when it is hungry, it has nothing to do. I appeal to the Ministry to come up with a mechanism of restoring the other species rather than removing them from Lake Victoria and leave the Nile Perch alone and it starts feeding on itself. At the end of the day even the output will decline.  

On marketing, I would like to enquire from the Minister; we actually know that the economy was liberalised but what annoys the fishermen is that most of the factories in Uganda under-price the Nile Perch. That is why there is a lot of reinforcement of soldiers on the islands bordering Uganda and Kenya. We were informed that Kenya exports and gains more from the fish industry than Uganda, but the problem is with our processing factories. 

For example, in December and November, a kilogram of Nile Perch was Shs 2,000 in Uganda, yet in Kenya it was worth Uganda Shs 3,500. That is why fishermen smuggle the fish to Kenya. When you tell the Minister, he will tell you, “liberalisation”. But these Indians are exploiting our people! It is imperative that government comes in and at least - because you can take an example of this period. A kilogram is at Uganda Shs 2,500 but the fuel these fishermen use is very expensive. So, there is need for the Ministry to intervene if we are to eradicate poverty, if we want to modernise the fishing industry. That means we are just modernising for the Indians, but the fishermen will die poor because whatever they get, they spend it on fuel to catch these fish. 

So, regarding the pricing, the Ministry should come out openly and advise us. Otherwise these Indians – and the moment the catch is good; we all know fish is a perishable product - they tend to be a disaster. They underpay them, they do not pay cash and they end up by paying them in barter system. For example, the Gomba fishnet costs Uganda Shs 25,000. But if the Indian is paying in barter terms, he prices it at the equivalent cost of Shs 40,000! You have no alternative; you supplied the fish, he is giving you the fishnets and the cost price per fishnet is Shs 40,000 and our people take it. 

So, as we are planning to modernise agriculture and to eradicate poverty, there is need for the Fisheries Department to investigate and find out whether what those industries are paying the fishermen, and what policies they are applying to the fishermen, really eradicate poverty. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

2.45
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to join my colleagues in thanking the committee, first of all, for their decision to go to the field to monitor and evaluate what is happening on the ground, and then for this good report they made. 

I associate myself with the contributions made by my previous colleagues, especially that of hon. Victoria Mwaka concerning the misconception of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA) and also of the design, which came out of it. I wish to also associate myself with the contributions made by the hon. Member from Jinja concerning the concept of the markets.

Mr Speaker, whenever you talk of modernisation of agriculture, it is commonly known that this is the domain of the Ministry of Agriculture, but because of the misconception, the Ministry of Agriculture only remained a small component in this so-called plan, which is in fact a framework. The other plans are to be implemented by other ministries and sectors and yet when we are looking at whether we are getting the impact of the plan, we are looking at the Ministry of Agriculture. So, there is a very big problem here. We should go back to the drawing board and see how we can harmonise the situation.

Concerning the markets, we have AGOA; we have Everything But Arms; we have Japan, Russia and everything. Yes, the markets may be there, but how do we access them? In the agricultural sector we need to do a lot because we have to re-orientate the sector in order to penetrate these very technical and competitive markets. This leads me to think that even the liberalisation policy concerning agriculture was perhaps premature. There is no way we can re-orient this sector, which is traditional, to catch up with the competitive hi-tech markets, for instance, AGOA, when we are depending entirely on the private sector. Definitely government has to come in to help this sector change and modernise so that we are assured of not only quantities, but also quality.

I interacted with some of the grain dealers, the consortium; one of them is Afroky. They told me that the regional market is there, but our maize grains are of very low quality. In fact there are about three grades, but our maize could not fit in any of them so they had to create a special grade, which is an inferior grade, for our maize. This shows that although the market may be there, we are not ready to penetrate it and have a good share of it unless a lot of things are done to modernise the production; to use techniques, which can reduce costs and which can improve the quality of the grains. 

This also goes to coffee because the report has already mentioned that the standard of our coffee is falling and, therefore, it may even give a bad reputation to Ugandan coffee. It was not very wise, Mr Speaker, to liberalise the coffee sub-sector entirely and leave it to the private operators. Maybe the Government, under UCDA, should have retained the Bugolobi plant for purposes of only controlling the quality of the berries before they are exported?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, hon. Kiwalabye, for giving way. The point you are articulating is so central to the livelihood of our people in Uganda, and I thought I would give information. It is not, first of all, correct for people to speculate that the international market of coffee has fallen. Coffee prices have been going down and up depending on the times. That does not necessarily mean that those that have invested in it should give up. 

Noting that coffee is such a valuable crop that it even features prominently on our Court of Arms, it is absolutely necessary for government to do whatever it can to promote the growth of that important crop. Not only that, the majority of our people entirely depend on coffee. Today’s abject poverty levels are greatly impacting our people. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were starting to contribute instead of giving information. Your contribution has been noted.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I was not actually playing down the importance of coffee or anything else. I was only saying that we need to do a lot, and whatever we need to do, cannot be entrusted to the private sector alone. Government has to come in to re-orient the sector so that we can penetrate these highly technical and competitive markets.  

I was also saying that not only markets like AGOA but also the regional markets and may be the internal markets should be explored. Because, Mr Speaker, when the NRM Government came to power, they had an objective, which I think was embedded in the Ten-point Programme. They wanted to build an economy, which is self-sustaining and integrated. So, if we still have that vision then we need the Government to spearhead, to help the sector modernise in such a way that we become self-sustaining economically; in such a way that the sector is integrated. By doing so we will be able to alleviate poverty amongst our people. This is how I look at it. 

But when you look at say, the AGOA market, and the Government item we have picked from there, and the way we are moving now, you see it is not integrated. It may not even be self-sustaining because I understand they are importing finished clothes out of which we are making garments to export to the AGOA market. We need to go down to our farmers to ensure that our farmers increase production. We should see that our farmers employ techniques, which will lead us into more production and improvement of quality, and then we move ahead. All those stages of turning cotton into yarn, weaving, and production of clothes, and even tailoring should be well planned, and we move to AGOA when our people are benefiting directly. This is how I look at it. Government cannot depend on the private sector to do all these things. Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. Our government has recognised that the private sector on its own cannot develop this economy. But I still find a problem with the people running our economy; they seem not to be putting to use the basic principles of economics. One of the basic investment principles is that investment should go to areas that have the highest returns. 

You remember in the 2002/2003 Budget our government came up with a policy of strategic intervention. The area that they decided to go into was maize. They got about US $2 million, put it into grain that is not even at the heart of our economy, and they abandoned a very key sector like coffee processing. In September last year, I was in London and by coincidence I met one of the Directors of Star Coffee on his market finding missions. When he realised that I was a Member of Parliament, he told me that, “You people in government have let us down because there is market but we lack the financial capacity to invest in quality improvement ventures”. As you know Star Coffee does their roasting in Tanzania and the packaging here. But you also know that we got about Shs 13 billion and gave it to the Tri-Star people who are just importing already completed fabric. The point I am making is that our government should get serious, focused, and put investment in areas that make the highest returns. I thank you.

MRS KULANY: Mr Speaker, thank you. On quality, what the honourable member is trying to say is very important. I come from a coffee growing area but the reports we have received of recent are very discouraging. The two research centres, which we have for Arabica coffee are soon closing down and if we are talking about quality, I do not know how we are going to maintain this quality when we close down these research centres. 

At the same time we have requested government to carry out pest control on coffee. But up to now there is nothing and this coffee is in danger of getting all sorts of diseases. Yet at the same time we are saying that coffee is the backbone of this country’s economy? So, to me we are not serious on quality and maintaining the coffee itself. Thank you.

MR KIWALABYE: I would like to thank the honourable members for enriching my argument. 

Mr Speaker, I appreciate government’s effort in intervening in some of these areas. The committee informed us that there are interventions in the coffee sub-sector, especially to do with the seedlings. I think this intervention is aimed at increasing the production and quality of coffee, given the improved variety.  

However, I am sad to say that the way the whole exercise is being handled leaves a lot to be desired. Much of these seedlings are wasted. In my own constituency in the village from which I come, these agricultural officers brought seedlings at night and just dumped them under a mango tree. We woke up in the morning to see seedlings just heaped there. Nobody was taking care of them, farmers were not informed, and local leaders were not informed. So we were wondering, what had happened -(Interruption)

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. Actually what the Member is saying is true. They have also been doing it in our constituencies; they just bring the seedlings and dump them there. But I think the reason is that there is a lot of eating behind the whole thing. When they dump the seeds they will claim they have delivered 30,000 or 50,000 seedlings, when in fact they have delivered about 5,000 or 8,000 seedlings. This is the practice everywhere that seedlings have been delivered.   

At one time, Mr Speaker, I had requested the Ministry of Agriculture to take an audit of this exercise of seedlings. But I do not know – I never got an answer and I am really wondering whether the Minister took it seriously. So, what my colleague is saying is true; and unless the Ministry takes the trouble to follow this up and audit, we might find they are just dumping money into a bottomless pit. I thank you, my colleague.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I do not need to add much to that, I think the point is made. I want to touch very little on the recommendation of the committee that the Government should establish an agricultural bank. 

You remember some of us who were not amused by the sale of UCB were saying that before the independence of this country farmers were organising themselves into movements and boycotts and they were left out of these banks manned by foreigners. We were not catering for the interests of the rural farmers and something had to be done. So other banks were set up: the Credit and Savings Bank, later on the Commercial Bank, the Co-operative Banks, all aimed at solving this problem. 

This government has also done something; the divestiture capital, this is what we call Entandikwa, which has failed; then the Rural Farmers’ Scheme and others. But up to now it is a challenge to all of us leaders, not government alone. If there is need for our people to access credit at reasonable interest with a special arrangement, it is upon us now to design a scheme, which will fit the needs of our people.  

The sale of UCB was unfortunate because it took us back to the pre-independence period. We had moved a step ahead; maybe we needed to improve on it but now we are back. And the committee in their wisdom says we should have an agricultural bank, again to cater for the needs of our people. I think this is a very big challenge and indeed it is a serious matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.03
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. When we talk about PMA and we see it on roads, in the Ministry of Works, in schools and in the Ministry of Education, we see it in the Ministry of Trade and Industry, and in the Ministry of Agriculture itself, can I say, therefore, that PMA belongs to every ministry because every ministry essentially works for the progress of this country? If PMA is for the progress of this country, it therefore means PMA is doted all over each of these ministries. If that assumption is correct, I think this is a good plan, which has been fundamentally misplaced and is being misused.

One reason I say it is being misused or mis-focused is accountability. While sums of money are being injected into the various sectors of this economy under the guise of PMA, how do we stand to measure the successes of each of these ministries with respect to its portion of PMA and see value for money in the projects that are being undertaken? Maybe we could ask another question. Would, for example, the Ministry of Works not construct roads in some areas by virtue of the mandate it has been given as a ministry responsible for roads? Would it fail to construct the roads merely because PMA does not operate there or it would only construct roads when the PMA project is also allotted to it?

Mr Speaker, I think PMA is a good thing, but when you spread it all over, we fail to get the proper focus of what is should do. Each ministry has its own different ways and objectives of attaining the goals it is supposed to attain. My assertion here is that PMA should be focused and be made within the confines of the Ministry of Agriculture with a defined strategy, and with defined objectives. That way these objectives will be achieved within specific periods of time and would be measurable –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. You may give out good seeds, you may preach all the good agronomic practices, but all that may come to naught if you do not have rural roads, if there is no electricity in the rural areas, if there are no agro-processing mechanisms, and if there are no marketing mechanisms. That is why the PMA framework – they call it a plan, but I call it a framework - that is why the framework for agricultural modernisation is based in different ministries so that each of those organs can handle their bits specifically. 

I wish to clarify that my own ministry handles research and advisory services. The other ministries, which are most competent to do that, handle the other areas like rural roads because if all this was in my ministry - My God! My ministry would be the whole government. We would have to do the rural roads, the rural electricity, the agro processing, the marketing, my God! 

The only way to handle this is to spread out so that each of the Government organs does what it is best at. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I hope this House appreciates these concepts as we deliberate on this matter. May I also thank the House for actually showing a lot of acquaintance with PMA. It is my conviction that the honourable members will take all this into account as we debate this matter. 

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the Minister has given us a clarification, which begets another question: if all other sectors are involved, as he is saying, does it, therefore, mean that without PMA those ministries would have been doing nothing for this country? Obviously, it means –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, honourable member. What he was saying was that this is a programme of government that involves different activities in order to accomplish what they want. You have to have roads, you have to have electricity; you have to have industries. These industries and roads cannot go to the Ministry of Agriculture, but if they do what they are supposed to do, then you may achieve the mission of the programme; this is what he was saying.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I will agree with you entirely but my contention is very simple. If that is the position, which I think is a good one, then the bigger question comes in: what about the rest of the country, which has not had this project? What is the role of the ministries and PMA in those areas where PMA is not? Does it, therefore, mean that the overall picture, which you are trying to create, does not exist in those places? 

For example, PMA is in 24 districts and Uganda has 56 districts; what is happening there if the overall programme of government of development rotates around PMA?  

Thirdly, we are talking about modernisation, which rotates around and gravitates towards agriculture, which should have a spread effect horizontally to other sectors of the economy through other ministries. Have we, since the period this concept was developed, made an evaluation and known how far we have gone, and how much more we should go in the attainment of the goals of PMA? In the absence of all these, we are running into a sea where we do not see an end to the running.  

Finally, the Minister in his explanation has also stated that there is NAADS and there are also other forms of services that the Ministry of Agriculture now extends to the farmers under PMA. But most of the people in this country are really peasants. I can say very authoritatively that not too long ago I was living day to day with peasants, their attitude, their aspirations and their expectations gravitate towards government moving to give them a sense of direction in whatever they are doing. 

In the past, for instance, government used to render extension services to these peasants as a means of elevating them in knowledge and making them more productive. Now these things have been left and government is not providing extension services because everything has been privatised to the extent that some of these farmers have lost direction in how they can produce. They are not subsidised, because we are now in the WTO era, and yet they are expected to compete on the international market where farmers in developed countries are being highly subsidised. Could the Government tell me how they reconcile the two positions? How are we going to make ourselves as competitive as those in the developed countries who are highly subsidised? I thank you.

3.14
REV. HAMLET KABUSHENGA (Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable members –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I request that you really be brief. Take five to seven minutes, not more than that.  

REV. KABUSHENGA: I wish to shade some light on two important issues about this report: marketing and access to credit. Many members have spoken about them, but the aspect I am mentioning is enhancement of local markets. 

While we have done quite a lot in developing export markets for vanilla, honey, silk and others, and even put in place an Export Promotions Board, which is doing a very good job, I would like to remind the Ministry of Agriculture about the dangers of putting all our hopes in this export market. First of all, because of the instability of the export market, in that the strategy of the countries and people that consume what we call the high value products that we are promoting in this country, is always to give a lot of market and encourage people to produce a lot. Eventually you have got more supply than demand and the prices come down again. This is what we are seeing in the coffee industry. 

The coffee industry has, among other things, been affected by the entry of new producers. Countries like Vietnam, which never used to be heard of, are now out competing us. So, when we develop our markets abroad, that is a very good thing because that brings in hard currency. But it has the problem of not being consistently reliable. Factors can change anytime and you then have the problem of dealing with the things you have produced and the production levels you have established. That also poses a problem for our people.

Looking at the commodities we import, the refining ability that the producers have got still needs many years to develop. We hope that one day the UPE graduates will go to technical schools and maybe 20 years from now we will have competent, vocationally trained people who will produce for competing with people from more developed countries. But this is yet to come and one of the solutions we are trying to develop is to harness the markets in our own country. And an important area of business that we have almost completely ignored is the schools and the young people. 

I believe that most members here will at least watch international marketing programmes. If you look at the way Coca-cola does their marketing, or MacDonald’s, the American company, their primary target are the infants. That is why even a five or six year old child in Kinkiizi will already be disgusted with Bushera and banana juice and will be longing for the Coca-cola because they say “share the fun wherever” and it becomes a childish thing.

I want to say that our Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance need to intentionally invest in going to our educational institutions and teaching people to eat the things that we are promoting. We talk about vanilla but no one in the country knows what vanilla is used for. They all tell you that it is a small and long bean, which generates wealth, like gold. Unless we actually go to the secondary and primary schools and give them a scoop of vanilla ice cream maybe once a month, we will not establish that market base. In our own country it is the graduates who go to Garden City and say, “I am looking for vanilla ice cream”. But this is how developed countries have handled their economics; the beef burgers are given free of charge to some children.  

We need to realize that government decided to promote cheese but if we do not teach our upcoming graduates how to eat cheese and appreciate it, then we shall remain dependent on the export market. That is why, for example, many who have invested in the production of cheese have been beaten because when you go to Garden City, Uchumi and Shoprite, you will actually find there are shelves, which are no-go areas for Ugandans. We assume that these are things to be eaten by bazungu yet we are promoting them for our people to produce.

I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Agriculture and to the Ministry of Finance to go out and teach our young people and introduce them to these products. When you are in school, Mr Speaker, anything is delicious because you are starving, and by the time you come out of school you like it very much. I would like to appeal to the Ministry to put into consideration funds and plans for interesting the young people into eating the things we are producing. So, that if one day the international markets are saturated, instead of struggling like we struggle with coffee, they can be consumed locally. That is the self-sustaining economy that we are all looking for.

Mr Speaker, the other aspect I want to speak about is access to credit. I happen to be one of the people who have taken up government’s challenge that we revive co-operatives. In the last two years I have started two co- operatives: one for adults and now I am starting one for youths. These are already registered with the support of the Co-operative Alliance. The problem we have is that the cost of finance that these co-operatives and the village banks have got and the cost of servicing the monies borrowed even from government bodies like the micro-finance centres, is ridiculous when seen in light of agricultural production.  

I have been waiting for an opportunity to take the Ministry of Finance to task. He should come up with a sample business plan for one agricultural product in which you can invest money borrowed at 30 percent per annum and you earn a living. And the issue of interest rates is not the only one people have to struggle with. 

Our Ministry of Agriculture has got to realize that the introduction of UPE is a very good thing but it has made labour in the rural areas highly competitive. You have to persuade people to work for you yet you pay them. I grow tea and we have to pay Shs 100 per kilo to those who pick the green leaf, yet the market price is Shs 150 per kilo. So, 70 percent of what a farmer gets for tea goes to picking the green leaf, after looking after the crop for three years! Hence, our Agriculture Ministry needs to realize that if credit is too expensive, labour has also become expensive. 

The attitude of our people towards agricultural work has always been negative. Tractors have become impossible - to plough one acre with a tractor in Kinkiizi, there are very few places in the rift valley, like in Katete parish in Kinkiizi East where they can use tractors. You need Shs 50,000 per acre. If you have got to pay for labour or pay for the tractor, and you have to also pay 30 percent interest, then we are not helping the agricultural sector to develop. This has resulted in people borrowing from the village banks, but only for crisis borrowing.  

I want us, if possible, to do research and say; “Where does the money that we are borrowing as a country to support the micro-finance industry end up?” It ends up paying school fees; it ends up paying medical bills. I am not saying that these are not important but our aim in borrowing this money, in putting our country in debt for 40 or 50 years, is to stimulate profitable agricultural production. But the interest rates are very prohibitive. Therefore, the call for an agricultural bank is ripe indeed but we know there are many hurdles. We are still in privatisation and by the time we jump all the political and economic hurdles in the donor world, to go back into state enterprises, there is a challenge.  

I would like to propose an intermediate solution to this problem. For example, the reason money that is borrowed from government agencies is at 30 percent to the farmer is that there are too many intermediaries. The village bank borrowing money from the micro-finance support centre has got to pay 15 percent; then you have to go to your village bank and they charge 15 percent, which you have to pay back; plus another 15 or 20 percent for your local running costs. Why, for example, does the Ministry of Finance not allow these agencies of government to do capacity building?  

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Uganda Co-operative Alliance because they invest most of their money in capacity building. Sometimes they subsidize our village banks so that we do not load too much interest on the borrower. Why does the Ministry of Finance not get rid of these agencies as far as handling the money is concerned? Why do they not build the capacity of village banks so that these village banks can access the money directly from the Bank of Uganda? That would bring the interest rates down to about 10 percent or even less. Then it would make sense for the person who is borrowing for agriculture.  

I want to call upon our Ministry of Agriculture and Finance to work harder to harness the markets among our young people, and also to remove the intermediaries who are making micro-finance too expensive and, therefore, agricultural production non-profitable. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.25
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for a good job done in monitoring, and for reporting to Parliament on what they have found in the Ministry of Agriculture.  

Without shame I stand here and say that we are dealing with a situation of a disorganized Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Finance. If you come to Bulamogi, Mr Speaker - I hope one of these days you will come over - you will see what they mean by being disorganized. As I speak today the farmers are about to abandon planting cotton because the economy was liberalized, privatised and people accepted and they started planting cotton. They looked for seeds and planted. Then Government came and started ordering people, “You are not supposed to sell cotton to North Bukedi; you should sell to somebody whom the Government wants you to sell to.” Yet they were not available to give us the seeds. This is one aspect, which contradicts the whole aspect that we are moving forward. We are actually moving around in circles.  

Farmers are given seeds late continuously and I do not know whether it is with the blessing of the Minister or CDO - we wonder really! We go out to mobilize people and tell them, “Please keep yourselves busy. There are no jobs in Kampala; find something to do here, which is tangible.” When we advise the people to do that we hear some other people sabotaging us. This style of doing things, Mr Speaker, is not good. 

If you observe the Ministry of Agriculture, yes, they did a good job. We thank the Minister of Agriculture. When you did research in Kawanda you promoted clonal coffee and we started distributing it. I will not repeat what my friend’s comments have been on that. But I wonder at the way the Ministry of Agriculture is addressing the issue of cotton in Busoga, a renowned area in the world on cotton growing. It makes me doubt you. Does the Government really care for the people of Busoga region? 

Busoga region is renown for oranges, but today you would be lucky to get a sweet orange from Busoga. In fact I was surprised at the oranges now got from Luwero and Masaka; even when you test them they are not sweet at all. One wonders what is going on! This morning when I was in the market in Nakasero, I was being shown tangerines, which come from Tunisia, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you surprised that Masaka is also doing the same thing as you do?

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Yes, it is true because if you test the mangoes, which are being marketed along Masaka Road, they are very sour. That means the Ministry of Agriculture is intentionally telling farmers to just go and stand on the road with fruits, which cannot help the farmers themselves. In short, is he marketing the whole issue?

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I do not blame the speaker who is on the Floor for his observations on mangoes from Masaka. What is happening, and what this House should note, is that there is an absence of research. Most of the research institutions in agriculture are dying out; they are not there. So people just plant anything and the Ministry does not check this. There is no research institution for agriculture, which the Ministry has set itself to develop. So, I am not surprised that you are observing that. Thank you.

MR GAGAWALA: Thank you very much, hon. Member of Parliament. Mr Speaker, even if you go to the Minister’s constituency - the one in charge – he knows what to do to graft oranges and mangoes but if you go today to one of the markets in his constituency and tested a mango, you would be lucky to find a sweet mango like the one that comes from Tanzania or Kenya. It is surprising because we are at the vintage point. We could take advantage of the opportunity as far as Uganda is concerned in fruits, fish and agriculture. But what we are producing is substandard. 

I, therefore, accept the recommendation of this committee that we should take advantage and establish what the Europeans are insisting on, that we should finance standardization. We have low standards for what we export, therefore, we should vote quickly and give them the money and then we shall hang them when they do not perform. It is not right when we do not give them the money to expect them to perform. This is an area called the Great Lakes, with fresh waters; we should be experts on fish.    

My constituency is now begging for fish fries, really why should a peasant beg for fish fries when he has already dug a pond of 30 meters by 30 meters? The Government should be willing to give them the fish fries so that they go on with the business and then harvest. We would even save the lakes if we kept our peasants digging fishponds and we fed on fish from these fish fries. Mr Speaker, we are running a disorganized system and it is this Parliament, which should put its foot down and actually force the Executive to order those who are in the field to do what is required of them. 

Mr Speaker, it is possible for this country to even conquer the field of fish farming because Kenya and Egypt cannot compete with us on fresh water fish. Here is an opportunity, which we are ignoring. Water is coming to Lake Kyoga and then to the River Nile. We are losing Lake Kyoga; it is all just silted up. We expected the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to plant trees along the banks of Lake Kyoga but this was not done. Fifty years from today there will be no Lake Kyoga because the Ministry of Agriculture did not observe it. Therefore, we shall go back to the quagmire of more and more poverty. Mr Speaker, I beg to stop here.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.

3.32
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (Kawempe County North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to those of members who have thanked the Agriculture Committee for a good report. I have a few points to raise. 

One, I would like to support the committee’s recommendation to set up an agricultural bank. Mr Speaker, a lot has been said about what happened to our former UCB. We had what was called the Rural Farmers’ Scheme under UCB and it tried to assist rural farmers in agriculture. I will not buy the idea of some members who suggest that since there is an introduction of micro-finance institutions, then these institutions could do the work that would have been done by agricultural banks. We all know that these micro finance institutions are even more expensive than commercial banks. So, it is my humble request to the Government, through the Prime Minister, that they should think about establishing agricultural banks to assist the backbone of our economy. 

Secondly, I represent an urban constituency. The issue of urban farming in the Ministry of Agriculture has not been handled well. We all know that even in urban areas they could grow various foodstuffs that could be of great importance to our lives. There are many constituencies, which are urban-based. The Ministry of Agriculture could extend a helping hand to ensure that there is sensitisation. Various facilities should be given to our people in urban centres as these could be very useful in as far as supporting agriculture is concerned.

Mr Speaker, coming back to PMA, the term sounds a little bit good – Plan for Modernization of Agriculture. For the past many years we have been talking about modernizing agriculture but it does not make sense that five years down the road we do not have any sample district or model district where PMA has been successful by 100 percent or 80 percent. We cannot talk about PMA when almost all farmers, apart from a few, are still using a hoe. We are still relying on nature. There is no kind of irrigation in most districts of our country. 

My humble suggestion is that instead of concentrating on capacity building workshops and other seminars that consume a lot of money, let the Ministry of Agriculture select four districts from our four historical regions. Let him put all the various initiatives in as far as PMA is concerned, and those districts will serve as the model districts so that we could go to them to see the impact of PMA. We shall continue saying that PMA is a good idea but when there is actually nothing to show on the ground. So, it would be better if they selected one district from every region and ensured - it may be Tororo or any other district - so that we get role model districts.

After that we shall get interested in extensively supporting the work of PMA. But as we speak now, PMA is more talked about that seen on the ground.

Finally, we should look at the short-term and long-term initiatives or interventions. When we talk about PMA - the Minister has already talked about the various sectors that could be consulted. When we put up a road, it is also under PMA; we are modernizing agriculture through having a better road network. But on the ground let us support the Minister of Agriculture. The Government could also come up and support these farmers by establishing agro-processing industries so that the issue of farmers depending on the ready market for their tomatoes is solved. If you do not get market today then those tomatoes could be used in the agro-processing industry and then we get tomato paste or tomato sauce.  

There is a lot of work to be done by the Ministry of Agriculture. There is also a lot of work to be done by this Parliament. We need to increase input and give in our suggestions in as far as improving PMA is concerned. I beg to sit, Mr Speaker.

3.39
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will just make a few but very important remarks. One of such remarks is related to what my colleague from Kawempe has articulated: the concern for promoting agriculture in urban areas. There is money from our partner donors related to how agriculture in urban areas can be promoted. I would like to charge the Government for being ignorant of the existence of that fund, and yet that fund is very relevant to a country like Uganda, which is landlocked. 

For example, what modern agriculture trends can you advance if you cannot invest in urban areas? -(Interruption)  

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification. The contributor is really an urban representative. He should be able to show us what he has been able to do so that we can also learn from him.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, in places like Kabowa and in Mutundwe near Kisigula, we have fish farming. It needs promotion by funding of the respective farmers to produce more so that the urban population can enjoy those resources. 

DR CHEBROT: I would like to thank hon. Lukyamuzi for the issues he has raised about urban farming. My only concern is that most of our waters in the urban areas are polluted, especially the swamps. As of now the incidence of liver cancer in Makerere has increased by almost 20 times because of the high incidence of lead. 

I thought hon. Lukyamuzi should not be talking of the need to abandon fish farming because of the many garages that dispose of lead and the many factories, which are making batteries. All these are being washed up into the swamps where they are growing yams and where the sugarcane is growing. And there are very many people who are eating sugarcane, yams and fish from the towns. So, because of increasing disposal of lead, we should be talking about abandoning agriculture in the towns. We should only engage in agriculture upcountry.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you for giving way.  I beg this House to take the matter on the Floor very seriously. If we do not then even next year we will be discussing similar problems. Agriculture does not depend on farming or digging the ground alone. No! We do a lot of modernised agriculture from the house. I do a lot of mushroom farming from a very small house. Let us take this matter seriously. Let us help the Government to see where we should be going. So, I would like to support hon. Lukyamuzi that even urban farming is very possible. I thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. Dr Chebrot, you should know that there areas where fish is grown, which are not necessarily swampy. You do not need to have a swamp to promote fish farming. I wish you would know that. And in areas like Mutundwe and in Kisigula, which I talked about, there are no swamps but fish farming is being undertaken.   

In regard to areas, which are suffering from extreme pollution, it is government to be blamed because it is dealing with quack investors without standards of affluent treatment. And we are charging it now that it must stop and it must control them because the environment in the urban areas must be protected from depletion. It does not mean that when the swamps are in Kampala, they must suffer the agony of toxicity. Government must understand and work along these lines.

I expected the report to have expressed concern about the need for government to promote a clean and well-protected environment. Modern agriculture in Africa demands awareness about the protection of the environment so that you can retain the rains and good climate if you are to promote agriculture. The seasons have changed; the rains have gone because of deforestation. I expected the report to recommend the need for government to promote agro-forestry so that we can regain what we have lost in terms of rain and appropriate seasons. I wish I were the promoter of that committee; possibly I would have highlighted greater dimensions of environmental sustenance in terms of agriculture.

In light of that, I would like to recommend that following a very high degree of deforestation in Uganda, if we are to regain its glory in terms of climate and rain, we should promote agro forestry as a prerequisite in our agricultural practices. 

I will not talk about the calamities of palm oil in Kalangala, which tends to cause deforestation later on robbing the area of ecological arrangements; because I might be dragging you into a scenario of critique.  

However, the farmers in Uganda are in real trouble. One even wonders how the farmers survive. The sale of UCB, for example, was one of the most unfortunate events because it totally impacted on our farmers. I could not have gone to school if my mother had not invested in growing coffee. For as long as coffee and cotton loom large on the Court of Arms of Uganda, every Government we elect must of necessity promote coffee and cotton. If you are not able to promote that, go away and an alternative Government takes over. This is a very serious statement, Mr Speaker, I am making. There are no jokes. 

We are mandated to promote the Court of Arms, which bears two important crops depicting our lifestyle. If the colonialists could get markets for our people and they lived well, what about this government in which we are supposed to have confidence after independence? One of the problems you are suffering from is exercising too much – (Interruption)

MR OPANGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Lukyamuzi for giving way. I wish to inform the House that the marketing of cotton is now better than it was in 1980. The people from Pallisa have the prices for cotton but their complaint is the monopoly of selling only to particular individuals; but the marketing strategy is good. Thank you very much.

MR LUKYAMUZI: If you are addressing the cotton sector I do not exactly know, but I am capitalizing on the coffee scenario. Mr Speaker, coffee is very important because after abandoning the Co-operatives, which were doing the supervision on behalf of government the coffee farmer is on his own now. Nobody is interested in the procurement of markets and people have now abandoned the growing of coffee. 

There is no evidence internationally, and I have done some research, that coffee growers must be badly off because the prices have gone down. It has been an on-going scenario: the coffee prices fall and rise. You can revisit the case studies of Argentina and Brazil respectively. These are traditional growers of coffee and farmers in those countries are quite well off unlike in Uganda where the Government - because of over-privatisation and liberalization - has left the farmer to hang. 

One warning I want to give is that if an alternative government emerges, we are going to ensure that we take up coffee seriously so that we guarantee the markets for coffee growers in Uganda - in our next campaign for the Presidency.

You should not take things for granted. For example, after dismantling UCB where the farmers had a relevant business, you have not put up any alternative. The name UCB has been left to hang. There is not even a replacement to echo that glorious name for which we had long been proud. So, the best I can tell you is that the moment we have political changes, we are going to regain UCB so that it starts activities in normal circumstances.  

I want to submit that internationally both coffee and cotton are still marketable. I also want to submit that it was a great agony for the Government of Uganda to have dismantled the coffee plant at Bugolobi. It is a regret we have never heard the President apologizing for that. I again want to warn that the moment we come to power we are going to regain that plant so that it exercises the role it was supposed to do in years past; and it is a serious undertaking. I have not come here to joke.

I want to end with this submission that Uganda is one of the richest countries in the world; we do not know that it is rich. We are poor not because we are poor but because we lack focus on how we can plan over the best way of rationally using our natural resources. Give us time so that we map out a trend where people can begin valuing the existence of the diverse natural resources in their country. For example, the hon. Minister of Finance, Gerald Ssendaula should be able to balance the budget if we knew how to rationally use our resources. 

We end up inviting foreigners to come to Uganda to maximise utilities related to electricity and return the same to Mbeki’s territory while we are yawning. What are we up to? Can we not manage that resource of power after 42 years of political independence? People must be joking, we must reverse the trend and time is now.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, so far 26 members have contributed to this report and the chairperson has told us that there is another part. This is part I, there is part II of the report. Do you not think we should now hear from the Minister and we conclude this debate? What I have heard has been a duplication of the same points. Don’t you think we should end this debate now?  

MS NAMAGGWA: Mr Speaker, yesterday when you were introducing this topic and giving us the opportunity to talk about it, you wished the House would gather more Members to listen to the problems in PMA. Unfortunately, this is not on the side of government and as we are told mainly the parts that are here are covering every ministry. But when you look at the House there is only Minister of Agriculture. The Minister for Gender has just come in. So, we only have the Ministry of Agriculture and Public Service. 

I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister whether he is taking note of all the areas that have been covered whose ministries are not represented? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well you are seeking clarification from the Prime Minister and he is here. But before he comes in, I just want to find out whether you do not think we should end this debate?  

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, yesterday we were here, we represent people who are predominantly peasants and agriculturalists. If we are not given a chance to talk on their behalf, what are we doing here? We come and sit here up to 5.00 p.m. and leave. One problem with us here is that we do not keep time. Some people then are given excess time and others are not even given a chance. You should think about it.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, honourable member, you came late. (Laughter). Yesterday, as you remember, when we adjourned I had said we would begin with hon. Nyeko who is not here. You came late - I think an hour or so after we had started. Maybe you lost the opportunity because I had said that after hon. Nyeko I was going to side and you were not there - (Laughter)- this is a fact. But do we really –(Interruption) 

MR BADDA: Mr Speaker, I suggest with due respect that you leave the three Members of Parliament that you had pointed out to talk and then we conclude. I was the first one. (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will take that. But I have to include the woman Member for Rakai for gender balance. So we shall move that way.

3.56
MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I insist on talking today because I know this report has matters concerning my constituency, and which matters are really unique. I would like on this note to thank the committee for visiting different parts of the country and more especially crossed the lake and visited Kalangala District.

About the Vegetable Oil Development Project, I am going to talk about the “shoes” as you said yesterday, the agriculture part of it. As the primary beneficiaries of this project we have been eagerly waiting for the project for the last six years and we are in full support of it. More than 30 demonstration plots were set up six years ago and these have been used by the Government to see the viability of the project in these islands. They have been working as demonstration plots but they have also been working as trial centres. Farmers manage them and now there is production. 

There is one thing that I want the Minister to note about these farmers. As the Agriculture Committee may bear witness, we are now processing palm oil in these demonstration centres in a very crude and difficult manner. There is only one hand mill, which the committee visited. All the 30 demonstrating farmers, who are spaced widely, cannot use this hand mill. So, my request on this note is for the Minister to make sure that instead of buying the many vehicles I see in Kampala written on “Vegetable Oil Development Project” on almost every street, at least buy ten mills and give them to these farmers. Because even if the project is not taking on tomorrow, these farmers are already suffering with the product. That is about palm oil. Otherwise, we are eagerly waiting for the project.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, it is about fisheries. The committee noted that there was a matter, which had a significant bearing on the sector, and this was the ban on fish and its impact – it is in the introduction of the report. The committee says that it was an attempt. I want to inform you that it was not an attempt but it was really done and the impact is still going on up to now. In the first place –(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) I have little time. I am not taking the information now.

Mr Speaker, the President lifted the ban but the effect it had on our poor fishermen is this. Every fisherman bought the small gear, which was then illegal but had been rendered legal by that announcement. The fishermen spent a lot of money; they went to banks and borrowed money to invest in this new venture. After three weeks the ban was reinstated. The fishermen lost the money –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that within these three weeks they spent millions to buy the gear?

MR BADDA: They spent millions of money within one week to buy the gear. For one boat you need gear of about Shs 3 million to operate. So, people borrowed money because they knew they were going to gain but after three weeks the ban was reinstated and this affected them greatly. We do not know who will pay, and I think government has to apologize for this. 

When the Minister reinstated the ban, he announced that all the contracted military agencies that had been put on the lake to curb illegal fishing should not go back to the lake. But as I was visiting my constituency during recess I found all types of military agencies moving around the lake –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the member declined to receive your clarification and he is entitled to that.

MR BADDA: So, I would like the Minister to tell us which military agencies are now supposed to be on the lake. What is their role on the lake; because we cannot now differentiate between legal military agencies and pirates or thieves who also carry guns?

About the market of fish, there is one issue that is disturbing fishermen as their access to the markets. The major markets are around Entebbe Airport: Kasenyi, Kitubulu and other landing sites. We have a very big problem, which the Fisheries Minister and the Minister for the Presidency has to look into. Whenever our President is leaving this country, or when he is coming back and using Entebbe Airport, our fishermen are not allowed to leave the landing sites until very late at night. They end up getting lost on the lake, getting accidents and not working the following day. 

So, they are always asking, “Is the President travelling today or tomorrow?” Then they will not work at all because they know they will be losing money and they will be exposed to very serious risks of accidents on the lake.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this one concerns agriculture. We have always been hearing the slogan of government intervention, but we are perturbed. We do not know exactly what government intervention is all about. I would have expected this report to show which crops and which areas are going to be beneficiaries. And what exactly is government going to do as it intervenes? Is it provision of seeds alone; is it provision of irrigation materials; is it provision of market? What is it and what has so far been done? 

I would also have expected some data because government intervention has been going on for so many years. What has been the impact, and impact is measured by levels of production so we expected to see some figures of the impact of government intervention, on specific crops. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. Many comments have been made especially in relation to my personal reservations about PMA. So I will not repeat those but I want to say that I continue to pray for this nation that somehow by God’s mercy and miracle this PMA will become something that Ugandans will be proud of. I really have my reservations but I will leave it at that. 

I want to go to the comment made by the committee that there is a high cost of seemingly peripheral activities. I have always wondered: there is a document that PMA sends out called “Activities of this week”! You look at that document and you wonder whether the Ministry of Finance has ever really sat down to look at the cost of this little activity. For instance, I found a document in my pigeonhole. It is PMA Progress Report from October to December 2003. The distribution list involves the Vice-President, the Prime Minister, the Ministers, the Permanent Secretaries and all sorts of people in the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Forestry and so forth. Then you have the RDCs, LC III Chairpersons, sub-county chiefs and so forth. 

I thought surely the Ministry of Finance in this age of IT should at least think of the Ministers and the Permanent Secretaries and all these categories of people to have access to the Internet. You can imagine we are 304 Members of Parliament and this document, which if you read it has nothing different from what you got last week. So, you just read one and you have it all. 

Surely, why do you not just put this document on the Internet and if anybody wants to access it - all these Members of Parliament have at least an e-mail address. Put it on the e-mail and tell us that we have just posted it and whoever wants it can go and read it. Why do you have to send us all this paper? And have you really bothered, since it is the Ministry of Finance, to assess how much this costs? This nation is suffering under the weight of this kind of things that are not thought out and at the end of the day there is nothing to show for it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.08
MR KIBANZANGA MBALIBULHA (Busongora County South, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to also contribute to this debate. I am not really thanking the committee because I have a feeling that they are not properly guiding the Ministry of Agriculture. I have been here for two days and members are simply lamenting. 

I am a mountain boy, I come from the mountains; for me it is beyond lament because PMA is nowhere to be seen in my area. I would like to ask the Ministry of Agriculture and Finance, now that you have a song about a vision, is PMA a vision or a plan? If it is a vision, Mr Speaker and honourable members, then we can continue talking about it. The next generation will make a proper plan for the modernization of agriculture. If it is a plan then it is a wrong plan. 

If a government plan takes five to ten years on paper then you had better abandon it, it will never work. I wish these honourable members went to Libya to see the Green Policy of Muammar Ghadafi. You can imagine a desert can now produce food enough to feed the whole of Africa for six years in case there is a crisis. In Uganda where you simply throw a seed, it germinates and you go back for harvest, and you continue talking about PMA in the air-conditioned buildings for five to ten years? That becomes a vision. It is not a plan. 

Mr Speaker, a very good plan must be divided into phases. We should be asking: which phase are we? But everybody is lamenting; we do not even know which phase we are on. “PMA, PMA”; have we started, are we ending, where are we? Who are the target people of every phase? Even a simple house must be developed in phases with a time frame for every phase. But this PMA has no phases and no time frame. Which activity are we beginning with: distributing coffee seedlings? Is the whole country going to grow coffee? Is Karamoja going to grow coffee? Are we going to talk about coffee seedlings for next ten years? 

Why do you not advise the Ministry to divide this plan into phases? Why? Why do we not have production zones to pilot this project? 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we know what constitutes modern agriculture; it is not talking amongst ourselves. We go to the farmers and here you have a problem because you still have peasants. You have not even transformed this peasantry class into modern farmers. In modernized agriculture you must invest capital. Which phase are you at? Where is the capital you are investing in this agriculture? It must be commercial because you are modernizing it, moving it from subsistence to commercial. 

When it comes to commercial farming, where is the market? Where is the storage? Can you store this product up to the next generation? I grew up in Kasese. We had a Produce Marketing Board, our stores are there and there is nothing. Even the Ministry does not know that Produce Marketing Board had property in Kasese, you do not know, and you talk of modernizing agriculture! The railway line, are we going to continue transporting this produce, as you increase production, using minibuses? The railway line is dead. The people of Kamwenge no longer even supply Kampala because it is too costly to use vehicles. What are you talking about?

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by saying that PMA looks like a vision now that you clamour about visions; it looks like a vision. I can only say that continue talking about it, popularise it until the next generation makes a concrete plan for the modernisation of agriculture. But the way you move with this plan of yours, forget you are going to modernise - zero. I thank you.

4.13
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the last two days I have been here listening to people discussing this report. I kept on asking myself whether the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is still relevant to this country? Even this report by the Committee on Agriculture would have been discussed by the Finance Committee because it came from the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries does not own the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture. That is why I ask: are they still relevant? 

You can see all the papers; we are getting them from the Secretary to the Treasury. They cannot manage production because they do not have the money; the money goes through Finance. They cannot manage the market because the marketing is under the Ministry of Trade and Industry. Then what is the relevance of the Ministry with three or four Ministers there? What is the relevance? Unless we get serious - I have been seeing all these documents. What is the input of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture? Maybe then we would know if they are still relevant and are ready to modernise using a hoe. 

How is the Ministry ready to produce enough cotton for the AGOA market? What tonnes do they need? What have they produced so far? I do not know. And there are many other projects. For example, the Kalangala Project about their palm oil would be good, but what is the implement of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries?  

I know public/private partnerships are good; they are working very well in the Ministry of Health. But what is the input of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in this public/private partnership in Kalangala for producing palm oil, and how are the Ugandans going to benefit? Those are the questions we should be asking.

Mr Speaker, I sympathise with the committee because I think technocrats from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, whom they had, did not actually know anything because they do not own the plan. I do not know whether it is a plan, a program, a vision or whatever you would call it. Leave alone the coffee they have been distributing, I do not know whether they have got concrete statistics, as we have been distributing coffee seedlings for a very long time. But of these seedlings they purport to have distributed, how many have been planted and by how have we increased the yield or decreased it? 

I was discussing this with some people outside and we said this is like a Plan for Mismanagement of Agriculture because basically it is that. What is there? The impact of NAADS on the ground – I was discussing in sub-counties in Mbarara; I met some people in a sub-county in Isingiro where PMA is. They think this NAADS has been used to rob the little revenue they are earning. They purport they have given the sub-county Shs 51 million and they need counterpart funding. And this money goes for capacity building to those who to go run these seminars to bring back all the money, going to teach the Banyankole how to plant matooke very well and yet they are more of experts than those people who go to teach them. So, they are robbing the little revenue we are collecting on the ground.  

What is the impact of NAADS? If it were done by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, I would know. Maybe then we would get something; but now it is done by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  We are talking of decentralisation, but I think we are now centralising all the – because, what is the relationship of the ministries under this PMA? Does Ministry of Tourism and Trade know what the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries wants to produce so that we look for market for it? Where are you co-ordinating? 

I think the committee should analyse the impact of PMA and come here, and we will recommend to the Government to disband it and some of these people go home and do something more very valuable than staying there. I wanted these factors - how many valley dams have they contracted under Agriculture to know that they are modernising agriculture?  

Mr Speaker, there are very many critical areas I could talk about, but I think this vision or this “plan for mismanagement of agriculture” has to be reviewed and we see where Uganda’s future can be. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.19
MR PETER MUTUULUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, agriculture is the backbone of our economy, our survival, and our everything. So, any topic about agriculture should be handled seriously and should be given enough time. 

I come to the report now. Page 7 of this report commented very briefly on the Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). But, Mr Speaker, we were promised a workshop on this issue of GMOs, but up to now we have not got it. Our people in the villages are confused. Some are even being told that we are consuming GMOs, that they are on the market, and I am wondering how government will allay this fear. 

The committee commented briefly on it again on page 20, first paragraph, on genetically engineered techniques, which can actually be dangerous if they reduce vitamins from a given plant or food. I think we need to study it carefully because this is now an international concern. In Europe actually, they have shunned the use of GMOs, and I do not see why Uganda Government would embrace it.

Another issue is on page 7 again - human resource management. The committee is complaining that there are graduates at sub-county level as extension workers. Up to now I am failing to be convinced what these people are doing, and why they are taking taxpayers’ money, because they just go for their salary. They do not go to the people as they are supposed to do. When a person approaches them, they charge money even on advisory issues. I really fail to understand why these people are there. The central government allocates Shs 29 million every month as salaries to extension workers, but I wish this money were used for something else because there is nothing on the ground to show for their work.

Another issue that I want to raise regards our farmers’ lack of guidance. You have heard of the Moringa tree. We heard of the Neem tree, somebody introduced this plant. He convinced people that it was a wonder tree, which cures almost 100 diseases and now that one has been forgotten. People spent a lot of money buying seedlings of this Neem tree, but now they have no use for it. 

As for Moringa, there is a gentleman in my village with five acres of a Moringa forest. He has failed to get market for it and the people who claim to buy it have never come. The Government has also not come up with a policy on this kind of thing.  

Mr Speaker, there is now the Kigaji issue, that is, Aloe Vera. Individuals come, introduce the thing, government does not advise people, they go ahead to plant, waste a lot of resources, and in the end fail to get money. I think we need to address this problem. 

Another issue is the –(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable member for giving way. Of course, I do identify myself with those who are really not happy with the PMA and I call upon God to also help. I have been following the argument of the Member and I do not think there is any way that a tree in this country could be useless when we need environmental protection. You know our forests are depleted. I expected hon. Lukyamuzi to intervene but when he kept quiet I thought I would come in. Because even if you plant a tree for sale - he must tell us why they were planted but these trees have not been useless. 

I can assure you Moringa is being utilised in this country - the oil, the soap. Even the Neem tree, people are using its soap and oil, and it is curing so many diseases. I am an example of those who have been cured by the Moringa. I had a problem with my toe and when I went to America I asked for treatment but they wanted about US $2,000 to get this toe cured. An American woman took me to a herbal shop and what did I find there? They told me to drink Moringa tea and use Moringa oil. They wanted to sell them to me but I said, “No, we have them back home,” and I came I got the oil, I drunk the tea and I became healthy. Even up to now we drink Moringa tea in our home. 

Therefore, there is no way the Moringa and Neem trees can be useless for sure. So, can you give other examples, please?  

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interjection)- please, there is no time. Allow me to conclude. 

I thank hon. Matembe for that information but my argument is that the Government should come up. We are just hearing about that Moringa. You know it because you have used it and it has helped you, but the Government has not come up to educate people. That is what hon. Kabushenga was saying, and that is why we say that government should come in and educate people. If there is no market, let them emphasise using it because we are just hearing about it from individuals.

There is this also the issue of promoting of some crops. His Excellency the Vice-President has come up with upland rice as a solution to our poverty, but it seems the Vice-President is alone on that one. How is the Ministry prepared to help our farmers because it is just a simple thing to grow, and of course, the outcome is very good? They tell us that even in dry areas like Mawokota, it can grow very well, but I am waiting for the sub-county and district agricultural officers to come and educate me. My farmers have heard that His Excellency the Vice-President is the one actually promoting this upland rice instead of the Ministry concerned.  

Lastly; the seed policy. It is still a problem here. Good enough I understand the chairperson of the committee worked with NARO and hon. Bikwasizehi. But the producers of seeds in Uganda are complaining that they cannot export seeds to neighbouring countries yet we have comparative advantage over our neighbours. They cannot export these seeds because we lack regulatory measures. When will the Ministry come up with legal measures on seeds so that we can be able to export them instead of importing from our neighbouring countries? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.30
MR AKISOFERI OGOLA (West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In reference to your earlier request that perhaps there should not have been further debate, I will be very brief. 

The issue I had really wanted to talk about and to impress upon this House is this question of Genetically Modified Organisms that my dear colleague has just talked about. On page 19 the conclusions of the committee about the genetically modified foods raise concern to everybody and certainly to me because it is where it should have started; that is where we are now. In other words, the beginning was not handled well. We now know that genetically modified organisms are here, the President has admitted, the Minister of Agriculture admitted that we might be eating it already. The question is that this matter has not been certified worldwide. I fear that genetically modified organisms may prove, in the areas of plants and animals, what the AIDS scourge is proving to be to humanity -(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. I just want to inform my colleague, hon. Ogola, that recently we pointed out that there is no law on bio-safety and bio-technology. The Minister of State for Animal Industry, hon. Mary Mugyenyi, informed us that the law is about to be brought to Parliament. Maybe the honourable minister could update us. I wonder whether it is the Ministry of Agriculture, which is responsible or the Ministry of Finance, because the National Council for Science and Technology falls under the Ministry of Finance. Maybe we shall be clarified on that.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The point being articulated by hon. Ogola is so pertinent that I am surprised that a whole President of the country could, as indicated in the report, express no worry whatsoever about the use of genetically modified food. In the presence of an appropriate law in regard to how the National Bureau of Standards can quantify the effects of that food, I am surprised that a government, which has even signed international protocols of bio-safety could not come out in the open to tell us what is what - just speculation. What are we up to?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you stand for information, you should give information, not express an opinion. 

MR OGOLA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sometimes I think genetically modified organisms were created out of the extra ambitions of scientists to get fame. But in this particular case, it is also to monopolise the survival process of humanity. These seeds, for instance, can contaminate our seeds in this country to the point that we will no longer have seeds, which are loyal to our bio-diversity. And they may monopolise them to such an extent that they are the only people to provide the seeds. We will not have the money to buy them; we will not have any way to handle it. 

In other words, this is a prescription for this. If the issue is as serious as this and many states have talked about it, Europe whose scientific level is as good as America, has had serious reservations about this thing. India has written a lot about this, but in Africa, we open the door! Is it because even in a matter of survival we cannot resist corruption? Who allows this kind of thing to come here without even asking Parliament to consider it first? The scientists are here, however modern the new standards may be, they should be a bit more concerned. What kind of country are we that we have to bend - every time a white person sneezes and we have flu -(Interjection) - I respect you, but please, I am stretching the Speaker too far; allow me to finish my submission. 

Therefore, if it is a question of bending to those who dictate to us, for God’s sake let us have the courage for once to tell them, “Wait a bit”. When you are in the bathroom taking a bath and somebody knocks at the door, unless he wants to kill you, you say, “Wait a bit, I am still in the bathroom, let me come”. But what kind of people are these? When the foreigners knock here with any idea, we open the door and they rush in and before you know it we are in danger. 

I ask the Government; I request; I plead that this question be revised. We must have courage to defend our people and I believe that in the agricultural sector, if we lose the ground, we shall have lost everything. Thank you very much for tolerating me, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think we should now receive the responses from the Government.

4.35
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ordinarily, I would speak after my colleagues have made their submissions, but there are some specific requests, which were made by Members of Parliament, notably hon. Sauda Mugerwa. She was saying, “Where are the members of the Front Bench?” We are here and we have the capacity to answer all your questions. 

I want to also express my disappointment that people like hon. Mugerwa insist that they must be listened to, but after they have made their contributions, they disappear. This also applies to other Members of Parliament who have made excellent points. I want to appeal to you to stay here and listen to the responses. Otherwise, every year we shall be asking the same questions.

The other point has to do with the capacity to change. I am a teacher; I taught for 30 years. But I have also noted that in the area of agriculture and in other areas, we the elites and some peasants are extremely reluctant to change and to receive change. 

For example, I am a dairy farmer, and we have been molested by monkeys. Hon. Sebunya advised people to eat those monkeys, but I found it difficult to eat monkeys myself because, first of all, you have to capture the monkey, then skin it, cook it and then eat it! So, when we were molested by monkeys, I did get good advice from a professional that dogs can chase them away, but my farm manager was reluctant to accept that. He preferred to bring someone to shoot the monkeys, but when we brought someone to shoot them, that person failed miserably. He would shoot at them, they would disappear, but a few hours later they would come back. So, I asked him, “Can you accept change? Try the dogs,” and I assisted him to use the dogs. Now those monkeys have disappeared; they have gone away. 

The point I am illustrating is capacity to accept change. If you have been doing one thing in one way, can you try another method persistently? Again, if you try a new method and you find a problem, try to persist. If you have just married and you have a problem with your partner, try to persist while sorting out the problem, but do not just give up. 

When I had a problem with marketing milk, I had to seek advice; and then I had to buy a Ganze bull so that the butter content may be richer, so that I could compete with milk producers from Ankole and other areas whose butter content was rich. I am now very competitive and I make a profit on my dairy farm. Certainly -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. I have been listening, and I just want him to clarify on the following:

One, in Uganda, are we practicing a liberalised agricultural policy or not? I am saying this in respect to the situation in Eastern Uganda where some traders now use guns to zone areas and this hinders traders from selling their cotton to a trader whom they like.

Two, the Mvule in Eastern Uganda have been privatised and the Chinese have destroyed all of them in Eastern Uganda, even the small ones. What policy do you have, because these Mvule have taken 100 years? What advise can we take from you?

Three, the fish, even in Lake Victoria, is getting contaminated because of industrial waste, gold mining in Tanzania, and our industries here. What advice can we get from you?

Finally, would you consider coming up with a law to make it mandatory - because Uganda is an agricultural country - that every person seeking a leadership position, especially Members of Parliament, should have gardens to show that they know what farming is? Because they have talked of capacity and the way we have been debating in this House seems to show that some people even do not know what farming is. Would you consider making it a law that before one considers contesting as a Member of Parliament, he should have acreage of plantations, farms of animals such that we really show and speak what we want and mean? Thank you very much.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: I would like the Prime Minister, at least he has been telling us as leaders or as technocrats to accept change, to advise us whether he is going to advise the Movement so that they accept change instead of remaining on “No change”?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, it is clear that the honourable members would like to make a contribution through the process of clarification. But hon. Ekanya, I think the points you have raised have been raised earlier. You see, some of you are in and out, and I would suggest that the relevant sector minister who has professional knowledge should answer those questions.  

Of course, when you accept change, there are certain things, which you should not accept. You do not just follow a thing like a machine; you have to weigh. But I was saying that the capacity of people to change and to persist in accepting new methods of agriculture is a major handicap.  

Finally –(Interruption)

MS NAMUSOKE: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister, for accepting my information. I am really feeling uncomfortable about the Prime Minister’s submission. The Prime Minister seems to think that the comments that members were making were just an indication that Ugandans have failed to embrace this programme for modernisation of agriculture, and yet the report and the comment that Members have been making are geared towards sending a message to government. This programme of modernisation of agriculture is not actually making an impact on the ground. It is so slow. If at all there is supposed to be any impact, the direction government is taking in this programme will never lead to modernisation. 

So, it is not that we do not want change. We are saying that the change that government seems to be bringing is not in line with the idea of modernisation of agriculture of our peasants. Thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to end because I know my colleagues would like to make their submissions. Of course the plan for modernisation has blemishes; I would be very foolish if I did not admit that it does have blemishes. But the point I was making is that another problem not grasped is the capacity to accept change. Can we accept change? If we do so, this country is going to become excellent; it is actually going to be one of the leading countries. (Applause). I thank you.

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Mr Speaker, we want to thank you and the House for the very eloquent contributions. We also thank the committee for giving us the opportunity to address you as a whole House. There was a rumour that when we come here we will not find anybody, because 90 percent of us have gone back to school, but we are very happy to see very many of you here. We are going to be very brief and we are going to share these answers between my colleague, hon. Fabius Byaruhanga, and I. 

It is true that the extension services that we have deployed at the Gombolola headquarters are not operating. I farm close to the farm of the Prime Minister, but both him and I have never seen these extension workers –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I think it would be erroneous to leave certain facts in the Hansard, that 90 percent of Members of Parliament are in school. I think the doctor should really give facts on this rather than speculate. I know it is not his habit. 

Some of us have been religiously sitting here and that should be appreciated, and if the honourable minister cannot substantiate what he has said, I think it would be in order for him to kindly withdraw it. I thank you.

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, the statement I made was that we had heard a rumour that many of us have gone back to school. I have now proved that that is not true since there are very many of you here as we answer these questions. 

I was trying to say that it is true that the extension services we have deployed at the various sub-counties are actually rare and it is for that reason that we have evolved this NAADS programme. The essence of the NAADS programme, honourable members, is to, first of all, gather up these farmers in groups. 

Secondly, empower them to hire and fire. That, in a nutshell, is NAADS. We want to empower the farmers themselves. They hire the extension providers and if they perform, they continue paying them, if they do not perform, they fire them and get alternatives. That was after we as a government had realised that these persons that we dispatch from the headquarters or from the districts actually do not perform. We wish to thank you for appreciating our efforts in NAADS.

We also wish to thank you for appreciating that in the PMA framework a number of ministries are involved. For instance, the Minister of Energy provides electricity to the rural poor; the Ministry of Works provides roads to the rural poor; the Ministry of Environment provides services to preserve the environment; the Ministry of Finance handles micro-finance so that credit can be available to farmers; the Minister of Trade and Industry provides guidance, agro-processing and marketing; and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal industry and Fisheries handles generating new technologies and disseminating them through NAADS. 

We are very grateful that this point has been very well grasped so that in the PMA context. It is a government programme and each of the various ministries has, fortunately, evolved a plan to ensure that the PMA framework is put in place.

There were a number of other points that were made. A point was made on the Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). May I use this opportunity to tell you that all of us are genetically modified organisms, because in plants you can get a little cutting and plant it, and it germinates and looks exactly like the parent stock. We are beginning to do that in humans, but we still largely depend on the coming together - I hope you will not say I used crude words here - the coming together of a male and a female so that we are actually not like the mother and we are not like the father, so that we are essentially genetically modified organisms. I do not know of anybody here that arose out of mutation or out of cloning, so we are genetically modified organisms. 

May I assure this House -(Interruption)

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the House is talking about genetically modified organisms in foods. Humans are not foods; we are not eaten. We are concerned about the food because we know - even medicines are GMOs, but that is not our concern, ours is on the foods we eat. Thank you.

DR NKUUHE: The marketing function that you said is under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, would probably come under co-operatives and that sub-sector has four total persons. There is a commissioner, a secretary, the driver and a tea girl. Do you really think that they can handle the marketing of a sector that employs or provides livelihood to about 80 or 90 percent of our people? Are you not really expecting too much from the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry to cater for marketing of agricultural produce? Thank you.

MS NABULYA: The genetically modified foods cannot be compared to human reproduction because when you are producing a child - I am a woman; there are no chemicals applied. But with food that is genetically modified, there are some chemicals, which we fear might be a danger to human beings.

Secondly, if you plant these types of seeds, the soil becomes barren for more than five years. You can never plant any other plant in that particular soil. Thank you.

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I was using the words “genetically modified organism” in a literal sense, meaning that it needs either sex to produce an organism. I am also aware of course -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, it was humour. I took it that way. Please, proceed.

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: The genetically modified organisms that I referred to are normally used through means that are not natural. We use bacteria to pick up some genes and put them into another organism. I am very much aware of that technique. I want to assure this House that there are no genetically modified organisms in Uganda, and that we are in the process of enacting a legal framework to enable us begin to use our bio-technology laboratory in Kawanda, which is about the best in Africa south of the Sahara -(Interruption)

MS NABULYA: Last year it was the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, hon. Kisamba Mugerwa, who confirmed that we have already started consuming genetically modified cooking oil. And it is true that many supermarkets are importing food that is readily available in Uganda but it is modified by these genetics. Please, could you clarify?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I was one of the participants in the World Assembly of Sustainable Development in Johannesburg last year, and speaker after speaker, expressed concern about the environmental hazards related to that food. As we speak now a number of countries including Zimbabwe, poor as they are in food production, are continuing to chase away that food. 

Mr Minister, our concern is two-fold. While you plan to carry out tests at Kawanda related to the generation of the food, it is quite different from another attribute where food of that formation is already coming into this county unabated. Why do you leave us in an environmental mess? The repercussions associated with that food are not necessarily realizable in the short run. They are realizable in the long run.  

Finally, you all know the repercussions associated with the use of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bomb. Children today, after 50 years of that occurrence, are born with grave deformities associated with that environmental hazard. What do you have to say?  Why do you speculate?

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate those interventions. I was talking about genetically modified organisms. I was not talking about genetically modified foods. It is very possible that foods that arise out of genetically modified organisms may have already reached this country. I think hon. Kisamba Mugerwa may have guessed right because we receive a lot of oil from Soya beans, which comes from the United States under a programme called PL-480. I see a lot of that Soya bean oil in Kampala. We have no way of telling whether it comes from genetically modified Soya beans but we suspect that may be a case since 90 percent of the Soya beans in the United States are actually genetically modified. I would not have much fear about that myself because this is the same oil used by Americans.

Secondly, a lot of the American cotton has been genetically modified, and a lot of the clothes we wear, many of them come from America and I have not had any itches. My guess is that we may not die soon. It is true that these things may have long- term effects. But I want to assure the House again, Mr Speaker, that there are no genetically modified organisms and that the National Council of Research and Technology in the Ministry of Finance will soon table a legal framework to ensure that what we produce and what we eat are safe for us.

We have got a very elaborate policy on how to handle new crops? I want to assure you that the tomatoes came from South America; the cassava we eat came from South America; the maize we eat came from South America; the bananas we eat came from Southeast Asia; the Soya beans we eat came from China. They were not indigenous. So, many of these crops were brought in, including the Irish potatoes. I think all the things we eat in Uganda today, except millet, are indigenous. 

I want to use this opportunity to thank our ancestors for having done all the screening to arrive at the actual foods we eat today. I am talking about new crops: There is Moringa; there is Aloe Vera; there is the Neem. May I take this opportunity to advise our farming communities that while our forefathers are not here anymore, there is a mechanism today to ensure that what is new is researched on? We first of all find out whether it grows here. 

Secondly, we find out what yields it will have and also find out what qualities it will have. This job is done by our scientists in the research stations. It is not the job of the communities anymore to begin this trial and error on these new organisms.  

May I, therefore, call upon our communities to wait for advise from the Minister of Agriculture, if you are handling crops; if you are dealing with fish, and if you are dealing with animals? Farmers and communities should wait until we tell them what to do. That is why we as a ministry have not said anything about Moringa and Aloe Vera, but we hear there are many groups going around saying, “Plant Moringa and Aloe Vera.” We as the Ministry have not pronounced ourselves on these matters because these matters are still with our research divisions. As soon as the research divisions have proved that those crops grow here, what type we should grow, what we shall get out of it; and as soon the Ministry of Trade and Industry tell us that there is market, then we will make the appropriate pronouncements. We hear rumours that everybody is jumping up and down and various persons are planning this and that. May I advise our farming communities to stop taking such risks?  

Mr Speaker, Moringa is being dealt with by the Forestry Department, Aloe Vera is being tested at Kawanda and Namulonge; and Neem is also being handled by the institute dealing with trees. Everything to do with fish, I will leave it to my colleague.  May I, however, emphasize that other than that framework for modernizing agriculture, which is multi-sectoral, we have put in place what we call a strategic intervention to focus on certain enterprises that we thought would bring returns to this country, the ones we think have got a multiplier effect. 

Beside that framework we have got this strategic intervention in the Ministry, to handle specific enterprises that we think can bring returns and have a multiplier effect. These involve, as you know, coffee. We have decided to treat coffee like we treat HIV/AIDS. As it dies we produce more but carefully. If we had said because there is coffee wilt, therefore, we should not plant anymore; we would be in a lot of trouble. So, we have been distributing free seedlings countrywide so that some may die but some will definitely survive. 

It would have been very dangerous to tell our people that because there is AIDS, please, do not do it anymore we would be in a lot of trouble. So, we have been distributing free seedlings countrywide so that some may die but some will definitely survive.  It has been very dangerous to tell our people that because there is AIDS, please, do not do it any more.  So, we are using the same approach as long as the thing is handled carefully, although it is very scaring. 

We took coffee, cotton and horticulture specifically as a special intervention. We also think that fisheries, and Irish potatoes, are strategic resources. We took livestock, particularly the hides and skins, which we had discovered that Mr Basajjabalaba had found a good market for. So, there have been those strategic interventions in an effort to move agriculture forward.

It is true that some of these things were not paid for. You know the reasons why? The Government made a decision that we had better finish off Kony first. Let us finish off this Kony man and this is very essential for us in agriculture. Because of the Kony intervention, our strategic intervention was also interfered with. We hope that in due course we will be back on course and that we will execute that strategic intervention and be able to move agriculture forward for the benefit of our people.  

I wanted to be that brief, Mr Speaker. For the detailed examinations we have arranged that we shall provide written answers. Otherwise we thought we would give those broad answers. With those very few words, may I request my colleague, Dr Byaruhanga, to also say a few words? I would like to thank hon. Odit and your team for a very good report and for giving us an opportunity to also appear in this House, which we normally do not do. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister. Now that you hope to give written answers, there is this issue of GMOs. Please, commit it in writing. Tell us the status of food and organs as you have said so that it does not stop only in our Hansard. Communicate it to the people we represent. I would like to know how much time it will take you so that we have a timeframe within which we are going to get this committed in writing. Is two weeks as they suggest, honourable minister, appropriate?

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA:  Mr Speaker, I will be leaving for Chile to go and present a paper on GMOs. Fortunately, I have gone a long way in preparing this. I will get some extracts from this paper and lay it on the Table before I leave. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Chairperson, I think the other ministers –(Interruption) 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, over the weekend the Ministry for Agriculture invited our committee for a meeting at Entebbe. We made a demand that Parliament was promised a workshop on GMOs and the Minister confirmed that the workshop is actually on schedule in March. Could the Minister confirm to this House that the planned national workshop on GMOs promised in Entebbe last weekend will be in March? Then we can decide on the date so that we clarify this matter, in our Hansard. Thank you.

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: This is February; we have got one month to go. I want to be given the opportunity to consult with my Permanent Secretary to find out whether he will have funds to seat the 300 Members of Parliament, and feed them, within about a month’s time. I beg, Mr Speaker.

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE, FISHERIES (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for the report and to thank the honourable members who made various contributions to this report. 

I am happy with the report because it took some time to dwell on the topic of fish, which is quite often forgotten. But I must inform this House that the situation as far as fish is concerned is not good, and it has not been good for a long time. In the case of East Africa in general, due to our lack of capacity, the Japanese and Russian fleets washed the entire Eastern Coast of fish. In fact in the so-called exclusive zones of Tanzania, Kenya and Mozambique, there is hardly any fish. So Kenya, Tanzania and ourselves are depending on our inland fisheries yet in the case of Kenya and Tanzania it would have been otherwise. 

So when we talk of the 450,000 tonnes of fish that comes out of Lake Victoria annually, it is supposed to cater for 19 million or so Ugandans. You also know that Zambia, Congo and even Rwanda hardly have large water bodies to talk about and there are actually also benefiting from the catches from our water bodies. So, in the case of Uganda we have a population of about 23 to 25 million people, and a national catch of only 220,000 tonnes. And 65,000 tonnes of that go into our processing factories and is exported; and another 60,000 being smuggled to our neighbouring countries, we are left with less than 100,000 tonnes for our own intake.

That gives a per capita fish consumption of only 4 kilos per person per year compared to the recommended intake of 15 kilos per capita. No wonder we have malnutrition in this country. 

The way forward is that we have to be very rigorous with fisheries management. We should ensure that we manage the fish in our water bodies properly so that we can raise the production. If we did our work properly we would be able raise production to about 300,000 tonnes per annum and that still would not be enough for the country. So, our future lies in emphasizing fish farming. And as one member here said, that is probably where our stress should be because we are very rich in fresh water resources.  

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: In the case of management we are using three approaches: one is the involvement of the community in the management of their own resources. Some of you might be aware, for example, that on Lake Albert, Lake George and Lake Kyoga we have already created what we call beach management units and they are operational. On other lakes we are trying to form them but they are not yet fully operational. 

The fisherman gets to know that this is his garden and he looks after this resource as the farmer would look after his cattle or after his banana plantation. That is one approach.  

Another approach is to use this very fisherman to identify, create and protect some breeding areas. 

The other approach of course is by policing, but the policing has got its own problems. This issue about gear and the catching of immature fish, it is caused by a very big demand for the fish. That is why we get this problem of people going to catch immature fish, because there is a market for it. Ten years ago there were only 3,000 boats on our part of Lake Victoria now they are 15,000 on our side of the lake. So, we shall get policing to get rid of the bad gear and unlicensed boats. 

But, of course, because of the pressure from the population, because they have no other alternative, it is a war that may not be easily won. That is why we believe that by emphasizing community policing and fish farming, we may reduce the pressure on our natural resource and be able to use our resource sustainably. The recommended gear is well documented in our statutory instruments and the fishermen know. Let nobody tell you that the fisherman does not know the recommended fishing gear. Whenever you are on these water bodies, as soon as they see your boat approaching, when the fisherman knows that he has the wrong gear in his boat, you will see him dashing off. Even when you go to the landing sites, once they know that they have something illegal within their possession, the immature fish or the wrong gear, you will see them running away. So, everyone knows what he is doing wrong. The reason they do it is they have no alternative or they have not been sensitised enough to see that they are ruining their future in the process.

There is the issue of the market, because one member was saying that the factories are exploiting our fisherman here and there is no way we can control smuggling also because the Kenyans and Tanzanians are paying better than what our factories can pay. Well, the factories may have a hand in it but our research has shown, and we have informed all the Government bodies about this, that the freight and handling charges at Entebbe Airport, which is the main conduit of our fish exports, are abnormally high compared to the freight and handling charges at the other airports.  

In the case of Tanzania, they have the Airport of Mwanza where they have charters and they have even allowed some Russian planes to land, they end up only paying 90 American cents per kilo to get the fish from -(Interruption)  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I have been listening very attentively to the submission of the hon. Minister in Charge of Fisheries. In accordance with Article 237(2) of the Constitution, Lake Victoria is supposed to be held in public trust by the State of Uganda. Is it in order for the Minister to openly lament over the failure of the Government to manage the lake in the state it is in right now in accordance with this quotation in the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know how to answer this but the fact is that the Government can be the trustee of Lake Victoria within the territorial boundary of Uganda. Lake Victoria extends to other jurisdictions where the Uganda Government cannot be a trustee for those countries.

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: Continuing with the explanation about the marketing problem, I said that at Mwanza the exporter pays US $9 per kilo of fish, to get it to Europe. At Eldoret and even Nairobi Airport he pays US $1.1 per kilo. But at Entebbe he pays between US $1.43 and US $1.5. 

These are people exporting the same fish to the same market to get the same amount of money. So at the end of the day the man in Kisumu or the man in Mwanza is able to pay slightly more for the raw materials than the Ugandan processor can pay. Of recent the prices for the Nile Perch in the European market have been very low. They have been very poor because our processors had over-supplied the market and also the Nile Perch was receiving competition from the European salmon and also the Vietnamese Baser fish. That also reduces the area of manoeuvre for our local processing industry, and it is why our fisherman is now receiving very low prices. 

In fact I have told everybody concerned that unless we handle that issue our exporters will remain uncompetitive. The other day I received letter from somebody whom we convinced to start a factory at Majanji so as to capture the fish that was being smuggled to Kenya. He was saying that he can no longer get fish and he is about to close the factory. That is as far as the market is concerned.

The other issue concerned the Nile Perch –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: There was the issue of lifting the ban on the fishing of immature fish. I think it should have come immediately –(Interruption)

DR FABIUS BYARUHANGA: Now that I am looking at the market, I could also give a reply to that question. The European markets have for a long time favoured white fish and some of you who are used to eating our fish here, and especially the young Nile Perch, know that it is whiter than the older ones. This had led fillet from the younger fish fetching a better price in Europe than fillet from the bigger fish. Therefore, the younger fish fillet had bigger demand in Europe than the fillet, which comes from the bigger fish. So our processors were breaking the law all over East Africa in order to get this white fillet, which the market required. 

After these studies, which were given to you in this report, we realized that unless we took action the fisheries were going to collapse or we would have no Nile Perch, big or small, to export to the market, which we had already created.  

Within the East African framework and Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization, we agreed that from now onwards we only catch the Nile Perch that is at least 50 centimetres long. We also do not catch those that are above 85 centimetres since most of those are mature females. Unfortunately, the implementation is lacking.

Whereas on our side there were a lot of efforts at implementation, elsewhere it was not rigorously implemented. So the processors were crying out to the Government saying, “No, we are being pushed out of the market. We have got nothing to put on the market because our colleagues have continued to catch the small ones. They do not allow the small ones to grow to the size up to which we are allowed here in Uganda to catch them so we are losing out.” 

When this information got to His Excellency the President that is why he said, “No, let us allow them to process even the small ones until all of us as East Africans agree.” Fortunately, as you know, this was very short lived. When we met in the Council of Ministers in the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization we discussed this matter and we realized that our main weakness had been the fact that we had not put in place a mechanism of ensuring that every member was adhering to our instructions. So in the last Council of Ministers it was agreed that the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization puts up a technical team that will be going around the factories and the landing sites to find out whether all of us East African countries are adhering to our agreement. That is how the situation stands as of today.

Someone here said that the Nile Perch has eaten all the other –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Related to that, a member said that the Government lifted the ban after people had invested their money. They bought the gear for the small ones then after two weeks you said, “No, stop.” People lost a lot of their money. Who is going to give reparation to the damage caused to these farmers relying on what was said? That was the question.

DR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That question was raised here some three months ago. I tried to explain as follows. The only written instruction to the public was saying that the statutory instruments concerning the fish size recommended for catching has been suspended and the same instrument was asking the people to wait for further clarification. That is the only written instruction that came out of the Ministry of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable minister, if there is a law prohibiting a certain activity and you suspend that law, I do not have to wait because the law that was curbing my activities is no longer there. It, therefore, means that I do things, as I want.

DR BYARUHANGA: With due respect, Mr Speaker, we need to probably give those Statutory Instruments to the committee who may, of course, get the services –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, but you are the one who said that you –(Interruption)

DR BYARUHANGA: Yes, because I wanted to clarify. The old statutory instrument talked about the sizes of nets that the fisherman is allowed to use. Those statutory instruments were not affected. 

THE SPEAKER: The only statutory instrument that we talked about, which is Statutory Instrument No.73, talks of fish size. So when somebody comes up and tells me that he went into the water with a net size, which was in the first case not allowed to catch the size of fish, which is no longer prohibited; that is why I get confused - (Interruption)

MR BADDA: I would like the Minister to clarify how could one access the small-size fish without using small size gear. How would you expect people to produce small fish without using the right equipment to catch that size of fish?

THE SPEAKER: He is saying that by implication of infection, you are allowed.

DR CHEBROT: This is to do with the presidential pronouncements, which I hope we will not see again. We had hoped that they would end with Idd Amin where he would issue a pronouncement or a decree. What I want to know is: when the President makes a pronouncement of that nature when does it become law? Does it become law immediately or it has to come to this House for it to become law? 

I do believe that when he makes that pronouncement it is expected that his Principal Private Secretary has to issue a letter or a memo to the concerned ministry and to the Attorney General and the matter eventually comes to this House. Does any pronouncement, which the President makes, become law upon pronouncement, or has it to wait to undergo the process of changing into law?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you may say it was an expression of intention to revoke. Once a statutory instrument is made, then he has to make another instrument revoking an old one, normally that is done. One would say that it was an intention to revoke, so it was not revoked.

DR BYARUHANGA: Of course the Nile Perch was introduced in the 1950s. It is true that because it is a carnivorous species there are some species of fish that it affected. But according to the scientists, it has tended to eat the non-commercial spies of water organisms. For example, we were informed that most of its food is mukene, which makes up only 10 percent of its food. And 90 percent of its food is the shrimps, which in our culture we have not been catching and we have not been eating. So, the Nile Perch converts what we do not eat into what we eat and, therefore, it is economically useful. The same way the cow eats grass and turns it into beef.  

As for the smaller species of fish, what I need to clarify is that as far as fish size is concerned, the law only places limits on the Nile Perch or the Nile Tilapia. So, if they find you with your mudfish or lungfish of any size, nobody should disturb you and say you have caught immature fish. This should be clarified to everybody in the villages. The law is only concerned with the Nile Perch and the Nile Tilapia. But when it comes to net size that is where there is some confusion. In order to protect particular species in our various water bodies, virtually every big water body has got its definite net size. 

For example, the recommended net size for Lake Victoria and Lake Kyoga is five inches. For Lake Albert it is four. For Lake George, Lake Edward and Lake Wamala, it is four and a half inches. I believe Nkeijanibarola and the other smaller lakes are supposed to be using four and a half-inch nets. Actually, I have been to Lake Kakyera but I found out that on the side of Rakai, they have insisted that their fish never grows so they have continued to use the smaller net size, although illegally. 

On the Mbarara side where they have made some effort the fish actually grew bigger, but it will never be as big as the tilapia you see on Lake Victoria or Lake Kyoga. So, it would probably be advisable if we could see the technocrats on that. Can we not probably allow the same net size, four and a half inches, on Lake Kakyera for that particular type of tilapia? But note that it is not the Nile Tilapia.  

Who is policing the water bodies? The Fisheries Act, as old as it is, says that any policeman above the rank of corporal, or any magistrate or any fisheries officer, can arrest you and implement the Fisheries Act. The same officers are empowered by the Fisheries Act to even confiscate boats, to confiscate fishing nets, and so forth. But we do not have that type of manpower on the lakes. We had allowed - because the law also allows it - the chief fisheries officer to appoint people as temporary fisheries officers to carry out certain work. We had tried to co-operate with other agencies for them to carry out fisheries work, and we are calling them contracted officers. 

Unfortunately when they went to the field, because they had not been properly trained, many of them misbehaved. They were mistreating people and taking bribes and that is why we withdrew them. As far as we are concerned, if you find somebody purporting to be a contractor fisheries’ officer, he is there illegally. He is not supposed to be operating as a fisheries officer in the field. But there are other security agencies, as you know. For example, we shall always have piracy on the waters and other types of crime. That is why the Police have got a section of the Police Marines. That is why the Internal Security Organization has got a section, which is called Maritime Security and of course there are smugglers moving on the water bodies that is why Uganda Revenue Authority has got the Special Revenue Protection Police. These gentlemen are there, so if you are smuggling fish the anti- smuggling police should be able to arrest you. If you are involved in stealing engines and stealing nets these people should be able to arrest you but the person who should be able to arrest you for fisheries’ malpractice should be a fisheries officer who is employed by either the central government of the districts.  

About the contamination of fish, there is a lot of water that is washed from the mainland into the waters, which contaminates our water bodies. Unfortunately our water bodies are large enough and as you know most eco-systems are actually living things. They can carry out their own detoxification. But because we are exporting to the most sophisticated markets in the world, we export fish to the USA and Europe, which have very expensive taste. For every consignment that leaves our territory to go to Mombasa to be shipped, a sample is taken. It is taken to an accredited laboratory called Chemiphar and it is tested for chemical residues. There is no consignment that leaves this country, which has not been tested for chemical residues. That is why we are in Category I as far as export to Europe is concerned. (Applause). 

Our processors and the Government have been paying Chemiphar Shs 1.2 billion for this service annually. We pay Shs 1.2 billion for this service annually because we insist that our quality must be guaranteed for us to maintain that market. We have been looking at the figures of the residues; the mercury, the lead, organ phosphates and what have you. There is virtually no valuation. For the last three years there seems virtually to be no change. So, I am very sure that our fish in most respects is still very safe for human consumption. That is why it continues to be accepted in all those markets I have talked about. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, thank you very much honourable ministers for those observations. 

Honourable members, this brings us to end of this issue. The chairperson may have a few points. Since I do not intend to put the question on adoption of the report today, I will give the chairperson about 5 to 8 minutes to make any comment before I put the question to his motion on Tuesday. With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. I thank you for your contribution and I wish you a nice weekend. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 February 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


