Tuesday 16th February, 1999.

(Parliament met at 2.00 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala). 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.



THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like once more to remind you about the fact that we have a lot of work during this coming Meeting, and I would like us not only to be regular on the appointed dates for the meetings, but also to be fairly for the same.  I hope you will continue to observe that.  I recognise hon. Awori;  is there any problem?

MR. AWORI: Yes, a big problem procedurally, Mr. Speaker.  I look at today's Order Paper, items number 1 to number 5, but I note with great concern that a very important development that took place forty hours ago, has been totally omitted. It is that the hon. Minister responsible for Internal Security has not made a statement to this House and yet this House voted for him a substantial amount of money, to contain terrorism in this country.  

I am raising this as a matter of concern for two reasons.  I have learnt with great dismay that indeed the money we voted for this particular Ministry and this particular matter has not been availed to the organs in charge of anti-terrorist activities.  I also note with great concern -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, you are raising a debate on a matter which was concluded. When I heard you starting the point, I thought you were going to say, 'I would like a statement made on the recent happenings,' that you have referred to; now you are opening a debate.  I do not think I will allow you to do that.

MR. AWORI: I was just coming to the point that do we expect a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs on the bomb issue?  And I was just expressing concern that indeed we do not have a Minister in this House connected with security, even when the country is very perturbed.  Is this how they are going to behave?  Could these two hon. Ministers give us a statement on what happened in Kabalagala?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs here, but I think the message will be carried to him so that he can prepare himself as to what to do.  Let us proceed.
                                                     
MOTION FOR PRESENTATION CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 1994/95.

THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr. Augustine Ruzindana):  Mr. Speaker, hon. Colleagues, this is the report of the Public Accounts committee on the Public Accounts of the Uganda Government for the financial year ended 30th June 1995.  

The report which was circulated to Members several months ago just before we went for recess is quite long - it is 144 pages  - because it covers all Ministries and departments which the Auditor General reported on.  We have therefore isolated the general problems found in the report and I will present a summary of the report and recommendations arising from this summary.  However, since the report was circulated to Members during the discussion,  Members can be free to raise any matter from any part of the report.  
Secondly, if Members would want to be patient, I would refer to some sections of the report later.  But if Members prefer to raise the matters within the report, I leave it to them.  

In accordance with rule 116,  sub-section (1), and rule 123 of Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda,  and Article 90 of the Constitution, the under listed Members who were appointed on the 18th September, 1996, examined the accounts showing the appropriation of the sum granted by the NRC, the then Parliament, to meet public expenditure in the financial year 1994/95.  

The Committee performed its work between 26th November, 1996 and 6th May, 1997 in accordance again,  with rule 123  of the Rules of Procedure.  I am stressing rule 123 particularly because some Members have been complaining that PAC deals with post-mortems only,  forgetting what that rule says.  That rule says that PAC deals with audited accounts of the Government of Uganda,  but not money that has not been spent yet.  

During its work,  the Committee did not only examine the Auditor General's report for the financial year ended 30th June,  1995, but also had started on the Auditor General's report for the year ended 30th June 1991, but could not continue because of time limitation arising out of Article 163 of the Constitution.  Therefore, the Committee had to concentrate on the Auditor General's report of the financial year ended 30th June,  1995 which was laid on the Table during the first Session of this Parliament.  What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is that when the current PAC started its work we found that the audited accounts of the year 1990/1991, 1991/1992, 1992/1993, and 1993/1994 had not been done by the previous Public Accounts Committee.  We had intended to cover all these arrears of these periods but we could not, because the rules laid down the period within which we must finish a report which is laid before Parliament.  

In addition the Committee carried out investigations on the transparency of the process of awarding a contract for procurement of goods, services and works in the whole Government and parastatal sector,  to a foreign company called SWIPCO. This was done in accordance with Section 123(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Article 164(3) of the Constitution and also Article 93(c).  A report of our findings was laid on the Table in this Parliament, it will be presented, I hope, before this Session comes to an end, as it has been indicated by the Business Committee.  

We undertook investigations into this company because we were convinced that this company would be paid from public funds, and indeed this is what has turned out to be the case;  but that is a discussion of another report.  

The Committee would like to express its disappointment with those accounting officers who either delayed in submitting written explanations or repeatedly failed to give satisfactory answers to the queries raised by the Auditor General in respect of their Ministries or departments.  This situation, added to what has already been mentioned above, explains the conditions which delayed the Committee to complete its work.  We would however, like to express gratitude for the efforts of those accounting officers who responded promptly and were able to give us acceptable responses. 

Arising from our examination of the report and discussions with accounting officers of the different Ministries and departments, the following observations,  recommendations and decisions have been made by the Public Accounts Committee.  During its work the Committee came across some serious shortcomings in the accounting systems of the Ministries and departments.  The Committee, therefore, would like to note the following remarks and recommendations to rectify them.

Classified expenditure:  The Auditor General had reported that he had again not audited classified expenditure to the tune of Shs 62,908,622,334, covering Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Police Department, State House and Presidents Office.  After discussions with the concerned Ministries and departments the Committee noted the following:-

1.  That most, if not all,  of the money that is under classified expenditure is not appropriated by Parliament under that classification.  If you look at the budgets which we have passed, you will never see any item called classified expenditure.  The money is usually under different items from which it is diverted without any requisite authority.  

2.  That a lot of the funds under classified expenditure could be misused because no verification is expected to take place.

3.  That the Auditor General does not have access to the records regarding these expenditures, for verification.

4.  There is no law or regulation which prevents the audit of classified expenditure.

The Committee therefore decided that measures be put in place to enable the Auditor General audit such expenditures.  The Committee together with the Ministers and officials concerned, have been trying for some time to come up with a solution to this problem.  And for the current report of the Auditor General which is under discussion before the Public Accounts Committee, the Committee has directed the accounting officers to deliver the relevant documents for audit by the Auditor General.  The appropriate audit procedures are yet to be worked out.

Outstanding advances:  The Auditor General pointed out that financial regulations require that all advances be accounted for by the end of the financial year to which they relate.  However, contrary to these regulations,  13 Ministries and departments did not account for advances totalling Shs 285,866,236.  During discussions with the accounting officers,  the Committee further found out that a lot of the advances which were accounted for, had supporting documents either missing or inadequate.  Sometimes advances could not be accounted for because the persons who are supposed to do so had died,  were retrenched or had retired.  

The Committee also observed that guidelines and standards for accountability are poor in many Ministries and departments,  and therefore recommended the following to those departments:-

1. That the accounting officers streamline the issues of accountability,  by not advancing to those officers who have not accounted for previous advances.

2.  That as a general rule, the estate of the deceased persons should be obliged to refund such advances.  However, if the person dies after more that one financial year from the date of receipt of the advance, then the accounting officer should be held responsible for refunding the money because he should have recovered it during the financial year in which the advances were made.  

3.  That record keeping in Ministeries and departments should be improved.  At present, record keeping in these Ministries and departments is indeed very poor.

Un-retired Imprest:  Contrary to regulations,  imprest amounting to She 184,441,540 remain un-retired in five Ministries and departments.  

Unauthorised expenditure:  The Auditor General reported that accounts in 6 Ministries and departments show non-authorised expenditure to the tune of She 1,700,246,753.  

During discussions with the relevant accounting officers,  the Committee found out that most of these expenditures are diverted to finance local or foreign trips of Ministers and their senior officers.  The Committee noted that such diversion of funds made the purpose for which these funds were voted for remain unfulfilled.  

The Committee therefore recommends that non-authorised expenditure must be stopped forthwith and all expenditure be made with authority.

Use of Project Funds and Vehicles:  The Auditor General pointed out that in certain instances,  some appointing officers had diverted project funds to finance the operations of the Ministries headquarters,  and that project vehicles were diverted for the use of officials of Ministries, and sometimes their Ministers as well.  

The Committee therefore recommends that the appointing officers should ensure that project assets - in particular vehicles - are solely on project activities and any disposal of project asset be sanctioned officially by Government.

Two; that the accounting officers stop diverting project funds forthwith.

Arrears of Revenue:  The Auditor General also reported that according to final accounts submitted by Ministries and departments, 13 of them had un-remitted balances of She 103,709,487,665.  That is, the taxes collected to be remitted to Uganda Revenue Authority, and all other revenue which is collected by Ministries and department, but 13 of them had un-remitted balances of She 103,709,487,665.

Losses:  The Auditor General also reported that a lot of losses in Ministries and departments could be avoided if such Ministries and Department put in place mechanisms to prevent such losses before they occur.  For illustration, the following small example is cited.  In the Auditor General's report, paragraph 18 (vi), he reported that a sum of She 2,586,000 was paid to a private firm to guard the Ministry of Labour and Social Services' vehicles. The report however revealed that in spite of these guard services hired property worth She 5,610,000 was stolen from some of the vehicles which were being guarded thus rendering the sum of 2,586,000/= incurred on security services as wishful expenditure. 

The Committee shares its concern with the Auditor General and recommends that Section 258 of the Penal Code and Article 162 sub-article (2) of the Constitution should apply in cases where officials have negligently caused loss to Government.

Board of survey on cash and stores:  The Auditor General reported that more often than not, several Ministries and departments do not submit to the Auditor General their reports on Boards of survey on cash and stores as required by the accounting regulations. Members may recall that the accounting regulations are derived from the Public Finance Act and they should be adhered to strictly.  During discussions with accounting officers, the Committee learnt:-

1. That surveys on cash in some Ministries are done after the close of the financial year,  contrary to the regulations.  
The regulations require that cash surveys should be done on the 30th of June of every year. But they are done generally after that date; actually, in a new accounting year.

2. In some Ministries and departments, Ministry of Finance does not appoint Boards of survey in time; the Boards of Survey both of cash and stores.  The facilitation of the members of the boards, is left to the Ministry and Department to which they are required to work, thus compromising these officials who have gone to inspect the Ministries.

3.  Board of survey members are always appointed by office not by name and this quite often leads to delays in carrying out the survey. 

Arising from the above, the Committee therefore recommends that all boards of survey on cash be done at a stipulated time of 30th June of every year. The appointment of Boards of survey members by Ministry of Finance should be done in time to enable the surveys to be carried out as scheduled,  and required by the regulations.  This has been implemented already by the Minister of Finance.  

Ministry of Finance should take the responsibility of facilitating the members of the Board of survey to minimise doubt that may arise on the credibility of their work.  

4.  Ministry of Finance should appoint Boards of survey members by name and not by office. This is also being done now. 

Accounting standards:   This is on general accounting standards in Ministries and departments.  The Auditor General raised serious concern over poor accounting standards in Ministries and departments.  

The Committee therefore recommends that well qualified staff be posted in Ministries and departments to handle public funds.  As of now, most Ministries and departments are poorly staffed as regards accounting staff.  Their training and qualifications are actually very low.

Appropriation in Aid:  The Committee also noted a lot of misuse of appropriation in aid,  and recommends that Ministry of Finance should streamline expenditure control of such funds.  Members recall that appropriation in aid must be approved by Parliament, but we have found out that quite often, Ministries and Departments have been using revenue at source without approval of Parliament.

Accounting obligations of the Treasury:  The Auditor General pointed out that under Section 27 (1) (a) of the Public Finance Act, the treasury is required to submit to him - for audit,  various statements containing the public accounts, within a period of four months after the end of each financial year.  However, since the financial year 1991/92, these statements have not been submitted for audit.  The statements and accounts referred to are the following:

1.  Statement of receipt into and issues from the consolidated fund.  These are reports which have not been submitted to the Auditor General for audit as required by law.
2.  The balance sheet of the consolidated fund
3. The balance sheet of the treasury general account
4. Summary of appropriation account
5. Summary of statutory expenditure
6. Summary of statement of revenue
7. Statement of public debt
8. Statement of contingent liabilities
9. Statements of loans made by Government
10. Statement of subscription made to international organisations and;
11. Statement of assets held in Development Banks

The Committee observed that failure of the treasury to submit the above statements makes the report of the Auditor General incomplete and the Committee therefore recommends that this be done immediately.  

The Committee noted generally that most of the accounting officers delay to respond to the Auditor General's queries and only wait to respond when they appear before the Public Accounts Committee.  The Committee therefore recommends that PAC desk officers be established in every Ministry and department to speed up PAC's and the Auditor General's work,  and give timely responses to the Auditor General.

Finally, we would like to extend our gratitude to the staff of the Auditor General to the Police PAC squad - in PAC, we have got a Police Squad now numbering 12 officers,  and also the officials from the Ministry of Finance, particularly from the treasury office of accounts who worked with us throughout PAC work,  and in the preparation of this report.  We would also like to thank the Clerk of Parliament and his staff for facilitating our work.  The work of PAC is a laborious one, it is quite often daily work throughout the Session and the Clerk and his staff have been with us throughout,  without any extra remuneration.  

I would like to thank my Colleagues, with whom I have served on the Public Accounts Committee since we were appointed to the Public Accounts Committee in 1996.  I am sure you know them, I do not need to read their names, do I?  So, this is the end of my summary.  

However, I would like for example, to call the attention of Members to the following paragraphs within the report of the Auditor General and within the report which we have submitted to Parliament and which is with Members,  and I hope Members have come with it. 

On page 7 paragraph 2.11, about classified expenditure, I would like Members to note that we have expressed our views to the departments concerned, and are in discussions with them to find ways and means of working out a system of having the Auditor General audit classified expenditure. 

I would also like to draw Members' attention to paragraph 4.15 on page 13,  about donations in State House not accounted for.  We have asked for a special audit from the Auditor General about this particular expenditure which is year in and year out approved by Parliament,  and we will be presenting a special report on this item.  

As an example, I would also like to call upon Members to look at paragraph 4.18 on page 15, on motivation allowances.  I am picking examples from different Ministries which I would like Members to pay particular attention to.  Paragraph 4.18 on page 15,  about motivation allowances.  

I would also like to draw Members' attention to paragraph 4.19 on Presidential trips made upcountry.  In a later report, we will be making a comment about the misuse of these trips with regard to transport, to fuel and other expenses related to these trips.  We would also like on the same page to draw Members' attention to paragraph 4.10 on page 15,  on funds not accounted for in State House.  

Then, I would like to draw Members' attention to paragraph 1.47, on deposits not accounted for on page 16.  It is a huge amount, She 1 billion plus,  and also US $1 million plus, on page 16.

I would also like to draw the attention of members to page 17 paragraph 4.15, travel abroad, (a) and (d).  

Then I would like to shift Members to page 40 paragraph 8.12,  on Third Presidential Forum.  It attracted our interest and I would like to draw Members' attention to that particular section. 
Then page 43 on paragraph 9.14;  ATDF properties.  ATDF is African Trade Development Fund which was started in the early 1960s to promote Africans in trade.  A number of properties were built in Kampala and upcountry and there is a report of malpractices that have been noted on that; page 44 paragraph 1.14.  

Then I would like to shift Members' attention to page 65 paragraph 14.7,  on teachers' salaries taking Bundibugyo district as an example.  It is just an example to show certain shortcomings in primary teachers' salaries.  There are other districts mentioned there, Kiboga and so on, but one district is vital enough as an example. 

Then on page 67, as an example of unaccounted for  funds, paragraph 13.9, you can see unaccounted for funds, just in one Ministry and it is quite a large amount.  

There are other areas I would like Members to note, so that we move together in this report.  Page 70,  paragraph 14.13;  medical treatment abroad.  I would like you to note what we saw and what comments we have made.  

Then page 77,  on over-payment and what the auditors usually call 'mugatory expenditure' - expenditure for no services rendered or no goods supplied and there is an example on that one.  

I had talked in my general remarks on arrears of revenue not remitted, there is an example on page 79 of arrears in a particular Ministry of Information,  at that time not remitted and it is just one example.  Then on page 80, we have revenue collection - and it is still Ministry of Information - revenue collection by Radio Uganda, by UTV and other services,  and what happened to it.  

Then on page 88, I picked an example of what happened to the proceeds from the sale of Army Shops stock.  There is what we found and what the Auditor General had found. I am sure Members have read their report;  and then page 89, material supplies and manufactured goods in the same Ministry and what did happen in that particular case.

I wish to end with directing the attention of Members to two items on page 90, verification of assets in the Ministry of Defence and then, arrears of revenue on page 96,  in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. -(Interjections)-  Mr. Speaker, I was just picking out examples here and there in our report, for the attention of Members,  so that in case the report has been too big and they have perused through it very well, then we can very quickly have points of commonality.

Finally, I wish to point out what we normally deal with in the Public Accounts Committee.  We deal with funds which are voted by Parliament and funds which are generally derived from the consolidated fund.  The Constitution under Article 153 creates the consolidated fund and how money can be withdrawn from it and how money gets into the consolidated fund.  Here in Parliament,  every year we pass an Appropriations Act and this Appropriations Act enables Ministries and departments of Government to finance goods and services required by Government - and this is what the Auditor General reports on.  Then in the Public Accounts Committee, we examine the Report of the Auditor General and thereafter make our comments.  

The Public Finance Act which many people do not refer to Mr. Speaker, outlines the manner in which money can be taken from the Consolidated Fund by the Executive.  Parliament supervises how this money is used by the Executive.  

The Auditor General, accounting officers and the Public Accounts Committee use a number of documents which are derived from the Public Finance Act.  These regulations derived from the Public Finance Act are the following and I think Members should try and become familiar with them:  

The first one is the Treasury Financial Instructions.  That is derived from the Public Finance Act.  

Then the other one is the Treasury Accounting Instructions part one, which relates to Finance.  And then the Treasury Accounting Instructions part two which relates to stores.  

And finally, the Central Tender Board regulations which are a little obsolete and which require some Amendments and I hope the Minister of Finance will soon bring these to us.

I would like to bring to the notice of Parliament that we have not completed a requirement by the Constitution to appoint an auditor for the Auditor General, as required by the Constitution.  The duty to bring the necessary documents to Parliament is with the Minister of Finance.  And so far, several years after the Constitution came into force, there is no auditor for the Auditor General.  And therefore, although the Auditor General audits other people,  he is not being audited because Parliament has not appointed the auditor for the Auditor General, and because the Ministry of Finance has not brought the relevant documents before us for  us to do the needful.  Mr. Speaker, with these few words, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Hon. Members, the report is now open for discussion.

MR. RWABITA DEO (Ibanda South, Mbarara):  Mr. Speaker,  I want to thank the Public Accounts Committee for this big volume of work.  I think it must have taken them hundreds of hours.  

On page 3, they talk of arrears of revenues, especially those revenues collected for URA or other Government bodies, that they are not remitted on time.  Mr. Speaker, I wish they could go deeper into every Ministry's Budget performance.  In many Ministries, the Budgets are not carried out as they are supposed to be.  You get some of the departments being starved of their money which we pass here and at the end of the day when it comes to May and June, there is a lot of hassle and restlessness in the Ministries to make sure that the money does not go back to the Treasury.  And what they do normally, they make sure that - I think there is where they are allowed to re-prioritise the activities - and you find that money which was allocated to activity "B" is allocated to activity "N".  I have found out that this is not proper, why keep that money until the last day?  

As a matter of fact, if PAC knew, if any money would be left over on a certain account, it should be deducted from their next budget so that they learn how to utilise money according to the Budget.  So this is one weakness that needs to be looked into by PAC.  Otherwise some of the departments suffer under the mismanagement of the accounting officers just waiting towards May and then re-allocate that money because they know if they do not re-allocate it then they will lose it.  That one,  I think is a big mistake in the accounting system and it should be looked into.

On Page 23, they talk of Foreign Affairs.  Although most of the queries were answered,  I have a big query again on the budgeting.   Unfortunately, I do not see any Minister of Foreign Affairs here.  But of late we have had a lot of complaints that our embassies abroad are in terrible situation.  They lack money for essential utilities like water, electricity and gas.  You can imagine, Mr. Speaker, you have been abroad, having no gas in winter is like being crucified on the cross,  because your family can freeze to death.  So, we think that the budget of the Foreign Affairs should be scrutinised so that these embassies do not ashame us.  

And in fact, why create so many if we cannot afford to look after them properly?  I would recommend that in case we cannot afford many embassies, let us have one covering three, five countries like other foreign embassies are doing here.  You get the Japanese Embassy in Nairobi looking after Uganda, after Rwanda, after Burundi, rather than putting a few everywhere when we cannot manage them,  and have our officers suffer and be a laughing stock in the international circles. 

My third point is on Ministry of Education.  On Page 61, again the question of teachers salaries came out in this report.  For many years, the problem of teachers' salaries has been a nightmare.  I think two years ago, they even went as far as taking physical stock of the teachers yet we still have problems with salaries of the teachers.  They never get them, there is either under payment or omissions on pay rolls, or total absence of paying certain teachers for several years.  
My question is, how come that other civil servants do not have that problem?  I would request either the Minister of Public Service or of Education to throw light on this.  Because these teachers especially primary teachers - the secondary teachers seem to be okay - but primary teachers have that problem of five, six months in arrears.  You can imagine a man who gets She 72,000,  has to wait for the next five months, what do you expect him to live on?  He has got parents, children, he has got a wife; he has to feed his family!  But this problem is recurrent, every year we have the same problem.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I am not so sure whether the hon. Member holding the Floor is discussing what happened before this report - which is dated 1995 - was written,  or is discussing the current situation in February, 1999?  If he is talking about the current situation in February, 1999,  I would like to assure the hon. Member that there are no arrears; the arrears were accumulated at the time when UPE was instituted.  Yes, the teachers on the pay roll are paid on time.  And if he has any teacher who is not paid on time, he can bring us the name, school and district of that teacher,  and that individual case will be handled and culprits disciplined.  I thank you.

MR. RWABITA:  Well,  that is good news.  But on page 64, there is an area where this problem could have resulted from.  This is double payment to certain schools and I think that is the trick where money gets lost. On Page 64 it was noted that, "one time a package of She 10 million was made for teachers of three primary schools in the month of November.  No proper explanation was given to the payment and no staff lists were presented for audit.  Similarly at one time, payment of She 4.1 million was made in August 1994 to teachers who did not appear in either previous or subsequent months."  So you can see, these are the tricks some of the paying officers are using to frustrate our teachers.  But I want to inform the hon. Minister that before he tells us that everything is rosy, I think he could listen to other Members.  We still have a long way to go, but we request you to keep on the cleaning exercise as much as you can so that our teachers do not suffer unnecessarily.

On page 70, the Committee deals with the Ministry of Health.  During that year, there were very few queries.  But allow me to talk about an issue that the Ministry of Health should be considering now.  At the moment there seems to be a discriminatory policy where the Ministry of Health advances as much as She 40 million to missionary hospitals and leaving out Government Health Centres which assist the poor people who cannot afford to pay.  To me, this looks like a parent who has a starving child and yet he is able to feed a very well nourished child of a neighbour.  I think this policy is mis-directed.  

Where do Government services get felt?  It is through health services, roads, education.  If you cannot give the poor the services they deserve,  and you give this money to the Missionary hospital, I think there is a problem and I think it is not proper.  I have a living example,  Mr. Speaker. In my constituency there is a health centre called Ruhooko, it was started in the 1930s.  There is a medical doctor sponsored by Government.  But She 40 million has been given to a Missionary hospital, leaving this Health Centre with no electricity!  The doctor is using a battery for light when carrying out surgery, he is using charcoal to sterilise the syringes.  So we ask ourselves, 'where does Government give services to the people?'  Because you are giving extra money to these already rich or reasonably catered for hospitals and leaving out this poor health centre.  

I understand that is not the only case.  We have a case in Gulu Hospital and Lacor Hospital, there is also that discrepancy, and perhaps some other areas in the country.  So,  here I would suggest that the Ministry of Health must think and work for the poor, before those who are able to pay for their services.  Otherwise, it looks discriminatory and our people cannot feel the impact of Government Services.  

I call for a change of this policy,  and I have already gone to the Ministry and aired my complaints, but they seem to say, 'a policy is a policy.'  But a policy is for people, it is not for the sake of the policy per se.  And I request you to listen to arguments from other Members so that these local health centres get priority before the paying hospitals.  And if the policy must stay, let the two share the money so that the local people can also have accessibility to the health services, rather than give it to the rich who will again be able to pay for those services without even getting the service free.  

With those few remarks,  I thank the Public Accounts Committee, but in future they should go into the Budgets of the Ministries and see whether their budgets are being performed according to the budgetary provisions.  Thank you very much.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Mr. Speaker, allow me to thank the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee and his team for having done a thorough job.  

When you look at the detailed report presented by the Committee, one striking issue that comes to mind is the aspect of creating appropriate standards within which to interpret and put in place the financial regulations - having an Accounts Act. We also need to simplify what one would call accounting manuals in ordinary accounting, to assist those manning our various accounting departments in Ministries.  So,  the issue of standards should be looked at critically.  By this I mean the human resource capacity to handle accounting functions particularly huge financial data which is generated by Ministries and departments.  This is a crucial aspect we should address.  The rest of these other issues would be symptomatic.  There would be symptoms arising out of some of these inadequacies.  

Allow me to go on to some specific issues raised by the Chairman.  The Chairman stated clearly that a contract was awarded for pre-shipment inspection to a company called SWIPCO.  I am not going to discuss it because there is a specific report on it.  But I would like to use this to highlight an issue which is very important.  The Government Ministries are normally vetted for any procurement by an institution called Central Tender Board.  Central Tender Board is supposed to perform that function.  But when we introduce another institution, organisation or  establishment to perform a similar function, in my view the Central Tender Board would become subordinate to this other contracted company.  Why should it be?

MR. PINTO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I seek clarification from the Chairman of PAC.  My Colleague says he is not going to refer to the matter of SWIPCO because it is covered in another report.  I would like the Chairman to clarify to us as we go on citing SWIPCO, is it true or is it not, that the award of the tender to SWIPCO was irregular?  And that in being irregular, and the way it was handled was not in accordance with established procedures, SWIPCO's continuation of operating in affairs of public funds and public procurements is in itself irregular?  Could the Chairman please clarify? 

THE SPEAKER:  Let us do this.  The Chairman will have an opportunity to respond, but let us proceed with the debate.  Is that alright?  He will take note of that.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:   I raise this issue because it is a fundamental principle in financial management.  If we have two, three different decision making centres vetting procurement, one has to be subordinate to the other.  In this case is the Central Tender Board supreme,  or is this other institution supreme?  What about the third one?  The third one is the normal procedure instituted by the Ministry of Finance through Uganda Revenue Authority and also in conjunction with Ministry of Trade and Industry that all imports into the country must be subjected to pre- shipment inspection.  

So you have three categories of decision making centres or institutions handling procurement for Government.  If you were to tabulate, if you to look at the financial opportunity costs, in fact these additional institutions are a burden in procurement.  I beg to submit that either those directly responsible for financial management do not understand it and if they do, then they deliberately allow this to continue.  May the Chairman of this Committee expound on that?

The issue of classified expenditure has been clearly articulated by the Chairman of the Committee.  Indeed when you look at financial year 1994/95, the amount is colossal.  But I am glad that since 1994/95 financial year, a lot has been done to streamline and ensure financial discipline.  I do hope that in the subsequent accounts of 1995/96/97/98, there will  be an improvement.

I would like to raise the issue with the Chairman of the Committee as to why the Committee should not handle historical events in two, three, four years.  Is there a way in which you can push the function of this Committee at least to be within a reasonable time so as to avoid concoction of figures, loss of documents, and above all,  to avoid the situation where we are presented with historical events;  and when we discuss them, they are literally irrelevant - they can only be used for students doing accounts or financial management?  Can the Chairman responsible for this give us an input as to what should be done to improve this so that we are at least one year behind and not three financial years behind?

I raise the issue of financial regulations and Public Accounts Act which was well articulated by the Chairman of the Committee.  I want to agree with him that largely,  some of the problems the departments face is either because of poor interpretation of financial regulations and public finance act or deliberate negligence.  It is deliberate.  What should be done to reprimand the officers concerned?   This recommendation has not been provided in the eleven point recommendations given by the Chairman.

On the issue of arrears of revenue,  I was disappointed when I ran through this voluminous document that, not to see a single Ministry being cited.  I wish the Chairman of the Committee could cite the Ministries that, 'the following Ministries failed to submit their arrears of revenue.'  And in any case, I do not know why such arrears would not be remitted to the consolidated fund, because it is mandatory that at the 30th of June, that is the closing of the financial year, all accounting officers are obliged to close their books and effect the transfers - debit balances, query balances and all books of accounts be put in order.  If they do not, there should be reason why.  Could the Chairman advise us as to how well this can be looked into,  so that it is avoided?  

On appropriation-in-aid, the Committee said that there is a misappropriation of funds on the appropriation-in-aid.  I am wondering as to how this would arise because when Parliament approves budgets for the various Ministries and departments, appropriation-in-aid is one such component in the overall financial provision as part of the revenue for a Ministry of department.  As such, it is normally provided for to finance specific issues, or in other words, the short fall in the overall Budget proposal.  In case there is excess in appropriation-in-aid as estimated;  yes, they could may be misappropriate the excess.  But if it is not the case, why should a Ministry or Department misappropriate appropriation-in-aid?  If they do, there must be a rule for reprimand because that would be a serious breach of accounting instructions.

Lastly, on 1.11, the Chairman and Committee recommend that every Ministry and Department should have a desk with a PAC Desk Officer.  To have a PAC Desk Officer in every Ministry in every department, in my view, would be inappropriate because the function of PAC is to act as a watch dog.  The function of PAC is to act as a check as to whether or not the finances approved by Parliament to a Ministry or department, have been well managed.  If you send your representative there, it means you are actually helping the Ministries and departments to do their work and at the end of the day, how will you be in a position -(Interruptions).

AN HON. MEMBER:  I want to inform the hon. Member that the Desk Officer we are talking about is not from Parliament; he is from that particular Ministry to handle queries of that particular Ministry with the Auditor General or with any Member from Parliament.  That is the information I wanted to give to the hon. Member.  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  The information given is still not adequate in justifying the need to have a Desk Officer.  I still contend that the issue of having a Desk Officer in the Ministry to handle PAC matters is not relevant because in every Government department, there is a representative of the Auditor General, unless may be this has changed.  If it has not changed, then the representative of the Auditor General in Government Ministries and departments can act as a watch dog for the Auditor General.  If that is so, why should there be another officer to handle PAC matters?  There is actually no need.  If one of the functions of that auditor in the Ministry or department is to look into PAC queries, that is a different matter;  but including him in here as a recommendation, I think we will be trying to do the work of that accounting officer.

MR. OBIGA KANIA:  The information I want to give supplements what my hon. Colleague had said; so that the hon. Member gets the gist of what is recommended there.  

What PAC has found out is that many times the Ministries' funds accounting officers, are not prepared to answer audit queries in time - in many cases.  They come with ad hoc data when they have been called by PAC.  When the Auditor raises a query, before it comes to PAC, it is not answered.  So, the purpose of assigning what we are calling a 'Desk Officer' in the Ministry, is to answer PAC queries.  His or her duty is to make sure that any queries related to an audit, and to PAC work is attended to - documentation is attended to - so that by the time the Ministry officials come, they are ready with the documentation.  Such a person is an officer of that Ministry;  he is not an officer of the Auditor, and he is not an officer of Parliament.  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME:  I want to seek clarification, and maybe the Chairman will explain.  In each Ministry, there is a Senior Accountant and he is a representative of the Ministry of Finance in that Ministry.  In fact the entire accounts section in any Ministry are representatives of the Ministry of Finance.  At the same in each Ministry there is also an auditor who looks at all the expenditure on a day-to-day basis, and that auditor comes from the office of the Auditor General.  You are now proposing to have a third category of civil servants for PAC!  I think that will be total duplication of work, it will be an increase in the recruitment in the Public Service, et cetera, and I do not think that will improve the situation.  I hope the Chairman will clarify on that.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  We are not saying that a specific officer should be appointed with the title 'PAC Officer', but that somebody within the Ministry should have a responsibility to respond to the Auditor General's queries when a report is made. The Minister of Internal Affairs mentioned the existence of auditors within Ministries.  Indeed it is true they are there, but it is these auditors who raise the queries that eventually end up being put in the Auditor General's report.  Once they are raised and the report is made, when we receive it in Parliament here and lay it on Table, then it becomes a public document which is available to everybody,  and we in PAC make a schedule of how and when we are going to meet each department and Ministry.  

We have found out through experience - and this is partly why we get delays in submitting reports - that Ministries and departments come when they are not prepared to respond to the Auditor General's queries.  We have discussed with accounting officers and actually agreed with them, and in most Ministries now there is a specific person responsible for responding to the queries raised by the Auditor General.  

There is no officer classified as PAC Desk Officer by the Ministry of Public Service at the moment, no.  But somebody should have a responsibility to respond to the queries raised by the Auditor General so that when an accounting officer is coming to PAC, he is ready.  He does not come and say, 'I am sorry, I am not ready, give me another day,'  and so on.  Indeed we have agreed with accounting officers and most of them have appointed specific officers to deal with queries of the Auditor General. If this officer has taken action on something, it is written down what action has been taken, and this is what we mean, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  As I wind up, allow me to reform the task of the report.  The report of the Committee, if adopted the way it is, is a creation of a position.  If you allow me, I will read it.  It is page 6, 11.11 which reads:  "The Committee noted generally that most of the accounting officers delay to respond to the Auditor General's queries and only wait to respond when they appear before PAC.  The Committee recommends that PAC Desk Officers be established in every Ministry/department to speed up PAC work and give timely responses to the Auditor General".  This is different from what the Chairman of the Committee has said.  The 'Desk' is different in the sense that what the Chairman said is that there will be a function of an officer to handle matters relating to PAC.  A function is different from a Desk.  A Desk would mean that you have somebody specifically appointed to do that.  But if we understand it correctly, and if we should adopt the report the way it is, I propose that the last sentence be deleted.  In that case,  whoever is handling audit queries would handle all the audit queries with the specific functions, reference and mandate to understand what PAC requires so that when queries are raised, such a person could handle them.  

With that,  I would like to thank the Committee once again, and to propose that the last sentence under 11.11 be deleted to give it the true meaning.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MAJ. OTOA (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the Motion but before I do that, I have a few comments to make.  
I want to disagree first with the Committee's report and then agree with them later.  I am saying this on the issue they raised in their report about the poor standard of accounting.  I disagree with them because the Auditor General is very thorough when it comes to the Ministry of Defence.  They can even quantify and evaluate classified items without necessarily auditing it.  I think this is a very good professional job the Auditor General is doing.  

A few weeks ago, I had the opportunity to attend the deliberations of the Public Accounts Committee.  The queries of UPDF officers who had taken double salaries, that is from the UPDF and from Parliament, was raised and I thought they got very satisfactory answers to these queries.  These happened in 1996 and yet this report is giving us a report of an audited account of 1993/94/95. This is where I disagree with the Committee, and say that the Auditor General does his work very well when it comes to the Ministry of Defence, but when it comes to other Ministries, I want to agree with him that they really do a shoddy job.  

The co-ownership of vehicles happened I think in 1993/94.  It is interesting to note that the Committee's report does not even talk about this.  I do not know whether the Auditor General's  accounting officers did not get these documents?  I could agree with him when he says documents are not available when the auditors go to the Ministries,  but  I do not think they would ignore the fact that this is a very long outstanding debt which is owed to the Government to the tune of She 73 billion; and many of those people who are engaged in these transactions,  most of them are here in this House.  For six years we have not been able to know the effort of the Government in recovering this lump sum of money owed to the Government.

The Committee also highlights non compliance to the recommendations of the Auditor General by most Ministries.  In 1997, Mr. Speaker, I stood on this Floor and suggested that the accounting officers must be brought to book.  Those who persistently continue to ignore -(Interruption).

MR. ADOME LOKWII:  The hon. Member holding the Floor referred to too many vehicles co-owned by very many hon. Members, from the time they were in some other offices in Government.  The point I want the hon. Colleague to clarify on is, being a UPDF representative, how many vehicles did the Army officers co-own and how much have they paid, so far, to Government?

MAJ. OTOA:  That one deserves a very simple answer;  we are not engaged in that exercise in UPDF.  

I still  would like to continue with the non compliance by several Ministries,  to the recommendations raised by the Auditor General,  and sometimes also by the Public Accounts Committee.  I think most Ministries are used to this one because they know nothing will happen after all.  That is why we continue to have these reports and we continue to have permanent secretaries doing these things with impunity. If this hon. House could recommend and make resolutions here and it is ignored by the Permanent Secretaries who are the Accounting officers, then I think we are in for a very bad time.  If most Ministries had taken heed to our resolutions of 1997, I think some of these reports would not occur again.  Mr. Speaker, for a Permanent Secretary to make payments on unauthorised expenditure, I think this amounts to a criminal act and he must be held responsible for it.  

I know and I still believe we can make it.  Poor accounting systems in Ministries are happening because we do not have the manpower.  For goodness sake,  let us begin to employ these jobless young graduates from UCC to do some of these jobs.  Accounts in Ministries cannot be done properly because the manpower is not there.  When will the Government lift the ban on recruitment?  Mr. Speaker, I think if this is done we shall find good accounting systems in Ministries.  Thank you.

MISS. BABIHUGA WINNIE (Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee and the Committee for the good work done;  and for indeed breaking the ice and being able to present their first report since they were constituted into this Committee.  I am glad that we have come to a level of handling matters relating to accountability openly in this House.  My only regret is that we must switch our clocks back to 1994/95 and I wish we were handling issues that could relevantly be articulated and applied in time.  This would improve the Government systems and service delivery within various positions of responsibility. 

I would like to support the Motion that this report be adopted, bit I have a few comments.  Time and again,  hon. Members have raised issues relating to corruption and non compliance to accountability,  and many times we have witnessed failure from people put in positions to discipline people who default in these areas, bringing us excuses that there is no evidence.  What more evidence would you need than what is given in this report?  

This report is actually nothing for us to be proud of.  It is full of terms like lack of accountability, misappropriation, flouting regulations, unauthorised expenditure, diversion of money, doubtful payments; rotten, rotten, things in our accounting system. I wonder whether the situation has currently improved, or we are still in the 1994/95 status quo such that these things will again surface in the PAC reports?  If the affirmative is true then we are a nation to be most pitied.  

There is the issue of classified accounts to the tune of She 62 billion which amounts to nearly one quarter of the total wage bill needed to run our Government in a year.  The notion that this Budget must be 'unclassified' and must not be looked into, gives ground to suspicion that this money is not being put to proper use.  If -(Interruption).

MR. PINTO:  With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I wish to thank my hon. Colleague who has given way but I had intended to stand on my own to raise an issue related to what she is talking about.  

Let me have the opportunity on this point of information to say that in the Constitution,  in regard to the Public Finance Act,  there is no provision for classified expenditure.  Withholding that information and not subjecting it to the Auditor General is not in consonance with the Constitution; and we are to a large extent not living with the provisions of the Constitution.  Let me read Article 41: "Every citizen has a right of access to information in the possession of the State or any other organ or agency of the State except where the release of the information is likely to prejudice the security or sovereignty of the State or interfere with the right to the privacy of any other person."  That does not mean that there could not be put in place some secure, vetted mechanism to look into the expenditure that is currently termed classified and which is beyond the reach of anyone.  

I ask the question today in this forum, as there is nobody else and nowhere else I can ask, how much have we spent in the RDC war?  Those national funds that we have spent on that war are  subject to the Auditor General who must check those accounts to ensure that they are really related to the security of this State.  How much have we spent on other expenditures in the Ministry of Defence?  That information must be brought out at least within the confines of the security and sensitivity of such information where they can be looked into, be vetted and audited.  If we do not, Mr. Speaker, I state here and now that it is in contradiction of the Constitution.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Maybe when the Chairman comes to answer he will clarify to me especially on what has just been said by hon. Pinto - who was once a Minister of State for Internal Affairs.  He knows very well that when he was a Minister there were certain classified items and expenditures which he himself authorised.  I want him - next time he contributes - to give the experience to this House,  how those classified items and expenditures look like.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. PINTO:  Am I given an opportunity to give this information?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think let us not turn it into -(Interruption).

MR. PINTO: Very simply, Mr. Speaker, because I could be misunderstood. 

THE SPEAKER: I will give you an opportunity when you are contributing. 

MR. PINTO: This is the only time I am going to stand.
THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR. PINTO:  First and foremost,  to clarify on what the Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Butime Tom is saying,  the Constitution was not in place.  

Secondly, what I advocate for is that the Auditor General should look into these expenditures within an arrangement which is provided for in the Constitution. Say, Clause (2) of what I had said of 41 that, "Parliament shall make laws prescribing the classes of information referred to in Clause (1) of this Article and the procedure for obtaining access to that information."  If that arrangement is put in place, we will be able to say classified information a,b,c,d must be only accessed by people who have been vetted for this vital function.  Right now we are spending money when there is nobody else who is vetting that expenditure. I am saying the Auditor General ought to audit it within the confines of the sensitivity and security of the stated accounts.  And I wish it is observed as per the Constitution so that then we shall comply with the Constitution and if we do not, then we are in contradiction.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I thank the hon. Pinto for the information -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: I would like to advise you that you seem to be attracting a lot of clarifications and information, so better be guarded.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I will emphasize that Government must put itself squarely in a position where there is transparency and a willingness to adhere to the provisions of the Constitution, so that all elements of suspicion covered under the colossal expenditure entailed in classified accounts is demystified.  It is when Government has shown the willingness to be transparent and accountable in this area that I and others will be assured that the said money is being put to good use.  

MAJ. BUTIME: I would like to make one clarification.  There is willingness on the part of Government to be transparent, and a lot of headway has been made in this direction.  There have been meetings between Government and the Auditor General and Members of PAC, to discuss the modalities of how the classified expenditure can be audited by the Auditor General.  At the moment,  I can say that the principle has been agreed on and the Auditor General is working out how best this can be done.  So there is really a willingness, and Government is committed to the constitutional provisions. I would beg hon. Members not to get too worried about this matter.  This is a constitutional Government and it is going to follow the Constitution to the letter.  
MISS. BABIHUGA:  I thank the hon. Minister for this information, but I would also like to inform him that money under this account is a cause of great worry because it is money that is associated with the security of this country. I would like to inform him that there have been audible disgruntled tones in departments under his jurisdiction, where people have been wrangled over  allowances, and have been undermining each other because of the way this money is being used.  So, the sooner the process of checking these accounts is put in place the better, not only for this Parliament but for the whole of our country.  I believe that when an exclusive public audit is put in place, we will not have -(Interjection)-(Mr. Awori rose_). I have not finished hon. Awori.

THE SPEAKER: That means she has declined to give you way.

MISS. BABIHUGA: I believe that -(Interruption).

MR. AWORI:  Thank you hon. Member for giving way.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that when it comes to classified expenditure,  much more so, matters pertaining to intelligence operations expenditure, I can say it is impossible to confirm it in terms of intelligence.  You can do it in capital goods, in operational money, but there is no way you can satisfy any accountant.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  The issue is not about satisfying needs, the basic principle is about accountability for whatever the money is; be it one shilling or billions of shillings.  We must not hide under the cover of classified accounts to hide the accountability of some sectors of Government that are critical to the smooth running of a democracy. 

Looking at this report, one wonders what level of accounting officers we have manning our Ministries!  To have She 1 billion being spent on unauthorised expenditure, to divert and avail  finances for Ministers and high ranking officials in Ministries to travel abroad is very absurd, because really  -(Interruption).

MISS. WINNIE BYANYIMA:  I thank the hon. Member for giving way and I would like to give information regarding classified expenditure.  

What hon. Awori stated a few minutes ago does not exactly capture the picture.  We have had opportunity to sit with experts from other countries who have given us advice about how classified expenditures are audited in their countries.  We recognise that certain operations of Government are secret and that therefore, their expenditures are also secret.  But what we require is that there be other people outside the security operatives who are trusted by the Government, to audit those accounts.  It cannot be that only security operatives are concerned with the security of the State and they are the only ones who can be trusted with the sovereignty and the security of the State.  There ought to be accountants who can be trusted also, who can be sworn in to audit those accounts.  There ought to be people in Parliament who are also trusted as much as security operatives, to scrutinise those accounts.  

What we are looking for, and I hope our Committee will eventually establish it,  is a procedure through which we have a series of people trusted enough, some trusted to spend the money and some trusted to vet that money.  What we do not want to have is a situation where people are trusted to spend and then we allow them to get away without being vetted.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Member for giving way.  What hon. Winnie is talking about is what was agreed upon, because she must also remember that before I went to the Front Bench, I was a member of the Public Accounts Committee for the last six years.  It was agreed that in the PAC itself, there should be a sub-Committee which, working with other 'trusted people' as she calls them, can audit the classified information without risking the leakage that might be a security disaster; and that was agreed upon. I am sure, as the Vice Chairperson of the Committee remembers very well, that the modalities to be worked out were to be done between the Auditor General and the security agencies as hon. Mululi Mukasa has stated.  

I think what now remains is for the Auditor General to do his work with a group of auditors.  When this information has come to the Public Accounts Committee staff, they will swear that they are not going to leak this information, in order to avoid disasters that may come as a result of this classified information coming out.  That one was agreed on; what is now remaining are the final modalities.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Babihuga, I am giving you three minutes to wind up.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and the hon. Members for the information.  I was raising my concern regarding non authorised expenditure to facilitate senior Government officials - including political leaders of Ministries - to travel abroad.  The very fact that this money is unauthorised means that it would not have been budgeted for, and I would not see any reason under the sun, why Ministries should make this Government go into indebtedness to facilitate people to travel abroad.  I would emphasise that if these travels would not have been ordinarily budgeted for, there should be no money allocated to this function.  Any accounting officer who would divert money, which would otherwise have ordinarily serviced a programme to help the poor people of this nation, should be discipline.

I would have been very pleased to read names of people who diverted money during the fiscal year 1994/95, being held responsible to refund this money or to answer for it.  It is not enough to highlight the flaws.  We must be coming to a point where individuals must be answerable for their actions.  This would include individuals who divert money, individuals who fail to account for money and non compliance to the recommendations of the Auditor General.  I would like to see strict measures being put in place to enhance accountability within Government Ministries, and the overall governance in this country.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI AGGREY (Samia Bugwe North, Tororo):  Mr. Speaker, I start off my contribution on a more-or-less procedural question to the Chairman of the Committee.  Right now, there is a controversy in the media as to whether the incumbent Auditor General is qualified to hold the job.  It is disputed whether he had the right qualifications in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.  

May I first of all make a disclaimer?  I am fond of the incumbent.  He is the best person, he has got the best experience, the longest experience, and he has been forthright in his work. But we just have this constitutional problem - I know the Auditor General does not fall under any particular Ministry - who can help us then?  Can the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, or the Leader of Government Business, tell us whether this controversy is unfounded or based on a constitutional fact?  If so, are there any measures to rectify the position?  Mr. Speaker, I would hate to see this become a constitutional matter - for the constitutional court.  It is a matter of procedural clarification.  Do we have the right person in the right job; not withstanding the fact the incumbent is a very competent person, forthright, and has done an excellent job?  It is a matter of constitutional interpretation.

I am getting worried about this matter of classified expenditure.  As we have had different points of view on what is classified and what is not classified, I still maintain that even if we had the best accountants in the world to check on expenditure - especially operation expenditure in the field of intelligence - it is extremely hard.  I know what some other countries have done and what has been referred to this Committee in Parliament.  We have people who look at the final figures or the original figures and they certify that indeed, the money was handed to so and so. But it has always been difficult to prove whether the money was actually spent the way it was meant to.  

I know of MI-5, CIA, I know of many other intelligence forces, where people who have misused the money were not caught through the intelligence - I mean the Auditor, no.  They were caught by their counterparts in other areas.  The people whom they had been selling information to, are the ones who normally give them away and then you realise that so and so actually took over She 2 million or US $ 2 million, but he never spent it on the work it was meant for, but on himself or herself.  That is normally the best way to catch those who are operating classified expenditure.  But through the account books, it is a fantasy.  Due to practical experience, I know it is difficult.  But you can check on the other people whom he is dealing with, then you are able to trace back and confirm that that money has been buying houses in Muyenga and other places, but not being spent on -(Interruption). 

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Could the Member on the Floor clarify whether it was a slip of the tongue for him to say, 'from practical experience',  or he meant to say, 'from personal experience?'   Thank you.

MR. AWORI:  Both.  I would like to go along with the suggestions from the Committee especially from the Vice Chairperson's view, that indeed we should get some assistance from experts.  To check on the classified expenditure, it means you must have some background, some experience - in intelligence especially.  It is different when it comes to capital goods, that one is common knowledge, even a book keeper or a semi ignoramus like me, can tell that this tape recorder cost only US $20 on the open market, so there is no way you can charge the Government US $200.  But when it comes to operations, Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult.  

You recall that from the CA days, we missed this issue.  It is a long time, but old habits die hard.  The question of classified expenditure and putting the security of this country at risk is a very serious matter;  we should not take it lightly.  Money could be put to bad use simply because we do not have the means to determine whether it was really used properly.  

We have a practical example.  We have a serious situation.  Two days ago, I had a tragedy in my neighbourhood;  some people lost their lives, some people lost their limbs and so forth.  But when the Minister responsible for Internal Security came up to clarify on the matter to the nation, he made one sentence which left me very worried.  He said, 'if I had been provided with the right equipment and resources, maybe this matter would not have taken place.'  And I recall in this House, we argued very hard for the hon. Minister to get an extra Vote to contain this situation of terrorism.  To date, the hon. Minister has not even given us a statement to tell us what happened at Kansanga, except generalities, and things which I cannot really call ones directly answerable to this House.  

We, in this House believe that he gave a statement and I am saying, this House which voted for money for him to do his work is at least owed some kind of statement and assurance that what we gave him in the Budget is being put to good use.  Not only that, when he says that, 'if I had been given more money or if I had more resources, some of these things would not occur,' the question is, has the Ministry of Finance released the money we voted for the Ministry of Internal Affairs?  We cannot give money to Internal Affairs and it is withheld by the Ministry of Finance when this country's security is at risk - lives and property.  I demand to know whether the Ministry of Finance has released all the money that we voted for the Ministers of Internal affairs and Defence, to make sure we are secure in this country.   I have a terrible suspicion from the Minister's statement yesterday, that somebody is withholding some of these resources.  And if that is the case, we definitely demand that the money comes back to where we voted it for.

I go back to this question of accountability.  We have a serious problem in this country, whereby year in, year out, we are told so and so misappropriated so much, and nothing happens.  Only one Permanent Secretary, the unfortunate one, landed in Luzira for one year or so, but eventually he got out.  Mr. Speaker, this House again voted for some money for the Ministry of Agriculture.  On top of that, we got assistance from the Japanese Government to the tune of US $2.8 million which was misappropriated by the Ministry. We were forced to refund the Government of Japan.  For how long are we going to go on like this, Mr. Speaker?   

If you look at all the Public Accounts reports since 1989, you can come to a rough figure of US $1 billion that cannot be properly accounted for.  That is 25 per cent of our external debt.  Should our children pay for other peoples' children to enjoy the money?  Where is the US $1 billion we cannot account for since 1989?  Mr. Speaker, the evidence is in accounts, Auditor General's reports.  No money can be accounted for.  Defence - the other day we handled it, nobody could tell us what happened to She 12 billion for helicopters;  nobody could tell us what happened to some other non expenditure, et cetera.  Yet people come to this House, they seek our permission to guarantee certain loans!  Should we borrow money in order to give it to some people's children to enjoy, when our children, our grand children will be forced to pay these debts, yet this money was misappropriated by certain people; especially the Ministers and Permanent Secretaries?  

We demand that from now on, if the Attorney General or the Minister of Justice cannot do it,  we can do it.  We want Article 164 sub-section (2) of the Constitution, we want an operational law to catch the thieves.  Right now, we do not have the means to bring to book any Permanent Secretary unless it is obvious.  We do not have the proper law and yet, Article 164 sub-section (2) demands that such a person must refund the money if it has been either misappropriated or not been used.  So, we definitely need the Attorney General to put that law in place or else, we shall do it ourselves.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am sorry, I am just seeking clarification from hon. Aggrey Awori.  When you talked of the release of funds to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, are you talking about funds for intelligence services, funds for intelligence gatherings, funds for police vehicles, funds for capital budget for anti-terrorism, are you talking about operational funds, what exactly are you talking about?  Because we are kind of confused as to whether you were vacillating between defence, intelligence services, security vehicles, terrorism.  Would you please clarify?

MR. AWORI:  I am sure my dear Colleague, the hon. Minister is aware of what I am talking about.  But I do not want to go into details.  He is aware of the Vote and the release I am referring to.  But since we agreed last week that we shall not go into great depth of national security matters, I leave it to him to check which Vote has not been released to his satisfaction.  But in this case I will help him because he thinks I am vacillating, no.  I am referring to matters pertaining to the anti-terrorist Vote, whether it is capital acquisition or operational money.  And if I refer to his own statement, he said among other things "that given adequate resources especially capital and operational, some of these things could not happen."  And since he was referring to the bomb in Kasanga and that is a terrorist activity,  I assume the Minister is talking about the anti-terrorist Vote release.  
I think I have to narrow it down to a specific area without opening up national security information.  Mr. Speaker, in a manner unlike me, I would like to resume my seat having asked the Attorney General to come up as soon as possible with a Bill to operationalise Article 164, sub-section (2) so that in future we do not have this problem of accountability.  And those who abuse their office, they should know there is a law in place which can handle them.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Dr. Martin Aliker):  The hon. Awori has questioned the qualifications of the Auditor General.  I would like to assure the House that the Auditor General whom we have now is one of the finest we could possibly get.  He has however reached the age of retirement and he has offered to retire.  Unfortunately, Government has not been able to identify an equally good person like him.  Part of the problem is that in order to get a good Auditor General who is incorruptible, we have to spend money and this is not readily available.  

On the question of classified material.  In 1971 when the coup took place on Borap Avenue,  under the bed of an hon. Member of Parliament now, a sum of US $40,000 was found.  I wonder whether that hon. Gentleman has been able to explain that.  Thank you.

MR. AWORI:  The hon. Minister was talking about money and he was answering questions I raised.  He also referred to somebody who was living on Borap Avenue.  Indeed I was living in Borap Avenue.  If he has information that indeed under my bed, or the hon. Member's bed there was US $40,000, is he in order to manufacture information publicly and mislead this House that indeed it was my house where the US $40,000 was found?  Is he in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, unless the Minister comes out clearly that the money belonged to somebody else, or to Government, or it did belong to the owner of the House on Borap Avenue, then I think the Minister is not in order to raise this issue the way he has done.  But the Minister also did not refer to any specific hon. Member by name. 

MR. KARUHANGA ELLY (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I first want to thank the Public Accounts Committee for the job well done in spite of the period involved. I think this Committee is one of the pillars of Parliament;  and I think the Public Accounts Committee will be the final audit of what we do here in Parliament.  Whether we are capable of checking the Executive action, and after checking, are we capable of bringing it to book?  Obviously we can do our bit, the Public Accounts Committee can do its bit, the House can do its bit.  What then remains is the will of the Executive to bring the implementation of what has been recommended, be it that it is a postmortem.  

Having said that, I also know that in the Constitution we did not spell out specifically that there should be Public Accounts Committees.  But in the Statute on Local Government, there are Public Accounts Committees at the district level.  Members of the Public Accounts Committee who talked to us tell us about the difficulties of their area of specialisation.  The need to get them buttressed and supported to be able to come to the correct conclusions, the need for information and the ability for them to be able to have informed decisions which will help to make collective action in Government cannot be over emphasised.  The support the Public Accounts Committees in the districts that I see, is enormous.  There has to be a lot of training, a lot of upgrading of the personnel involved in this type of work, if we have to check Executive action that might have gone astray.  

This Parliament will be judged on the strength of its Public Accounts Committee.  There has been of course criticism that the Public Accounts Committee is led by Movement diehards, the chairman, the vice chairperson is the Director for Information in NRM Secretariat, hon. Ruzindana is a big cadre of the Movement, therefore there has been criticism.  But I think with this report, it has been proved that they can go above that type of criticism and can actually criticise the Government honestly and genuinely, and I want to congratulate them for disabusing the public of these unwarranted attacks.

There are a number of things that I see in the report and they leave me with some questions. During the time when we were writing the Constitution, money was spent - She 70 million - to put up a constitutional monument at the City Square.  It is not there, but money was spent.  We have a Constitution, we have no constitutional monument.  It is no longer appearing in the budget, it is a matter forgotten.  

I do not think this is fair.  I think as a country we need a constitutional monument to know that we have made a giant step and crossed from military rule to constitutional rule.  And I am glad to see that the National Political Commissar is here,  who was also Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.  This is a matter that should be pursued.  Whether the She 70 million was eaten  or not, I think we still need that monument.  

Secondly, my main concern and the reason why I really asked for the Floor, is to talk about the pensioners in this country.  I am sure that hon. Members in one way or another are associated with people -(Interruption).

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I think that it should not pass without clarification,  when the Member says that She 70 million was eaten and there is no constitutional monument.  The position is that, yes, there was some provision in the budget of the Constituent Assembly Commission to lay a foundation stone for purposes of the promulgation of the Constitution;  subject to the construction of which the remainder of the money was to be appropriated by the Ministry of Finance.  

I think the problem lies in the fact that the monument has not really found a home yet. Because the Constituent Assembly Commission was wound up and these assets were given to the Electoral Commission.  We do not know whether it is under the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs or under the President's Office,  or there is a special arrangement with the Ministry in charge of culture.  I think that is part of the problem.  But, Sir,  the money which was voted was for purposes of the occasion.  The remainder is to be constructed upon a special appropriation.  I thought I should clarify on that.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I thank the honourable National Political Commissar for the valuable information and I hope that he has taken a mental note of this point and in his active capacity - as he was active over the weekend - we know that this is going to be taken care of very well.

I was talking about the pensioners.  It is a shame to this country that in spite of the fact that the Constitution provides for us to take care of the aged, we have failed as a country to take care of people who have rendered selfless service and become of age.  I see judges walking on foot with shoes that are torn  - yes, some of them have passed away in that state.  I do not think that it is fair for this country to have pensioners earning She 10,000 - posted to them on the account as a pension!  It is very, very important that a new law be brought and a new approach to the pensioner's issues be taken care of.  In other countries this becomes a major campaign strategy.  But here, you go home and find somebody who has rendered service - and you know in the old days when civil servants used to work for so long  -(Interruption).

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank hon. Karuhanga for giving way, and receiving my information.  I heard him saying that we need a law to improve the welfare of the pensioners.  The fact is that we do not need any law.  There is an adequate formula for the payment of pensions and some of the parameters there mean that whenever there is an automatic increase in salaries, that should apply to that formula.  That formula has been tried in the Public Service and the computation for what the pensioners would get was arrived at; but that the Ministry has deliberately refused to implement that requirement on the ground that the Government has no funds to meet those obligations.  So this is really most unfair and unjust to pensioners like us who put in quite a lot of our energies and capacities in the affairs of this country;  that today we can simply be denied what is our right and exist simply because of Government's inability to meet the cost!  That is the information I wanted to give you.  And I think with your cooperation we should pursue this matter much more seriously, because all of us ultimately end up as pensioners.  I thank you.

MR. PINTO:  By way of a quotation, let me use a Luganda proverb that says, 'baagala aliwo.'  It means they love those that are there presently;  many people who are no longer in active service indeed suffer greatly.  I would like to inform my hon. Colleague that never will the provisions and privileges be repeated as has been done so generously to a few people at present.  Some civil servants have benefitted from the sale of Houses which they have acquired so cheaply.  Look at Makerere, Kololo, Ntinda, Bugolobi and elsewhere.  The other servants who served before and those who will come later will have nothing to buy or go home with.  I think the arrangements of the social security benefits, should be expanded and really improved.  I think privileges of judges,  other civil servants and other people who have gone to Public Service, including those in private enterprises should be catered for.  So it is a very, very crucial point that my hon. Colleague is talking about, which requires our immediate attention.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes, I was actually provoking the hon. Minister to see whether he could remember something about this.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I thank you hon. Karuhanga for giving way. Before I left Public Service, the matter of pensioners was being dealt with, especially bearing in mind Article 254, sub-article (2);  and I refer to it,  "the pension payable to any person shall be exempt from tax and shall be subject to periodic review to take account of changes in the value of money".  So to begin with, it is a constitutional requirement.  That is the first point I am to make;  to review their pensions.

The second point I would like to make is that we had to find out how many they are because there were a lot of ghost pensioners.  The first exercise was to count them and also to ensure that we put in place a system whereby persistent 'ghosting' is not only encircled, but paralysed.  By the time I left we had counted them and we had a group of consultants who were putting in place a system of avoiding ghost pensioners.

The third one was the issue of updating their pensions.  And as you know, we are working under a system where salaries were not only monetised, but they are consolidated.  That is to say, if you are getting for example an allowance for a telephone, it is also monetised.  But when we use a monetised and a consolidated package, it became clear that it was not sustainable.  And we even sought the advice of the expert as to whether we would use the initial salaries prior to the consolidation and monetisation.  By the time I left, we were working out a formula which would enable the State to upgrade the pension in a manner which is affordable.  And I know that as soon as this is completed, Public Service will see the necessary money.  But I think it will be wrong to say that the Ministry of Finance has not been responsive to the needs of pensioners;  it is the other way round.  I thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  Could the hon. Minister tell us;  because he is saying that the consolidated pay could make the upgrading or review of the pensioners pay unsustainable.  Could he tell us whether those who are retiring and going on pension now are using that package?  And if they are, then how is it going to be sustainable?

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  It is sustainable because you are dealing with fewer people.  And now if you are to apply the formula to say 20,000 people, then it will not be sustainable.  That is a simple answer to your question.

MR. KARUHANGA:  First of all I am very grateful to the hon. Members who have given me information.  But I want to correct the impression which I think is a wrong impression created by Dr. Okulo Epak who gave me very good information, but did not think that there is need for a law.  I differ.  We need to write a Pensions Act,  and amend the one we have and thereby implement the provisions of the Constitution so that our pensioners can be protected from statements that the Minister has just made,  that 'the Government cannot afford.'  That type of statement will be stopped if we make a law.  

The Government cannot afford to look after its pensioners!  Mr. Speaker, two weeks ago, I visited an old pensioner who served as a veterinary doctor in Bunyoro - Masindi, in Lira, in Gulu, in Kabale;  he was promoted through the ranks almost to the level of Commissioner.  Now that he is retired,  he receives She 10,000 a month and sometimes he has to travel to Kampala several times to demand for it.  I really think this is an insult to our aged.  We would rather say the Government does not pay pensions because it cannot afford.  But as a Parliament we have a duty.  If the Government has that attitude that it cannot afford, then I think it is high time a private Member's Bill found its way here.  

But what an embarrassment it will be to Government that is it private Members who are bringing a Private Members Bill to protect people who are constitutionally provided for!  The formula was agreed on by the Government,  as we are informed - the Minister has confirmed this.  Consultants with World Bank were hired to come and do this and they took away the money of the pensioners.  And we sit here in a Public Accounts Committee and approve money for people whom we are paying allowances to build dams and they do not;  and these are people who are sitting here, looking at us!  What a responsibility we have!

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I am seeking clarification.  The former Minister responsible for Public Service made a statement to the effect that pensioners were counted and that their packages were monetised.  The clarification I am seeking is, would demobilised soldiers in the context of service in the Government be like retired civil servants?  Demobilised soldiers have continued to have their remunerations quantified and progressively paid, even though with some delays.  Could we use the same mechanism that we have with demobilised soldiers, and create financial mechanism to cater for pensioners?  This is a clarification I am seeking, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now we are getting off target.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Hon. Karuhanga is tackling the issue of pensioners at a time when ten pensioners who happen to be my constituents have just invaded my office.  They came to see me over a big standing problem.  Since September, last year, much as they are paid minimally, they have not secured their salaries.  I think Government should come out to state why, much as it is paying the pensioners almost peanuts, even those peanuts are not forthcoming.  There must be a very big reason which the representatives of the people are seeking to know.  

MR. KARUHANGA: I thank the hon. Members for the information.  But I do not want to utilise this period to talk about this because hon. Babihuga, the Chairperson of Public Service and Local Government Committee is not here.  But there are Members from that Committee who are here.  However, this is a matter I would beg that that Committee takes its time, analyses with relevant Ministers, and makes a specific recommendation - a legal recommendation to amend the Pensions Act.

Secondly, it is high time we transformed the benefits Social Security Fund is giving to our people and made them into pensions and also married the Government pension scheme with that of the social security fund scheme so that we can have a strong scheme for the benefit of our people.

Lastly, I would like them to look at the members who work for Government in various fields, even including Parliament.  I have spent here almost 13 or so years,  there should be pension for me when I retire.  We do not have such a thing as pension for people who render selfless service to an institution like this.  These are matters I would like that Committee to address and make sure that there is a future.  That people can work towards -(Interruption).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I would like to give information that in the Israel Parliament, when a Member of Parliament serves several terms, he is entitled to pension.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  That is very good information coming from hon. Mudoola.  Even for our Speakers, they would have no pension if they retire.  

But having said that, I want to move from there because I think the point is made, and I want to talk about -(Interruption).

MR. WAPAKHABULO: Thank you for giving way.  I think the hon. Member was looking at me when he said Speakers do not seem to have pension.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that I am not even getting that which I am entitled to by virtue of my service in the East African Community.  I thought the hon. Member was going not only to talk about Uganda civil servants but also those of us who became pensionable in 1977 and our pensions remained unpaid;  not withstanding that they were contributory and our buildings are being used by the Government of Uganda for purpose other than generating income for us who are entitled.  But I would not mind, Sir, if the Speakers also were taken into account - including Speakers emeritus - when we work out the Speaker's pension.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I think it is very important that we sort this out.  We have the problem of the veterans, we have the problems of the pensioners, we have the problems of he orphans, we have the problems of the aged, we have the problem of the retrenched.  I think we have to address this question once and for all.  

On Foreign Affairs,  there is an Ambassador who stole money from the Embassy where he was working, and then he absconded.  Up to now he has not been brought to court, although the issue appears in Public Accounts Committee reports, time and time again.  It appears in the report of Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee time and time again!  The man committed a crime, he stole our money,  he is sitting in London enjoying this money;  why is there no action from Government in spite of yearly recommendations of Public Accounts Committee and also of Sessional Committees?  Why is he scot-free?  What immunity has he got and why is the Minister responsible not collecting this man from Interpol?  I would like this matter to be addressed because it is really embarrassing us and it will never leave these Committees and it is now consuming more pages of our ink and paper for nothing.

The question of these Public Accounts Committees are audits.  We passed a Road Safety Act.  The Minister has up to now not signed it and brought it into law.  I do not understand why, and I would love to get an explanation from him on why this is so,  because first of all we would collect a lot of money for Government via licences, taxation et cetera.

Two; there would be discipline on our roads.  Now, there is not.  People are dying like mosquitoes on the roads.  Rally drivers are running amok and people are just wiping out our population day in, day out.  Something has to be done on carnage on our roads and I appeal to the Minister responsible to bring that law into effect.  We passed it here.   I would like him to stand up and give us the information why he is not implementing it.  When we go to the Police to ask them, they say, 'we are impotent, you passed the law but it is not -(Interruption).

AN HON. MEMBER:  I would like to inform hon. Karuhanga that just this morning we were in a meeting actually, discussing the implementation of the Road Safety Act.  I can assure you within a few weeks, that the implementation will be in place.  

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you.  I am a Member of the Government Assurances Committee, and I have had the assurances - which are one year after we passed the law.  Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I wish with deep sorrow and anger to report to this House as follows:

Sunday night, at 21 hours and 50 minutes, in Kabalagala, a  suburb in Kampala, two home-made bombs exploded.  Kabalagala,  Mr. Speaker, is the road from Reste Corner Hotel on your way to the round about that goes to the Shell Petrol Station.  That is where these two bars, Telex and Family Restaurants are situated.  Two people died on the spot.  Then two more died later - one on his way to hospital and the second one in hospital.  That is, we lost four people altogether.  

35 people were injured and they are all spread in Kampala hospitals, clinics and then some are being nursed in their homes.  Many who were in hospitals have so far been discharged.  

We have arrested nine suspects now helping the Police with investigations.  I issued a statement yesterday both on electronic, magnetic and print media and the same statement was also echoed on BBC and I was also interviewed by the BBC in English and Kiswahili.  

The bombs were home-made, but who placed them we have not yet concluded.  In other words we are not conclusive on who placed these bombs in those two places but we hope very soon we shall be able to conclude.  

The bomb blasts came as an isolated surprise.  You know that Valentines day was 14th February when the whole of Kampala was steaming and enjoying itself.  And you remember that this also  happened at the finals of the world cup when every Ugandan who had an opportunity to see it on television, was settled watching. That is when these terrorists chose to kill our people.  And now they chose again to use Valentines day - when couples and friends were busy having a good time - to slaughter our people.  

I wish to say that it cannot be true that this was as a result of failure on the part of finance to release funds as hon. Aggrey Awori tried to imply. Both capital and recurrent votes and releases for that particular item of terrorism has been smooth and on time. Therefore, there is no excuse as far as funds are concerned.  

There is a lot of capacity built on combating terrorism in the Police and sister security institutions and therefore we should not panic because there is real capacity as far as combating terrorism is concerned. And we shall hunt and eliminate the remnants of terrorism and anybody else who arrives in Uganda on a terrorist mission. Those who have been arrested, after investigations we shall charge them or release them.  We have agreed and we know that we shall confine ourselves to the 48 hours constitutional requirement that suspects are supposed to spend in a Police station.

Finally,  Sir, I regret to inform the House that after pressure,  safe houses are no longer in use.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I gave the Minister of Internal Affairs opportunity to speak because there was a reference in one of the contributions regarding incapacity of his department to attend to incidents such as he has outlined.  That was the context in which he was allowed to make this contribution and it is part of the debate on the Public Accounts Committee report.  It is not something isolated. -(Interjection)- (Mr. Karuhanga rose_).  Hon. Karuhanga you just resumed your seat just a few minutes ago. Let us hear her first then we will come to you and then the Chairperson.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I thank the hon. Minister for the timely communication, and congratulate our security forces for their prompt response.  But I am rather concerned at the degree of preparedness in assisting the injured on site, regarding the levels of damage as depicted in the print media.  Because, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister has said that they have got adequate capacity to handle such disasters but I was rather concerned at the rather inhuman way in which the injured were being packed in car boots and pick-ups - which must have compounded the degree of injury.  I am not blaming the people who assisted,  because there was no alternative, and it was done out of humanitarian action.  My point of clarification, how prepared is the Ministry to avail adequate medical and ambulance care to the injured, on site?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mine was very close to what hon. Babihuga has said.  But first I want to thank the Minister for this response he has made now because it has really calmed us.  

Second,  I want also to inform him that the people we have talked to since that time are very impressed at the way the security agency works after the bomb blast.  The  people who were within the area were very, very impressed at the simultaneous response of the security services and I think they should be commended for that.  My personal assistant happened to be in a taxi at Kabalagala at the time,  and  it was evacuated.   

The response of the public in attending to the injured is also highly commended and the people who were there should be congratulated and thanked.  Taxis were evacuated for the injured to be rushed to hospital as fast as possible without fear of another blast, because there were two which went off simultaneously.  And I think we should thank the security agencies for the efforts they have put in.  In fact, we are told that if it had not been for their fearing to shoot innocent people,  they were about to shoot the very man who they suspected to have planted the bombs.  I thank the Minister and all the people involved in that exercise. 

MAJ. BUTIME:  I would like to say that I talked about population capacity to combat terrorism.  I want to agree with hon. Babihuga that we have not yet perfected the capacity to evacuate the victims.  That must be done by pooling resources with the Red Cross, and the hospitals.  And of course the anti-terrorist squad itself has not yet finalised measures as far as capacity to evacuate victims is concerned,  but really I did not want to bring that here.  And for hon. Karuhanga, yes, that is the capacity I was talking about.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRMAN PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr. Ruzindana): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the Members who have made their contributions and who have appreciated the work done by the Public Accounts Committee.  I am very grateful for having got this opportunity to present this report and I am sure Members now appreciate the difficulties that PAC faces in handling its assignment.  Other Committees deal with specific Ministries or departments, but we deal with the whole of Government, every Ministry and every department that receives money from Parliament.  That is one problem.  

The other problem is that although we have this very big assignment, we do not have greater resources than any other Committee.  As you know,  Mr. Speaker, we have one Clerk Assistant whom we share with other Committees and who has duties - sitting here in plenary and at the same time compile a report about every Ministry and every department that has appeared before the Public Accounts Committee.

Thirdly, we do not have more Members than other Standing Committees and all our Members are also Members of Sessional Committees and some have other assignments.  In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have three of our Members as directors of departments in the Movement Secretariat.  Therefore, I hope Members do appreciate that Members of this Committee have put in a lot of work, and on their behalf I would like to register our thanks for the appreciation Parliament has shown.  

I would also like to inform the House that although Members have been saying that we are dealing with the past, actually, that is our assignment.  If Members read rule 123 of the rules of Parliament it says the following:  "The Public Accounts Committee shall be assigned the examination of the audited accounts showing the appropriation of the sums granted by Parliament to meet the public expenditure of the Government."   Audited accounts can only be in the past, they cannot be the on-going management of the Budget.  And because of the experience which we have had, I have actually proposed to the Rules Committee,  in my capacity as a Member of Parliament not as a Chairman of PAC,  that in their review of our rules,  we should create a new Committee which we could call the Appropriation's Committee,  that would monitor the management of the  Budget during any current financial year.  

I have given an alternative that in case Parliament or the Committee does not accept my proposal, then the current Sessional Finance Committee should be transformed into a standing Committee which could be called the Finance and Appropriations Committee that would handle the current management of a Budget.  And  if the Rules Committee accepts that proposal and it comes before Parliament, then I urge Parliament to accept that proposal in order to cure the criticism that we do not deserve.  We are criticised for not doing an assignment which is not our assignment. (Interruption).

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I appreciate the Chairman's concern to exonerate himself from blame, but from the Rule he has quoted - 123,  he has only quoted the desirable part. I would like to draw his attention to 123,  Sections (2) and (3) which urge the Committee to report to the House at least twice in a year,  and I think if they endeavour to do that,  we would have more appropriate reporting that would draw us nearer to the time of implementation.  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME: I would like to thank the hon. Member for the information.  That rule 123 (2) which she has referred to,  says the following:  "The Committee shall monitor all expenditure of public funds as required under clause (3) of Article 164 of the Constitution." Article 164 (3) of the Constitution says the following; "Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds",  and that is what we do;  all expenditure is ex-facto.  We should do it when funds have been monitored, not when re-allocations are being made,  like hon. Rwabiita was saying. Re-allocations are made before expenditure is incurred.  Once expenditure is incurred then it comes under the preview of the Public Accounts Committee. And I hope our interpretation of our assignment is a correct one,  and this is what we have undertaken to do.  And I would like to say -(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson is winding up why do you not give him that opportunity?

MR. RUZINDANA: I think let me continue since I have many questions to deal with.  I would like to say that in my report, I have mentioned that the previous Public Accounts Committee was in arrears by five years and we had expected actually to deal with the arrears of the other Public Accounts Committees,  and started on them.  But mid-way we did find that the rules required that we finish a report we have laid on the Table within six months, and we switched to the one which we had ourselves laid on the Table and which is the one we have reported on.  We actually laid the report on the Table within the stipulated period, but we could not have it put want to put on the order paper.  However, we have rectified that now.  

I would also like to say that the report of the financial year 1995/96 is ready and the Public Accounts Committee is now considering the report of 1996/97.  I do think that by the end of this Session, that one will also be ready. So, we will be up-to-date and I hope that later we shall be in a position actually to go back and finish the years of the previous Public Account Committees.  That is as a way of clarification.  

The other clarification I would like to make is, Members would have seen that the format in which you got the report is not the proper format. The report of the Public Accounts Committee should be a printed one like this report of the Auditor General, but we have not been in a position to give you a properly printed report because of a lot of reasons; one major one being financial.  So, there are a lot of handicaps under which we are operating and we are going to rectify them.  Now, let me go to the questions. 

Before that, the other small preliminary remark is that when we are presenting our report, at least, all Ministers or all Ministries should be represented here, because all of them are mentioned in our report.  All accounting officers should be around, so that they know what Members have raised during debate. It is true they have copies of our report but they should definitely be present.

And thirdly, as a procedural matter, there should be a reply by the Ministry of Finance to our report presented before Parliament. That one is not there and it is part of the rules.  The last response of the treasury to an Auditor General's report was when the current Auditor General was still Secretary to the Treasury.  There has not been any other reply by the Ministry of Finance to an Auditor General's report or a Public Accounts Committee report.  

Let me go to the queries raised and the comments made about the report.  I would first of all like to appreciate the comments made by Members.  Many of them should actually have been answered by the respective Ministers, or through their representatives.  
The re-allocations which take place during the management of the budget, and the permutations which the budget goes through after approval by Parliament are usually unknown to Parliament.  The re-allocations from this item to that item, from this vote to that vote, are actually unknown and unauthorised by Parliament and that is why I thought an Appropriations Committee for this purpose would be useful; so that Parliament keeps abreast of these changes within the Budget - of the movements from one vote to another.  And where authority is required from Parliament,  then that Committee would force a particular Ministry,  or the Ministry of Finance in particular, to come to Parliament for authority.  That is an important observation that needs to be addressed.  

The state of our embassies, in fact, one of the last Ministers we met last week, was the Minister of Foreign Affairs and we did raise the issue of the state of our embassies.  Ii was observed that countries with less capacity than ourselves in the African region seem to manage their embassies better than we do.  There seems to be no rational explanation on our side for we see our neighbours, some of them poorer and smaller than ourselves, actually managing their embassies much better and giving more resources to their embassies.  I think this is an area that needs to be handled by us all,  and we need a statement from Government to Parliament to explain why we seem to be unable to manage our representative offices abroad while countries with less resources and in some ways, less able, are actually doing a better job than we are doing.  

The Ministry of Education salaries have been clarified and the comment on health made by the hon. Rwabita is appreciated.  

Hon. Okumu-Ringa did mention the standards of accounting in Government.  I had explained the statutory basis of accounting in Government.  It is the Public Finance Act from which certain regulations are derived, accounting instructions, treasury financial instructions, Central Tender Board regulations and so on.  Many people and many departments actually, do not have copies of these relevant documents.  What we did in the Public Accounts Committee was that every member of the Public Accounts Committee was issued with the relevant accounting instructions and we all have copies of these important documents.  

Every Ministry should also have copies of standing instructions and standing orders of Government if they are to conform to the regulations within Government; but this is actually not readily available within Government.  So, it is no wonder that standards are poor, because lots of people that manage public finances and assets,  are actually not acquainted with the regulations and the laws which they administer.  This is quite a serious shortcoming and it must be rectified.
 
I must also report that there has been a lot of correspondence between the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service about the standard of accounts staff,  and there is hope that in future, this may be rectified.

There was a specific reference to the contract with SWIPCO and I thought I had covered it in the report.  We are going to present a report about this contract, here in Parliament and every Member has already got a copy of this report.  I think it would be inappropriate to begin discussing the contents of a report which I have not presented before Parliament.

Classified Expenditure;  I think this is an issue that has been mentioned by everybody who made a contribution.  But I would like to request that the House appreciates the work done by our Committee in this important area on which the Auditor General has been reporting annually, that he has not had access to classified expenditure. But since we started our work, we have been interacting with the departments that are handling this expenditure and we have met readiness to rectify the problem of classified expenditure.  

The major problem is that there are no legal provisions that create classified expenditure.  It has existed through tradition and through precedent that the documents have not been made available to the Auditor General, not that the relevant departments have resisted.  They found it that way and it has remained that way.  We have had meetings with some of the departments that administer this class of expenditure and we are resolving the situation together with them.  For a start, some of these departments say that they have internal regulations and internal mechanisms to control this expenditure.  Perhaps some departments do have them but they are unknown to us, they are unknown to the Auditor General, although for a start,  they all agree that these internal mechanisms should be there.  I do think that we are going to resolve the issue of classified expenditure using the experience of other countries and also using the goodwill that does exist within the system.

Sanctions against violators;  there have been comments made by Members as to what happens to people who are discovered to have violated regulations or to have committed crimes.  I did mention that attached to us we have a PAC squad, given to us by the department of CID and in our work we refer to them whatever we think is of a criminal nature.  In 1996, we referred 43 cases directly to the PAC squad, as we were examining the report of the Auditor General.  In 1997, we referred 84 cases to them.  

When you compare with the previous periods, in 1990 the PAC of that time referred three cases to the PAC squad, six in 1991, five in 1992, five in 1993, eight in 1994, and nine in 1995.  But in our case, and we took over office in September, 1996, we referred 43 cases to the PAC squad, and in 1997 - the period covered when we were considering this report - we referred 84 cases to the PAC squad.  Some of these cases are still under investigation, other cases have been taken to court.  
For the later period which is not covered by this report, this PAC squad has got 150 cases before them.  So, there are remedial measures that do actually take place in co-ordination with Police and other departments.  I think that we are not in a hopeless situation;  that those who violate the law can do it with impunity without anything being done against them, no.  

Hon. Okumu-Ringa did want us to mention the Ministries and Departments which were in arrears of revenue. I did not mention them in our report,  because I assume all of us do get the report of the Auditor General and actually, they are listed there.  Some of those which were involved in unauthorised expenditure were the following:
Ministry of Public Service She 429,910,871. 
Prime Minister's office She 27,650,000.
Local Government, recurrent expenditure She 121,720,957; and
Development expenditure She 51,440,070; the total for Local Government being She 173,000,000.
Public Service Commission She 9,000,000.
Prisons Department She 363,000,000; and 
Law Reform Commission She 3,000,000.

There are others which are mentioned in the Auditor General's report and which Members can readily refer to.  I do recall, actually that in our rules, Members are urged not to ask questions where information is readily available in various publications.  I think it is part of our rules.  

Then appropriations-in-aid; how does it arise that it can be misused when it is actually voted by Parliament? What we did mention is that the funds, revenue generated in Ministries and departments, sometimes are used without authority of Parliament. That is what we were pointing out and it is a common occurrence and it needs to be rectified. The PAC -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Chairman, how long have you -(Interruption). 

MR. RUZINDANA:  I am about to finish, Sir. Since I do not get many opportunities to explain to Members the work of PAC, I would like to get them to understand what we do exactly so that our work is better understood.  But I am about to finish, Sir.

PAC Desk Officer;  this one, we did agree with the accounting officers and actually, many departments have already implemented our recommendation.  We get answers more easily than when  accounting officers come with their teams while they are not ready, and then we send them back.  There are a few Ministries which we have sent back but most of them now come with answers.

Maj. Otoa did misunderstand the report about poor accounting standards.  We did talk about poor accounting standards, but this was not in reference to the work of the Auditor General.  The Auditor General is quite good and the problem there is shortage of staff and also shortage of skills,  because the Constitution has given them the function to make value for money audited.  They do not have skills to perform that added function.  The other ones without appropriate skills are those who admnister classified expenditure.  

On the qualifications of the Auditor General -(Interruption)- Mr. Speaker, if I may finish and discuss the point privately with my Colleague, I think it would be useful. The qualifications of the Auditor General; when in the Constituent Assembly -(Interruption)-(Mr. Okumu-Ringa rose_).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okumu-Ringa, will you resume your seat?  The rule is that if the Member contributing does not give way, that should send the appropriate signal that he is not prepared to take on the clarification or information.  

MR. RUZINDANA:  The qualifications -(Interruption).

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, you did give me an opportunity to contribute, and in my contribution, I raised a pertinent issue on page 6 of the report and it was discussed; many Members contributed to it.  In my contribution I proposed that the last sentence of that provision be deleted so that it makes sense.  The way it is written is not the same as it was understood, as explained by the Chairperson.  Is it in order for the Chairperson to neglect what we had agree upon?

THE SPEAKER:  I find a lot of difficulty in appreciating the point of order.  Proceed.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  The point raised by hon. Ringa is that he wanted the sentence deleted, but I already said that this matter is already being implemented.  

THE SPEAKER:  I have already ruled on that.

MR. RUZINDANA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker;  I am sorry to have gone back to that one.  The question of the qualifications of the Auditor General, the Constitution talks of a qualified accountant, but at the same time, the Constitution also under Article 268 (1) did confirm those officers who had been appointed,  and let me read it:  "Subject to the provisions of this Article,  every person who immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution held or was acting in any office established by or by virtue of the Constitution then in force, so far as is consistent with the provisions of this Constitution, shall be taken to have been appointed from the coming into force of this Constitution,  to hold or to act in the equivalent office under this Constitution."  Well, there is the problem of the "so far as is consistent with this Constitution," but that is the interpretation of the Constitution - the function of which is for other authorities - it is not mine.  

We had also been informed that the current Auditor General requested to retire and is just holding the fort so that another Auditor General is appointed.  And if anybody knows any qualified person, I think he should inform the right authority.  

To operationalise Article 164(2),  I thought that within the Penal Code there is an offence of causing financial loss, so I do not know what I should operationalise. I also think that under the current law,  anybody can be charged under the Penal Code and this Article of the Constitution can be enforced.  

District Public Accounts Committees;  Mr. Speaker we do have a problem.  Parliament votes a lot of money to the districts and the mainstay of the budget of a district is money voted by Parliament.  But this money is not actually properly accounted for.  The Auditor General does audit the accounts of districts, but I do not think he will ever develop the capacity of going to LC III and so on.  So we do have a problem.  And the sooner the district public accounts Committees are operative and strong, the better.  

But that will not cure the problem of accounting for funds to Parliament, the funds which Parliament votes for district budgets.  And therefore, I have actually made a proposal to the Rules Committee that we should create a Committee within Parliament to cover the districts.  There are 15 Members of the Public Accounts Committee, but there are 45 districts and I do not know how many urban authorities.  There is no way PAC will ever develop the capacity to review all the reports coming from the Auditor General regarding the accounts of the districts and urban authorities.  

Sometime back, I remember laying on the Table about 50 reports of districts and urban authorities.  We did put a sub-Committee of the Public Accounts Committee composed of three people.  Obviously three people can never cover this area effectively.  It is within the power of Parliament to create another Committee to deal with the funds which we vote for the districts.  If we do not do this, definitely the funds voted for the districts by Parliament will remain unaccounted for before Parliament.  

And the other issue of the Ambassador who walked away with some money from our High Commission in Nigeria several years ago.  We did raise this issue with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs last week and we found that appropriate legal measures have not been taken yet.  The instructions Interpol gave, of how to handle the matter, have not been compiled with;  there is no commission that has been issued by any legal authority in the country, and therefore appropriate authorities should expeditiously initiate measures to deal with this particular issue of the Ambassador who walked away with public funds some years ago.  

I think I have dealt with all the issues raised by Members and I would like to thank Members for the support shown to the work done by the Committee.  I would also like to thank my Colleagues in the Public Accounts Committee for the time and effort they have put into producing this report.  I also thank the staff of Parliament for their assistance to the Committee.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  I thank you, Chairman.  I now put the question that the Report of the Public Accounts Committee for the Fiscal Year, 1994/95 be adopted subject to the comments by Members,  from the Floor.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  I adjourn the House to 2.00 O'Clock tomorrow.

(The House rose and adjourned to Wednesday 17th, February,  1999 at 2.00 p.m).
