
Thursday, 18th February 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Council was called to order.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Butime): Mr. Chairman, in accordance with Rule No.24 of the NRC interim Rules of Procedure, I would like to make the following statement regarding the incident that took place at Luzira Prison on the 15th of February this year.  

On Monday 15th February, about 150 ex-NRA convicted Prisoners refused to enter their wards after final counts.  A report to this effect was communicated to the Deputy Commissioner of Prisons at 6.00 p.m. who, immediately rushed to Luzira.  On his arrival, all Prison officers had been alerted and were ready to contain the riot.  The Deputy Commissioner talked to the Prisoners in one of the bomas through a locked gate.  They aired their grievances, which he promised to pass on to the Army Commander, but they refused to return to their wards.  It was getting dark and it was decided that they stay in the Boma, but there was re-enforcement made outside that Boma until the next day.  On the 16th of February, the Deputy Commissioner together with other senior Prisons officers proceeded to Upper Prisons and found that the previous night had passed without any incident, but prisoners had continued outside and in the Boma, singing and chanting.  The Deputy Commissioner of Prisons held a meeting with senior Prison officers and the second in command of the NRA unit based at Luzira.  He also held a meeting with the second in command of MPPU, the Mobile Patrol Police Unit.  In the meeting, it was resolved that further negotiations be carried out with Prisoners with a view to returning them to their wards.  After the meeting, the Deputy Commissioner of Prisons talked to the riotous prisoners again, but they refused to enter the wards, and they demanded again to see the military leadership.  At this time, 9.00 a.m., they had started being hostile and were armed with broken water pipes, stones, bricks and other metallic objects and they were threatening whoever was approaching them and whoever was approaching the gate which they had nick-named ‘NRA check point.’ 

The Army Commander and the Inspector General of Police were contacted and a senior military officer, the Chief Political Commissar of the army, was sent with a legal officer from Army Headquarters, to talk to these rioting prisoners, but at that time, the situation had deteriorated and the prisoners had broken through one of the walls and gained access to the kitchen and the area of the carpentry workshop.  They had disconnected water from the rest of the prisoners and they had taken all the food and destroyed the dry ration, which always stays in the stores.  The situation became chaotic and it was no longer possible for the two officers to talk to the prisoners.  The wall of the prison had also been broken and it was feared that if they entered the carpentry workshop, they would arm themselves with dangerous carpentry tools and these would be used against the prisons staff.  At this point, there was a danger of them being joined by other colleagues in the condemned section.  The majority of prisoners who were otherwise peaceful as a matter of solidarity could have also joined the riot and thereby escalated the problem.  A decision had to be taken at the spot by all officers and any further delay would have been disadvantageous to the prisoners.  It was, therefore, decided that the police riot squad together with prison officers storm Boma B where rioting ex-NRA soldiers were; and that the NRA and military police were not to be involved and they were to monitor the developments from outside the prison.  As anti-riot squad was trying to get access to the Boma, the prisoners started throwing stones and other objects.  They injured three police officers and five prison officers.  After violently resisting the anti-riot squad and attempting to grab the equipment of the riot squad, they continued to advance in a formation and it was at this point and after warning shots to stop them from advancing, that live ammunition was used to half the advance.  In the process, unfortunately, two prisoners were shot dead, seven sustained injuries and at this stage, the rest of the rioting prisoners withdrew to their wards. 
It should be noted that only two prisoners died and not four as it appeared yesterday in the The New Vision. And, furthermore, the riotous soldiers were convicted ex-NRA soldiers and not detainees.  All of them had been tried and sentenced in the military units and also by the general court martial.  The situation at Luzira now has gone back to normal with just a few prison warders and military personnel keeping surveillance at the prison. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, this is just a point of clarification, which I want the Minister to make and, what next?  You remember I wanted to move a Motion, but in view of the Minister’s statement, I think I may not hurry with that Motion now. I was happy that when I indicated I was going to move the Motion, the Minister went out and he has come with that statement.  This is a very serious matter.  I am asking the question to be clarified, ‘What next?’ Because I remember when a similar incident did happen in Makerere, where two students were killed, a Commission of Inquiry was appointed and as far as we have heard, various radios including radio Katwe is saying four, others are saying either; BBC was talking of eight, The New Vision is talking of our, the Minister clarifies whether in view of the seriousness of this matter, he intends to appoint a Commission of Inquiry into this matter? Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BUTIME; Mr. Chairman, Radio Katwe stopped operating in 1986. (Laughter) I was saying that radio Katwe operated because government at that time was withholding information from people, and there was no democracy and freedom of speech, etc. And I thought that by 1986, radio Katwe, if it did not stop at all, it got weakened tremendously.  Now, I am saying that the prisoners who died were two; that The New Vision did not get a correct picture or correct information from the Prisons authorities.  There will be no Commission of Inquiry because the matter is very clear.  In the case of the Makerere incident, that is a completely different matter and the Minister for Education can answer that one.  As far as Luzira is concerned, I am saying that there will be no need for a Commission of Inquiry.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

DR. BYARUHANGA (Bululi County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to complete my contribution, which I started yesterday.  As I said hon. Members, what we are doing today, this week, and in the next few weeks, debating this Constituent Assembly Bill, is historic in the sense that we are establishing the foundations of democracy in this country, and these foundations of democracy demand that we are accountable to the population and that we are transparent in whatever we do.  In this light, therefore, I would like to thank the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs for the statement he has just made about Luzira.  I welcome that statement.  

Going back to our Bill, in this Bill, if we have to reinforce the pillars and foundations of democracy, it is important that all sections of this Bill must be consistent with our objectives.  Therefore, there are certain sections in this Bill that I would like to comment on. Part Two; page 5, ‘establishment and composition of the Constituent Assembly and qualification of delegates.’  As I said, yesterday, I had the pleasure of consulting the people in my Constituency; that is Buruli in Masindi, and we had very good deliberations with them.  They made various suggestions and it would be improper for me if I did not outline some of the recommendations they made.  For example, section 4 2(a); The Assembly shall, subject to the provisions of this Statute, consist of the following delegates; not more than 180 delegates elected from the electoral areas; one from each electoral area in accordance with the rules set out in the third Schedule of this Statute; which is on page 19. 

The people of Buruli were of the view that this figure of 180 seems to be based on a population quarter of about 70,000 to 80,000 people.  Since we would as much as possible want to have a truly elected Assembly; directly elected Assembly discussing this document, they were proposing that the population quarter under discussion should be 30,000 to 40,000, and considering the population of Uganda to be about 16 million people, we are talking about 400 delegates directly elected.  

Really, for the purpose of this Constitution draft, a figure of 350 to 400 directly elected by the population of Uganda is not too much.  In that vein, therefore, we shall reduce on the number of delegates who come in through section (b) and (c). As I said, we want to be very democratic.  Now, if you look at the first Schedule, on page 19, ‘a National Women’s Council to be established by law,’ I have no objection with that, but I feel the number should be reduced to four -(Interjection)- yes.  

Excuse me hon. Members.  The point is, if we are trying to be consistent with our democratic objectives, let us have as few interest groups as possible in this Assembly. Now, the NRA, I think I have no quarrel with that number of 10. The NRC, now I do not see why there should be special representation for NRC.  It is not necessary.  Whom do you want to include here?  Because all of us will have an opportunity to contest in the electoral areas.  The National Organisation of Trade Unions; I have no problem with those too.  Number 5, the parties. In the same way as I have excluded NRC, I do not see why parties should be included in this Constituent Assembly. These are citizens of Uganda.  They can come in through popular mandate.  So, the people of Buruli were of the view that these it is not necessary to include these political parties, and in any case, 5(c) - recently there was a declaration that the UPM is no longer existent.  So, even that is already a superfluous inclusion.  The National Youth Council; four people, I have no problem with that. So, this is in line with having as many people directly elected by the population as possible in this Constituent Assembly.  Now, 2(c), these 15 delegates appointed by the President in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet. I think here, we should reduce this number to five.  It is not necessary to have 15.  

So, on that basis, instead of 42 delegates in 2(b), the number substantially goes down.  I will bring that in Clause 10. Now, these are the qualifications of the candidates; if you look at 10(1)(d), this is really not necessary.  This is superfluous.  Who is the leader of a political party? What do you mean by leader of a political party?  Is this the leader at the district or at the national level? Who is this?  It is very vague.  You will cause problems.  If you try to categorise people, to define them - the basis of this NRM now has been to try and neutralise these feelings.  If you start defining somebody who may have been a UPM in 1980, and now you are trying to define him under this section (d), are you being fair? I think this is a superfluous statement and it will cause more problems.  I think the hon. Minister should really exclude that.  In fact, some other people have even publicly said they have left their former parties and -(Laughter)

I was also a bit disturbed about the section hon. Prof. Kagonyera has already touched on - proficiency in English or the language that will be used for debates. I think, a leader must really be proficient in the official language.  At least for purposes of minimum interaction, and since this is going to be an intense period, we are now talking of three, four months, and we really have no time for interpreters.  We need to address substance. So, I think really somebody must be proficient in English.  

Now, Clause 15; if you look at Clause 15, we are talking about the quorum.  It seems the hon. Minister was basing on his earlier assumption.  I think, we would rather deal with a percentage here, instead of numbers because absolute numbers are meaningless in this case.  Now, look at Clause 17, that is two thirds decisions of that Assembly. I welcome this idea that the Constituent Assembly will as much as possible, resolve matters by consensus as we have been doing in this NRC. I think, let me give my views.  The principle of consensus, where you agree after careful persuasion and explanation, has helped us in the last six or seven years of the NRM administration. We have not had ill feeling, and I think it has been a success.  It has not divided this House.  I feel it is good that the hon. Minister has emphasised consensus in the deliberations of this Assembly.  

If you go further - Clause 17, Sub-section - okay, I think the hon. Minister here clarified that there is one Vote, not a casting Vote.  That was corrected yesterday.  Now, the issue of something that is contentious or a Clause that is contentious, I think we need to address ourselves to that.  If delegates in that Assembly feel that the issue is contentious, who will define - if you look at Clause 18, Subsection 111, who will define that Clause or that issue as being of National or local nature? Who determines that? Is it the Minister? In this case the Minister of Constitutional Affairs or the Commissioner? Who decides that something is National and not local or vice-versa?  That must be very clear in this Bill because it can cause problems for the Constituent Assembly; and in fact, if we really go by the spirit of democracy, I think after the Constituent Assembly has debated them, we must go back to the population for further discussion -(Interruption)- Yes, because we are now talking about promulgation, if necessary they should go - what are described as contentious issues should go back for a referendum by the population, if the Constituent Assembly cannot agree because it might even fail to define what is local or national. 

Finally, the issue of intending candidates who want to stand in this Constituent Assembly.  I am happy the hon. Minister says, every Uganda will be allowed to participate to stand for election to the Constituent Assembly.  In the same vein, I request the hon. Minister to withdraw that deposit of Shs.100,000/=. Since we are going to debate a very vital document, the people of Uganda have got a chance in a very wrong time.  Let every Ugandan - this may sound simple - but let every Ugandan who wants to stand, let him stand as we did in 1989, freely, without any deposit.  We do not want to pay for democracy in a direct form. How will this candidate recover his money? The principle is not the amount of money involved Shs.100,000/= but the principle. If it were one million plus, you are now introducing a direct element of cash or taxation in this particular election.  So, I would prefer the hon. Minister withdraws the Shs.100, 000/= completely.  
With those few observations, I wish to remind you that we have set ourselves a historic duty to rebuild the foundations of democracy in this country and we should not shy from our responsibilities and, therefore, we must carry out our responsibilities decisively so that in future, no one -(Laughter)- disputes our election.  Thank you.	

MR. MUKISA (Bukooli County) Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  While I support the Bill, there is one thing I am wondering about; there has been so much talk of late about no money, no money, to the extent that salaries of various ministries are in arrears, suppliers to government have not been paid, and NRC is also - has been complaining that it has not got everything on time.  I am wondering! Are we saving in preparation for the exercise? If we are very good? But we should not find ourselves in a situation where we say we are going for elections, we do not have enough money, and we end up doing a bad job. We shall have wasted a lot of time.  If we are going to get this money from somebody, it may be good. But if we are going to get it, it will be in exchange for what? I do not think anybody spends his money for nothing. So, if we are getting money from anybody, my worry is, what are we getting it in exchange for? 

As we debate this Bill, I would like to request every one of us, to know exactly what we are going in for.  There has been a tradition in this country where opposition has meant obstruction, and what I have been hearing from a number of quarters in this country, especially, from people who think or who imagine they are not directly in the mainstream NRM – they have been diverting the attention of Ugandans and obstructing the efforts of government.  I am, therefore, calling upon every Ugandan, as we discuss this Bill, and as we prepare for elections, to know that this is an issue, which does not concern NRM alone, but concerns everybody in this country. So, I think we should all pull together and so that we know what we are looking for, and so that we support this noble idea of getting this country a Constitution which is recognised, and which has been formulated by everybody.

There has also been talk that this Bill is one of those Bills that most Members here have actually consulted their people about.  I did consult mine, I even wanted others to come in and contribute.  We did not chase them away -(Laughter)- they only turned out to be impatient because they thought they were coming to Bukhooli to lecture to the Bakooli.  They thought people there did not know anything.  So, they thought they will just come to lecture to them.  We told them that we had our own ideas and if they wanted to enrich our ideas they should first sit and listen.  But they were not patient enough to sit and listen.  They wanted to lecture. So, we told them we had had enough of the lecturing, and they should go. Surely, I do not think they were bitter at all because they are the ones who misbehaved, not us.  

There has also been talk in this country, especially where there are indications that perhaps there is a group which is trying to reject the historical Members.  At the same time, whereas the impression being created in the country is that historical Members are being rejected, when in fact, they were the initiators of this idea, and the impression is that the army is being treated as a favourite in this exercise.  But I feel this is a wrong impression created because it is not the first time this has happened.  There was a time in the history of this country where a movement was killed, but the army wing of that Movement remained until it was overthrown. UNLF was killed, but UNLA continued, and it was used, not by UNLF, but by another person. I hope this time that we do not embrace the army as a favourite and throw away the Historicals, because I think the military wing needed the political wing to do the job.  So, if we are saying the Army Council or the army, we should also think about the original Members who mooted this idea and have been honest enough to push it through up to-date when some of us who were on the periphery, or even some of who were opposed to it, are now coming in and embracing the ideas as if it they were ours.

MR. SSERWANGA LWANGA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to give some little information to the hon. Member holding the Floor, that as far as the army is concerned, this issue has been resolved because as you know, and as all the Members know, the law says that the people to debate the draft constitution are the NRC and the Army Council. The Army Council has already resolved this issue and it says that let the people elect their people, the people they want, for us we can send a small number there, not all of us.  So, I do not know what the hon. Member holding the Floor, when he says that the army is as if it is being favoured, yet it has already pulled out almost completely from the whole process. So, it is now the NRC to resolve this, and maybe take the same position! Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. MUKISA: I seem to have been misunderstood, but I do not think we should really go into that.  I think those who were listening properly have got the point. When the Minister was moving the Bill, I got worried.  In fact, I really wonder whether it really came from the people.  If it did, then our people are really not very honest with us because I thought that the people had confidence in this House, and that is why this House has been making laws.  Otherwise, when you say that the people who elected us here say that our mandate has expired, really, they should have recalled us.  At least they should have shown indications of recalling us.  But they keep telling us they like us and they may even vote us again.  

So, not that I disagree with the idea of going back to renew my mandate or anybody going back to renew their mandate. It is a noble idea, but I think that a particular reason is not an appropriate reason.  I do not think, I am yet to see that document and who have said that.  If this House really -(Interruption)

MR. KAVUMA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member now holding the Floor that in fact, the population is complaining that this House has not given them the law to recall those of us who were directly elected. (Laughter)

MR. BABU: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, it is a pity that an hon. Member stood up in this House and talked about a recall Bill.  This House has never received a recall Bill from any quarters at all, and this has been spread as a rumour throughout this country, and everywhere we go, people are asking us why we rejected a recall Bill.  I would like it to go on record Mr. Chairman, that this House has never received a recall Bill.  Thank you.

MR. MUKISA: Thank you very much for that information.  So, Mr. Chairman, you can see that as far as we are concerned, we think the Parliament has been doing a good job, people still have confidence in it and I think -(Interruption)

MR. NJUBA: Point of clarification.  I would like to clarify the point the speaker on Floor has made reference to.  I have never  - I did not say that your mandate has expired, and there is no such influence from the Act, and indeed, the proposal seeks to keep the NRC going, because its mandate and legislation is still there.  All I said was that they want you to get fresh mandate in so far as the Constitutional-making process is concerned.

MR. MUKISA: Mr. Chairman, it cannot be fresh mandate unless it has expired.  It is either a different mandate for a different thing, but it cannot be a fresh mandate for something new.

MR. MAYENGO: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, the point the hon. Member has been labouring on, I think would be conclusively resolved when we receive the report which we are expecting on Tuesday. (Laughter)	

MR. MUKISA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I think that since everybody here, especially those elected, is going to get a chance, I do not see the point of ten people representing the NRC.  Those that will be elected and happen to be Members of NRC, will be here and we should go ahead with business.  

I looked at the proposed composition of the CA, and I estimated that it is about one delegate for 80,000 Ugandans.  If we have to be consistent, then I think that the criteria for these numbers puzzles me, whereby there are eight women representing women, when we have far more than 240,000 women; ten soldiers  representing ten NRC Members, when this House has had less than 800,000 people; two trade union representatives, when the unionised workers are more than 160,000; eight representing the various political parties, when we are not really sure whether the membership of the parties is about 640,000; and fourteen youth only with thousands of youths in the country; and fifteen to be nominated by the President, which would be equivalent to 1.2 million Ugandans. So, the criteria for selecting this membership really puzzle me.  

I would like to suggest, therefore, that in the circumstances in which we are, where we cannot boast of being rich, we should not make this House as heavy as that.  We should make it light, but at the same time try to consult everybody. I suggest that all these interested groups wherever they will be, should be given a copy of the Draft Constitution.  They should get time to discuss it, and make their amendments wherever they will be, before sending them, instead of sending people here.  (Hear, hear!)  

The mere fact that I am not here does not mean that I am not represented, and these women if they have their Council and they invite delegates from everywhere and have a conference, they would make a surgery of the Draft and send it here, and if necessary, each group can be represented by one person, just to articulate the point, instead of two here, ten here, or three there; the rationale is not clear.  So, Mr. Chairman, I think that instead of burdening this House, let us have the Constituent Assembly composed -(Interruption)

MR. MARWAS: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Member is raising a very vital reason, but possibly, you will benefit on the information that after some research, I am reliably told that the Minister drafted even the Bill without consulting the Constitutional Commission. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Continue, please.

MR. MUKISA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I am sure that instead of getting out of here after passing this Bill and then we tell the people to prepare for elections, if this Draft was to be sent to all District Resistance Councils and they discussed it, those various District Councils will come in with their amendments or with their suggestions.  Then these interest groups if they got copies and were given the time, as we prepare other things with the registers and what have you, as that goes on, this can also be going on concurrently.  Certainly, by the time of elections, we shall get those ideas here and the CA, instead of having 15 people elected by so and so, and people start saying that those were the President’s people, those were so and so’s people, we have a House of purely elected people representing the different areas in Uganda, and we go ahead with business. 

Lastly, I do not support this populist idea of saying people should not contribute.  This is an exercise which is very expensive and I think, any Ugandan of goodwill should be able to contribute towards it.  In Bukhooli, for instance, they were saying, 100,000 is small and that we should double it.  (Interjection) Yes, why not? These people -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Try to wind up, please.

MR. MUKASA: This exercise is going to cost this country a lot of money and whoever  thinks they are going to come here to deliberate on this Constitution, should be able to put in some money.  We are not going to  - the RCs were saying that if they have a very good person they think should come here, they will contribute for him.  He does not need to produce the money himself.  So, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I beg to support.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Kategaya): Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important Debate.  Mr. Chairman, in everybody’s political career, there comes a time when one must make a decision; a very serious decision, and I think the debate for this House is a very important Debate in he history of this country, and it is also important for the political career of the Members here.  Because our decision will either usher in stability for the future or it will not lay the foundation for the stability of the future. That is why I am taking the Debate very seriously.  All along, the mission of this Movement has been to democratise our Ugandan society. Even when we came here as 32 or 35 Members of NRC, we said we should expand ourselves to include more people. This is what we have been doing, and this Constitution-making exercise is part of the process of democratisation. We should not be seen as wanting to cling to power.  I think our mission should be to enable the people of Uganda to make their own Constitution and, therefore, we should lay a foundation where there will be no queries about the exercise itself.  We should not create obstacles or take steps which will arm those who are going to question the validity of this Constitution.  This is what is really political about this Constitution-making.  We should not do anything that will create it outside the validity of the Constitution to come.

The Movement is interested that the people of Uganda as a whole, for the first time, should be heard, and their voice should be respected.  If you want to be a leader, listen to the people, because in the past, with due respect - and I am no longer talking of the past these days, because they cannot help us, but sometimes one has to.  Our people have been the object of political decisions, and not a subject of political decisions.  Decisions are taken somewhere and handed over to the people, not to say anything, but I think we should change that trend. But if people are going to take decisions here, they must be in harmony and consonance with the thinking of the population, and this Constitution is a basis of that.  As you know, I do not want to bother Members, because we have set up this Constitutional Commission, which has been going around gathering information, and they have compiled a report that I hope will come to this House in time. Otherwise, it will come in time and I am glad the Minister of Finance has just informed us that he has released funds to the Minister of Constitutional Affairs to ensure that these copies are printed.

We are now coming to this House to ask you to divest all the powers that you have under the law, for the sake of making a Constitution that is written out, and this is the whole point.  We have some people who are very good at jumping from one position to another. For instance, one time a citizen was crying that we have a big army and it is consuming big resources. When we reduced the army, they said, now Museveni no longer wants the army because he has finished with them; the same paper.  One time they were saying the army is too big. When the army was reduced, they said now Museveni has thrown away his boys because he no longer wants them.  

Now, in this Constitutional exercise, should we give the citizens of this world an opportunity to question our Constitution or not? My answer is that we should not, because under the law, you were saying the present NRC and Army Council should be the ones to make the Constitution.  I am sure Members know, and people have heard about how big this Army Council is, and if it is bigger than the NRC, that will not be a Constitution.  This is my argument.  

So, when somebody says that let us now combine the NRC as it is, with the Army Council, and add some people, has this question been answered?  Not at all, and, the army and the Chief Political Commissar have just informed us – he has sat on his own revolution and decided on his own that you are not going to be an obstacle to this exercise.  You are not going to arm the enemy of the people of Uganda to say that this army is actually the one, which made the Constitution. We are going to withdraw for the sake of not quitting ground on doubt and he said, only twenty or ten maximum - maximum not even that it must be maximum because the idea was - let us not have this excuse of saying, the army is going to dominate the Constitution.

Concerning historicals, I have no quarrel with that.  As you know I am a historical member, and I am not a small one at that, but I am saying, if this is going to be an obstacle, I am getting out.  If I want to come to this Constituent Assembly, I should go and stand, and if people elect me, I come will in. If they do not, I will go home and finish. Because, for how long can we be historicals? I cannot go on claiming I am a historical, no.  There must come a time when historicals will not be referred to as historicals.  So, I will go and get a mandate, and if I do not get it, too bad; I will go home, full-stop.  However, I should not be an obstacle in the sense that since I was a historical, I must remain there, and if I am not there then the Constitution should not be made.  What type of historicals are you? In fact, with due respect to hon. Butagira, I saw his argument on his proposed Amendment.  He says; ‘In 1966 Constitution it was made by elected Members plus indirect elected members from Lukiiko, and they made themselves a Constituent Assembly’’. But what did we get out of that?  They seemed as if they were people who had forgotten nothing, and learnt absolutely nothing.  Because, to bring 1966 as an example, that we should repeat it, for 66, yes, for 67, as if nothing has happened out of that, then what are we? It means nothing has happened out of that, then what are we? It means nothing has changed and we just continue.  

So, as I said, I am concerned that the army is out, and my stand on historicals should also be out, and should not be an obstacle. I have also said that in NEC.  So, I do not see why people - other people, want to be more of Catholics than the Pope! This NEC will still play an important role in the making of the Constitution, but with better constitutional credentials.  This is one point.  Not credentials which are doubted.  Why should we - because a Constitution as far as I am concerned, is like a Bible or Koran, where the factions are Sunis, Shirz, and Tabliqs, but they all believe in the Koran.  We have Anglicans, Catholics, Seventh Day Adventists, and Pentecostals. But we all believe in the Bible.  

So, even with the Constitution, it should be such a document that we all believe in, although we have different views in the country, and that means, in the making of that Bible, the Constitution, everybody must participate.  Let us have a directly elected Constituent Assembly; let Mr. Lukyamuzi come in if he can make it, or let Mrs. Obalich, if she wants to, come in. And if you want Michael Kaggwa as mobiliser, they should stand and come in, so that this body is planned that way and we pass the Constitution.  I do not think it will be in question at all, because we do not want Museveni’s or Obote’s Constitution.  When are we going to have a Ugandan Constitution?  When are we going to have a Constitution, which we shall call the Constitution of Uganda, and say that, ‘Mr. President this is how you are going to govern the country, we all know about it’.  And as I said, the NRC is going to participate definitely, once we are allowed to stand and be part of the Constituent Assembly.  In fact, we are giving you two privileges because the NRC as it is now, a law making body, will remain.  Right? I am talking as a proposal and I will explain.  I think hon. Members should behave honourably and that is why they are called hon. Members.  We listen to each other, and we are to argue very coolly because we are leaders.  And as I said, first, as the NRC we can stand on our own and come and participate in the Constituent Assembly, that is one way.

Secondly, we have said, the NRC, as part of the historical process should be seen there. That is why we do not mind whatever number we get, ten or twenty.  Because we are saying that the NRC has been part of the process, just like the NRA has been part of the process, because the roots of this body is in the bush just as much as the NRM roots are in the bush, and in order to complete the exercise, the NRC in its own right, and as part of the process of democratisation, should be part of the Constituent Assembly. 

So, we can or you should, according to the proposal of the NRC as a law making body, still remain.   I know, there are some people who have said, ‘oh, this is too expensive, why two bodies?’ First of all, the expense is the first argument I have heard about.  But my question is very simple; how much have we lost in terms of life and property - roads and hospitals, when there is confusion in the country?  How much have we lost, how much did we lose in the 1979 War? It is actually from 1971; how many people died in 1979? Where is Masaka, Mbarara, and Arua?  How much, if you convert that?  In 1980, I went with the then President Binaisa to Tanzania to take the first group, and I saw over twenty APC of Uganda there, which had been taken.  Because of our confusion here, Tanzania would not have come here if we were peaceful.  How much have we lost in this exercise?  

So, if you just make a small group to sit here and create stability.  The expense to me is nothing as long as the country is going to be stable for a long time.  So, I am not convinced about the question of the expense, because it is a valid argument, as long as we do not put in place a mechanism for solving our political problems peacefully. Then, to save a few shillings here today, we do not regard our future as not waive.  I think the Bazungu say, ‘you are pennywise but pound foolish’.  So, the expense is number one.

Two people have observed that if they are in a Constituency, and they are NRC Members at the same time, and there is also a Member of the Constituent Assembly, is their power not diminished?  That is what they feel; that their power is diminished.  How can we have two bulls in the same kraal, as if it is okay?  Or, two cows in the same kraal?  

But the Constituent Assembly is a ‘taskforce exercise’, if I may use that expression. It is a mere taskforce.  We are saying, this Assembly comes, looks at the Constitutional provisions, debates them, finishes and goes home. That is all - it is a taskforce.  It is not a permanent body.  It is a taskforce charged with a specific task, which it has to finish.  I do not see how somebody who is in just for six months diminishes you; then it means you do not have any powers. If you are really threatened by four months, then you might have known no authority here.  (Laughter)   

I said the question of supremacy in law making is not in question because NRC would be a supreme law-making body as you are now.  The other one will just be doing the Constitution only - that is all; there is no conflict.  I think as I said at the beginning, Members must be decided - are we going to be put in analogy of history, where they will say that this is the group of people who said they want to create a foundation for the stability of the country, by saying let us not go on. We were noble enough to rise above selfish interests and created a house which made this Constitution, or to say nothing has changed, we have interrupted nothing; let us continue.  I think this is a matter of choice.  But I am sure Members will choose the noble one, of having raised above selfish interests and allowed the creation of the new Constituent Assembly to make this Constitution.  I know, of course, some people have questioned how we know whether the figures gathered by the Constitutional Commission are correct.  If they can provide alternative figures we can look at them also, because one cannot just argue - bring us the authentic ones and we shall look at them. But the figures are showing that the population is also actually for a new body.  They are not excluding you from standing, but they are saying that a new body should enact this Constitution.  
So, I just want to touch one point. I did not want to go into the provisions because I do not think that it is necessary. We can look on that one, provided that we are convinced on the basis of what we are doing.  

I also want to touch on the question of the Chairman, as proposed in the Bill - Chairman of the Constituent Assembly. We are proposing that the President on the advice of the Cabinet should nominate this Chairman.  I know some people have said, ‘no, this is undemocratic  - the Chairman must be elected by the Constituent Assembly’. First of all, elected from which group?  Is it the people who are elected in the Constituent Assembly? We want a Chairman who has at least clearance on impartiality or credentials of impartiality; because as a member - if I am going to stand in my Constituency, I am going to say, gentlemen and ladies, I am against, or I am for multi-party.  I will say that in my campaign. But if I come here and you elect me as a Chairman, then those who are for other things.  - I am not going to get your vote. Or if I say I am not for multi-party, then hon. Damiano Lubega may not have a chance to speak. (Laughter) 

So, in weighing this question of the election and the rest, you should weigh this question of having a Chairman who does not seem to be having a side before he comes to the Chair.  That is why we are saying that let the Cabinet - at least you can entrust the Cabinet with that - that they can look together with the President, for somebody who gives an appearance that all sides would be fairly heard in the debate. That is why we thought a Chairman should not be subjected to politicking because we are going to wonder whether he is on our side or not? That is why we said that let us have somebody present with all his sources at hand, and the Cabinet could look for somebody whom everybody feels is impartial.  Mr. Chairman, with these few words, I support the Bill.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to talk about the Constituent Assembly Bill.  The Constituent Assembly Bill is going to be a political landmark in this country’s history.  When passed, it will be a political landmark for the NRM Government.  I believe the Constituent Assembly Bill is intended to enhance our political development and to emphasise our political democracy.  I am sure in the process of wanting to make a Constitution, we are looking at having a document that is acceptable to all, is dependable and also workable.  The only way we can do this, is to ensure that as many people as possible, get involved in its making.  

Allow me to borrow the words of John Lock, who was a philosopher and who said that, ‘One man has no right to silence 99 as much as 99 men have no right to silence one.’  Everybody has his own right.  If, even a small section of the society feels that something is not rightly done, I think it is also entitled to be heard and since this Bill was published, voices have come up, maybe with different reasons, or with different objectives, but voices have come up that we need to have a taskforce that debates this Constitution.  Indeed, all of us have personal interests, and personal interests summed up together form national interests. But the only way to cater for national interests is also to include personal interests and, therefore, all interests should be catered for. That is why I wish to support that there should be a taskforce that discusses and debates this Constitution, so that nobody comes up and says I was not part of it.  What I do not want to associate myself with is, to say that the NRC has no mandate. The NRC has the mandate, but the NRC is only being mature and politically alert to say that if there are some sections of the population which say that they should have a taskforce separate from us, then we should yield to that and say that let us have it if by doing it or we are increasing the acceptability of the Constitution. (Applause)

 We cannot depend on the question of who said what to the Constitutional Commission.  I understand there are 25,000 memoranda; and it is possible to have had many of them actually backed by the same group. So, those statistics are not necessarily reliable.  As much as we all know, and I have also consulted my people in the Constituency, we have not consulted all the people.  Nobody can come and say I had 100,000 people in the Constituency, and I consulted 100,000; no. We consult certain groups.  

So, the important thing really, is to get a general view and get - do we have a section of the society which thinks that the only way to increase the acceptability and workability of this Constitution, is by having a taskforce, which is different from the group that we have been having.  When this is said, and I hear, there are certain sections in this Bill that certainly will end up being revisited because - for instance, Section 5(a), states that a person can vote when he is 18, but you are saying to be able to stand you must be 21.  The man pays graduated tax when he is 18, and he is allowed to vote when he is 18, is he part of the youth when he is 18 - you are saying you bring people who are youth, but you are saying they must stand when they are 21; I think we may have to revisit that part and actually allow those who are qualified to vote because they also qualify to stand. 

There is a section which is very amusing. That when somebody is by profession fallen out, he should not stand - I will give just one example; suppose a Reverend Father actually decided to marry, he will have professionally left his job; or suppose a Reverend of the Church of Uganda married a second wife, he will have professionally left his job but should that one disqualify him from standing to discuss the Constitution. (Laughter) 

We have also allowed civil servants to stand. But I think we shall have to put some safeguards, because if we are going to look for people acceptable to society, and I am talking about society which is going to vote, which society is relatively very poor, then brains do not necessarily go with money.  In other words, being a good and intelligent man does not necessarily mean that you must have the money. If we allow civil servants to stand, then I think we should have a provision that they should also actually stop using government facilities when they go for campaigns, because I think it is unfair in the long-run, to allow people to use government facilities on behalf of others, and then campaign with them.  I hope we shall move an appropriate Amendment to take care of that.  

As we have been going around the countryside asking people on this Constituent Assembly, the issue of political parties came up, and I think, we cannot hide that it is actually there and embedded there; and in this Bill we want to pass - if we pass it as it is written, we are saying political parties should not be talked about when we are campaigning. But of course, it is very difficult to enforce.  

It may be appropriate after we have passed this Bill, to have the referendum on political parties before the elections; so that we all go – (Applause)-  determined on where we are going with the whole population, rather than come up and say ‘no we had wanted this but you see we were fewer’ because, I believe that if we want a referendum, those who are for multi-parties now, may be very few. (Laughter)

Hon. Byaruhanga was talking about population representation. I think we all now believe that there should be population representation in the Constituent Assembly, if it is going to be really fair.  If we are going to have a Constituency as a county, then we shall keep the unfairness as it has been. For instance, Bukoto County has 360,000 people; as another County, I think Kyamuswa, in Kalangala, has 7,000.  Areas which are thickly populated have got fewer counties and those which are sparsely populated have got many more counties. 

I think the idea of a district as the base to determine the number should be used, and if we can take the multiple of 100,000, we would come up with approximately 168 members in the Constituent Assembly, directly elected.  The issue of women has been talked about.  It puzzles me why they should be eight or ten.  I think, if we kept the same base as we have now, of a District -(Applause)- so that we have one woman representative from each District, but this time not elected by men only.  This time, all the women who want to stand should do so at the district level, so that they are voted in their own right; competing amongst themselves. Because of the cultural traits that we have, if they stand with men, we know what will happen; so that each district brings a lady, who has stood against other ladies and has been voted by all the people in the district, at the district level.  (Applause) 

We have a problem of when we come to the campaigns, or when this Bill is passed, assuming it is passed the way it is written, and we have to have campaigns.  The campaign shall be candidates’ meetings and that we cannot have a meeting without the consent of the Returning Officer or whoever it is.  How do you define a meeting or how do you define a campaign, and where do you campaign?  Because campaigns are everywhere all the time, and a meeting can begin from two people.  A meeting can be in a bar or on the road, or anywhere.  I think that kind of arrangement does not have to come up, and I think, once we allow campaigns, we should allow and if we do not want to allow them, we should stop them, because to allow them halfway, you will not actually enforce the whole thing.  

Another area that we may have to revisit is the idea that when the results are over; because some of us were around in the last elections as they were being held; that when the results are over, all the returns will be taken to the Returning Officer by the Presiding Officer, and nothing should be left behind. I think this time, to avoid any other malpractice, it maybe very important to make sure that all the candidates’ agents sign on the documents and keep the documents, so that when it comes up, you know who tampered with the figures.  

I think we shall have done a lot of good for this country, if we pass this Constituent Bill so that the people of Uganda can see transparency in politics in the country.  The framework of this Constituent Assembly is not dependent on any other document, certainly.  It is only the framework that helps us agree on how to do it.  For instance, even if the NRC was to convert itself into the Constituent Assembly, there should be a programme of how to convert yourselves.  In other words, you do not have to have any other laws or any other documents for you to be able to have a framework.  The framework must be there for you to be able to fill in the blanks and then do the job.  

I believe if we are sincere, upright, and transparent we shall be able to get a Constitution that can be acceptable to all; a Constitution that we shall all wish to defend, and I am sure the government will ensure that everybody knows how to defend this Constitution, if it comes in place, because it may be a futile exercise if we are going to have a Constitution and then later we have no logistics and methods of how to defend it.  The important thing is not the document.  The important thing is how we perceive the document, or how we understand it, and how we can defend it.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. ODONGO V. (Kole County, Apac): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  The importance of this Bill does not need to be over emphasised; we know that we all need a new Constitution.  The NRC of which I am a Member of, has  done a recommendable job.  It has earned a good name for Uganda and that is why even the outside world now says Uganda is moving towards democracy.  The IMF and the World Bank is very happy with us because of the NRC, which has earned us a good name.  In 1989, this NRC was used to extend the government period -(Applause)- and that is true.  We became part and parcel of government, but now, a lot of things have been said.  Our mandate is being denied, doubted, questioned and misunderstood, and because of that, even the outside people are saying we were bribed; that we were given a pick-up, Toyota-stout - the government bribed us to extend their period of administration.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of information. This House - what was extended was not the term of governance, but the term of the NRM period, and as a matter of fact, members of government had been changing, but members of the Movement and NRC have not changed.  So, the hon. Member should really be informed that what was extended was the term of Office of the NRM Administration.  The Government has changed; for example, hon. Mbabazi was not a Minister of State for Defence at that time, but now he is.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ODONGO:  Mr. Chairman, all that I know is that government has not changed. What has changed is only the personnel. (Applause) Because our mandate is being doubted, and because we want to walk out honourably as we had started, and since we have stayed here to earn a good name for this country, I propose the following: 1) I ask my Colleagues, Members of Parliament who are both elected and Historical, that if there is a way the NRC can be dissolved so that all of us move out -(Applause)- because already our mandate is being questioned, doubted, and even being denied - why should we continue here? Why should the government keep on paying us when we are not mandated here?  We are talking of cutting down expenses.  So, if there is anything which I am very strict on, is finances.  I do not want it to be spent anyhow.  Now that our work is no longer very useful here, why should we continue being paid here. NRC should be dissolved and people go back for election.

LT. COL. SSERWANGA LWANGA:  Point of information. I want to give some bit of information on this issue of the - because I have heard many Members talk about the legitimacy of the NRC, its competence and about the representatives of the NRC not having mandate. They have even gone ahead and said that the NRC does not speak on behalf of the people.  I want Members to be clear.  These are not issues as far as the Constituent Assembly Bill is concerned.  I think, the issue is how do we legitimise the Constitution - should we use this body or should we use a new elected body; because Mr. Chairman, you will allow me to give more information that when the Commission went to the people, they wanted us to tell them what would happen to the proposals and views which they were going to give us.  We told them that  - I happen to be a Member of the Commission, for your information Mr. Chairman - we told them that these views you are going to give us will be discussed by the NRC and the Army Council. They said, ‘no, you can end there and we go away!’ and we asked why? They said, ‘yes, those people have done a good job’. The NRC has been leading the government very clearly; you people in the army have been fighting well - when I hear one hon. Member saying that the NRC was used, I think you should also say that the Army was used to defeat insurgency.  They said, ‘yes, you are doing a good job, you have defeated insurgency but on the issue of Constitution gentlemen, give us peace and we elect the people we want to elect and -  because this is something permanent; the permanency of the Constitution.  They are not doubting the House or how capably it is being done.  

So, the issue is - how do we legitimise the new draft.  By dissolving this House, I think that shall be ending the interim period of the NRM, which is not the intention of this Bill.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. ODONGO: Mr. Chairman, that is his own opinion.  Allow me to continue.  Since people say we were not directly elected - the NRC Members, then it would come to the same thing, because this is an RC system of election, where we are selected rather than elected.  This would also go to the extent of even the District Council. Why should they hold the mandate, if we do not hold the mandate as people are saying?  Because, they are also selected like -(Interruption)

MR. KAYONDE I.:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to continue making an allegation without substantiating; could he clearly mention either a statement from government or any Member of the House, who has said that he doubts the legitimacy of this House, because - is it in order to continue making the allegation without substantiating?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is entitled to his own views.

MR. ODONGO: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for protecting me.  Having said that, it is very difficult to maintain two bodies, the Constituent Assembly and the NRC, because, first of all, the NRC will be doing nothing.  What will they be doing when those fellows are deliberating?  There is nothing. So, we should have only one body which is legislative in a small country like ours.  So, the NRC should be dissolved, and we should elect.  I support the Bill and I want that we be elected to go to the Constituent Assembly, but the NRC should go so that we all go for elections. (Applause) Because our mandate is being questioned, let us rejuvenate our mandate.  Let those who are still fit come back, and let those who will be thrown out, be thrown out on nomination.

MR. MAYENGO I.: Point of clarification. Mr. Chairman, I would like the hon. Member to assist me at least and clarify one little question.  When he suggests that this - I am asking for clarification Mr. Chairman - that when he is suggesting that the NRC goes and that the Constituent Assembly does everything, could he clarify whether the Constituent Assembly will also pass the Budget which is coming. Is he in order to continue making the allegation without substantiating it? 

THE CHAIRMAN: He is entitled to his own view. Please continue.

MR. ODONGO: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for protecting me.  As you said, it is very difficult to maintain two bodies, the Constituent Assembly and then the NRC because, first of all, the NRC will be doing nothing.  What will they be doing when those fellows are deliberating? There is nothing.  So, we should only have one body which is legislative in a small country like ours.  So, the NRC should be dissolved, and we elect.  I support the Bill and I want us to be elected to go to the Constituent Assembly. But the NRC should go so that we all go for the elections. (Applause) Let us go and rejuvenate our mandate, and let those who are still fit come back, and let those who will be thrown out be thrown. 

Mr. Chairman, no nominations -(Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO: Point of clarification. I would like the hon. Member to assist me or at least to clarify one little question, Mr. Chairman. When he suggests that the NRC should go and that a Constituent Assembly does everything, could he clarify whether the Constituent Assembly will also pass the budget which is coming? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR. ODONGO: Mr. Chairman, I just want to continue.  On nomination, I recommend that there should be no nominations of any kind.  On special representation, if we are not careful, we shall find ourselves dividing Uganda into councils and unions and then we shall come back again to this House to enact a Bill which will integrate the councils and unions because we are now putting the elders’ union, farmers’ union, youth and women, and we shall add more, even the middle aged and those who do not belong and then we shall find ourselves divided into unions and associations and councils and then we shall get another Act of Parliament which will unite us if we are not careful.  I am saying that the youth can still sit somewhere and send their proposals to the Constituent Assembly.  There is no need for them to be represented. They can even contest; in fact, we are encouraging the youth to contest alongside with the elders.  Already, we have good examples in the House here.  When shall they learn to contest? They should start now rather than wait to be taken on special representation. Women the same -(Laughter)- yes. The only special representation which I would recommend is the Army Council, ten members only -(Interjection)- that is obvious, I can explain for the whole day or three days so that you know what the role of the army is; that one is obvious. 

Secondly, we have forgotten a group of Ugandans who are very useful and we are trying to give special consideration to people who are able, who can walk and see and who can hear.  The disabled should be represented in the Constituent Assembly. (Laughter) The blind, the dumb, and those who cannot walk should be represented.  These fellows actually need special representation because they cannot compete normally. So, I recommend that we have four of them, one from each region.  Thirdly, I recommend that the three main religions in Uganda are represented, the Catholics, Church of Uganda and the Moslems. 

Having said that, I want to wind up by saying that we should leave people to be free to campaign because if we say that we restrict the campaigns, we have no yardstick to measure how we can restrict it. Let people be free because our brothers on the Front Bench are using the Television to talk, and other things. Why not the rest; those who can afford.  Let them also use it if they can afford to.  So, let the campaign be free. 

The Chairman, should actually be elected by the people who have been elected in the Constituent Assembly.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

MR. KAVUMA (Kyadondo County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this very important Bill before this august House.  Before I start, allow me on behalf of the people of Kyadondo, to thank the Government of Uganda and the population for having organised so successfully the visit of His Holiness Pope Paul the II.

I say this is an important Bill because as national legislators we are here to lay a foundation upon which the good governance of this country will be based. Hence, we are laying the foundation for providing for the smooth transfer of power from one set of leaders to another leaders.  As we are all aware, the question of smooth transfer of power has eluded Ugandans for many years.  People we represent here have very fresh memories of how much life has been lost, how much property has been destroyed with the change in leadership, in this country.  First and foremost, I want to communicate to this House the wish of the people of Kyadondo and the others I have been able to meet during the several consultations I made on this important subject.  They have no doubts in their minds that as a population, they want a separate body to enact the Constitution of this country.  

The people want to exercise their supremacy, and it is good that the NRM has taught them that they can exercise their democratic right without any hindrance, and after seven years of testing that power, and during the process of empowering the people, they are not willing to see anybody standing in the way of that process at this important time when they are going to lay the foundations of how Uganda is going to be governed in the future.  When they say they want a new body, they are not questioning the ability of the current NRC, not even its mandate.  All they are requesting for is that the hon. Members come down and subject themselves to the will of the people.

The principle of the supremacy of the people is very important.  I have no doubt because arguments have been made that when our people actually elected, they elected the cream from the society and, therefore, there is no need for them to elect others.  I am saying this is what they are saying.  If they elected the cream, and we allow to stand according to their request; we go back, and they return us, we shall have even more weight politically to discuss matters of national importance.  I have said that the people remember the chaos that has always accompanied the change of leadership in this country. Because of that the people of Kyadondo and Mpigi have asked me to communicate this view; they do not buy the idea that because we must have elections, and because the people have demanded, then we must also dissolve this House now and go for General Elections today, or in a few weeks so that whoever is elected can come back and be in the NRC and also turn themselves into a Constituent Assembly to do the Constitution.  Why do they object to that? They are not interested in seeing an abrupt end to the interim period of the National Resistance Movement which is most likely going to end in chaos, because the framework of transfer of power has not yet been agreed upon.  They want the interim period to end at the time when they will have agreed as a nation, as to how  -(Interruption)

MRS. KIRYAMPAWO: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like, to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that when we dissolve the NRC, it does not mean that it is the end of the NRM administration in my understanding, because we found them there, and so, when we go, we shall leave them there. (Laughter)

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the Member for the information and I want to thank her particularly because she said, ‘in her own understanding’, and you are entitled to it. But if you say you want to dissolve this NRC now, what you are saying consciously or otherwise, is that you are legally and technically ending the interim period in a manner of the National Resistance Movement, and in a manner that will leave no legal framework in which a new government will be set up.  For instance, even if we sat here and we said we dissolve ourselves, that will be a wish we have expressed. But there must be the overall general manager of this country who will now say the people have said they want to dissolve the House.  Let me resort to the Constitution and dissolve that House.  I want to inform Members that that provision is not there in our Constitution today.  Even the President has the legal power to dissolve this House.  

So, we shall have ended the interim period and we shall be calling for, I do not know, an ad hoc manner of seeing what happens after the dissolution of the House. These arguments can appear very attractive, but the people we represent here still remember what has been happening since 1966. People have been talking on behalf of the people and yet when suffering came, when death came, most of those who were sitting in the houses like this one, picked only the few passports they had and they abandoned them. It took them years to find people who could say, ‘gentlemen and ladies, we are not taking passports to run away, you come with us and we go into the jungle; somewhere in this country to come and sort out this issue of how are we going to have a change of leadership without subjecting the population to death and loss of property’.

It is not a new thing under the NRM arrangement that they listen to the will of the people. Before I came to this House, there were calls that gentlemen you did very well. You fought and captured state power on behalf of the people, but you are too few; the historicals. Those cries were heard and an expansion was made, and we came here.  Today, there are cries from the people, even if somebody wanted to doubt the statistics which we have been given by the government, and which were availed to the Commission, the question is not statistics because these were given may be two or three years ago or something like that. But the point is, if you are a leader you should have the capacity to see that the prevailing climates are turned into a particular time, and be able to take the right decision depending on what the people want. Even if they were no statistics, if the people demand they want others to come and debate the Constitution, even if the statistics were saying otherwise, a wise manager of public affairs would have said, gentlemen, to hell with the statistics, things have changed, the people wants this, ladies inclusive  -(Laughter)- things have changed, the climate is like this and I think we must go with the will of the people like they did in 1989. The NRM is doing the same thing by going to the will of the people. (Interjection)  

MR. MULONDO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to give the Member on the Floor some information that the people do not want to elect other people; they want to elect their fellow Ugandans, people here inclusive. So, there should be no fear and I do not understand why the fear should be there, for us to go back to the people and be elected to come and debate the Constitution. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order. Additional information if you can take it.

MISS OPOTI DHIGIRA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like the government to clarify to this House the fact that the way Members are talking, most of them have the confidence that when they go back they are going to be elected into the Constituent Assembly.  If we have the Constituent Assembly and the NRC in place, how will the two bodies work together concurrently, because the NRC cannot sit out for more than six months and the Constitution is needed in place within a certain period of time?  Could this be clarified to us? Thank you.

THE RT. HON. PRIME MINISTER (Mr. C. Adyebo): Mr. Chairman, there is one distinction which the House should note and speak about, and that is the supremacy.  Is it Parliament, that is the NRC, or is it the Constitution. Just two days ago, the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs was very clear and explained that in this country, it is the voice of the people that is paramount and supreme unlike in Britain where Parliament or the NRC is supreme.  However, we now have a situation where the NRC Members are saying that their integrity has been doubted, and they have not been allowed to adopt the new Draft Constitution after discussion.  The government has taken note of that, but we are saying it is not a matter of undermining the integrity of the NRC, but here we are taking note of the allegations against the government, that the Constitution has already been tailored if anything, with the support of the NRC. But we are saying that is not the case.  We must have a separate and independent body, the Constituent Assembly, to discuss this Draft Constitution.  

The question is, what about the NRC Members?  We are there for transparency and democracy to prevail.  Let the hon. Members of the House go back and participate with the rest of the people of Uganda who would like to be elected this time, not indirectly but directly, because there was also an accusation during the last elections that only a certain section of the country took part in the elections.  We had noted that, but to cancel or to do away with this doubt let it this time be universal suffrage for the elections of the Members of the Constituent Assembly, and let the NRC Members also participate because there is no fear.  Now, the question that arises is, what about the functions or deliberations of the NRC thereafter? There is no conflict here, the NRC will continue deliberating alongside the elected Constituent Assembly because, after all the time allocated for the deliberation of the Draft Constitution is only four months. But if there is work that will warrant more than four months then we give additional, maybe, three months to make it seven months. 

So, we would like to give consideration both to the House and the NRC, to continue with its normal duties, while those who are interested in taking part in the elections of the Constituent Assembly, must also be provided for because there maybe some people, some hon. Members, for instance, who may not be interested in the elections of a Constituent Assembly, but they may be interested only in the 1994 Elections. We do not know, but we must make provision for all of them so that there is no inconvenience caused to any party, and I think that is democracy, as well as the position of the government.  Thank you very much.

MR. KAVUMA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I will now go to some of the provisions of the Bill, with your permission, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Summarise, please.

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman, I will start with group representation.  This is what the people of Kyadondo say.  First of all, they want to thank the NRA for having done a good job when they waged a bush war against dictatorship.  They want to thank the NRA for the maintenance of peace, security and stability in this country up to today.  They want to thank the NRA for having heard the voices of the people and for having agreed to reduce their numbers from the Army Council to a maximum of ten members to come and join the Constituent Assembly.  They have no complaint with that number, and they approve of the same, and they have reasons.  They say, unless you are blind to the politics of Uganda, you cannot marginalise the role of the army and its influence on our politics.  That today, unlike in any other armies we have known, we have an army that is very sound, qualitatively.  An army that has a full grasp of the aspirations of the people, an army which understands the management of public affairs, and which is properly politicised.  These are the words of the people of Kyadondo-(Interjection)- the hon. Member will talk on behalf of Kotido some other time. (Laughter) Mr. Chairman, because of constraints of time I would  -(Interjection)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform my hon. Colleague on the Floor of the House, who is a lawyer, that he is dodging the question at stake by mentioning Kyadondo all the time -(Laughter)- what he ought to tell the House is that, in the circumstances which we find ourselves in today in Uganda, because it was stated in the Statute of 1986 that appointing a Uganda Constitutional Commission, now, in the process of making a new Constitution, there is inevitably a constitution now legally constituted in Uganda, ‘a constitution can be altered, reconstituted, remade, debated by the decision of one parliament or a legislature, must be made by a new one or a Constituent Assembly which we are now debating because’ - why? Because as it is being repealed in practical democracy by electorates, for the purpose for which we, after debating it, must come into the debating of the proper portfolio of the Constitution. 

Therefore, it is inevitable constitutionally speaking, that there must be a process brought in the Constituent Assembly to enable the House to carry out the method. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman, I do not have to thank the hon. Member for the information he has given because I am sure those hon. Members who have the capacity to comprehend what he said, have definitely done so.  

On the question of women, the people I have consulted have said they have no objection in giving preferential treatment to the women of this country in order to enable them to come in, in sufficient numbers to join the process of framing a new Constitution. They were saying that it is okay. There could be ten members for a start, and then the others can find their way in later.  That is what some people were saying, including the RC IV Council which I consulted most recently.  But, of course, when we are here as representatives, we are not delegates.  I felt it is agreeable in the suggestion that a framework should be laid where each district should be allowed to send one woman representative to this House. (Applause) And I lend my support to them.  Why, Sir? The women have been marginalised for a long time.  Our history and culture have rendered them a disadvantaged group.  They are the largest number of our population, and they contribute a lot to our economy through their labour, sweat in the fields, in the offices and factories.  It would be ironical and wrong if at a time when we are going to decide how Uganda should be governed, we again marginalised these women.  Recent developments have also shown that the country has actually been losing as a result of not tapping the talents the women have.  We do not want to make that mistake again, Mr. Chairman.  I think we should be consistent. (Interruption)

MR. OMADI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor of the House, that if he has been one of those marginalising women, that is a very serious matter, because women are called ‘bakyala..’ (Laughter)

MR. KAVUMA: Chairman, I want to assure the hon. Member that I am not one of those who have been marginalising women and my strong advocacy for them to come here in sufficient numbers, should be evidence enough to convince anybody that I want to see the women play a more active role in the management of our public affairs; and rightly so, they deserve it; it is their right! The youth also, majorly for similar reasons as the women, because it is high time the youth came and participated effectively when we are laying the foundations of the governance of Uganda tomorrow.  Because, the youth have in the past, been misused, unless we give them the opportunity to come and see what happens in the arena of the management of public affairs.  Otherwise, they will become a potential reserve force for bad politicians who can surface anytime to re-tap it and misuse them again against their own country.  

The youth - I think the number proposing the Bill, I have no quarrel with it. The others as they have shown can really come, because in many by-elections, they have come on their own and I am sure, if they keep up the spirit, they will come in numbers that are sufficient enough to be able to make their voice quite audible in the Constituent Assembly.  However, I had a bit of problem with representatives of political parties.  I want to be very honest. People were wondering why; because in all the politics during these seven years, they have known that they can live together and work together, even without putting party labels on their chests or elsewhere.  They also say that if the elections are free and fair, all political parties will definitely find themselves in that Constituent Assembly.  But why do they have to be treated separately?  But I explained as a reasonable representative should do! Because, it is one thing to listen and you do not explain, then people give you something to carry when you are even convinced yourself that you did your job. But when I explained that we do not want the politics of exclusion, we are recognising that these parties, whether they are paper tigers, they are there. So, in order for them not to say that we were excluded at a vital moment, let them come to the arena and we sort it out with them here.  It will be a better solution.  So, they agreed that each party, if the want it so, may have their two representatives, Mr. Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, wind up, please.  Time is going. 

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman, nominees of his Excellency the President, say they have no quarrel with the nomination.  Their reasons are that, first of all, these nominations of the 15 are not done by the President single-handedly.  He is acting on the advice of the Cabinet.  I am speaking the minds of the people I represent here.  If I could have less interruption, I would finish, Sir.  They say that even after the last election, they saw the wisdom of leaving a way where the head of State could tap resources that could have been left out by elections, to come and join in the work of nation building.  They themselves told me that if that  kind of provision was not there, probably the hon. Minister for Finance now, would be in his Chambers.  They quoted hon. Adrian Sibo, I must tell you; I think they are impressed when he contributes, and they also talked of hon. Nkalubo Wasswa, and they are saying, that they would have lost.  The principle is, they are saying, we would have lost those talents if there were no such a provision in the Constitution. So, they have no objection to the Chairman, nominating the seven people.  

On the question of the Chairman for the Constituent Assembly, the people say it is agreeable that the Chairman should be appointed by the President on the advice of the Cabinet.  They go further to say that in order to encourage -(Interruptions)- but really want to seek your indulgence, I do not think a lot of information has been given, and really for somebody not to convey what they have on this important Bill, I think, Sir, it will be unfair. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. I have 270 Members who want to contribute on this Bill.  

MR. KAVUMA: I will finish quickly, Sir.  So, they are saying, that even the Deputy Chairman, should be appointed by the President -(Interruption)- for the simple reason.  This is the reason.  The reason is simple. If you have somebody appointed by the President and another one elected by the House, you create a situation where antagonistic relations could develop among the two. One will claim, I was appointed by the Head of State, and the other one will say, but look, I was elected by this Council.  So, they say, for a better working relationship, the appointing authority should be one and the same.  Mr. Chairman, on the Constituencies -(Interruption.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  It is time, please. I want to inform all Members that we have 270 Members who would like to contribute on this Bill.  Be as brief as possible. 

MR. BWANIKA BBALE (Katikamu County, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I will be very brief. I thank you for the opportunity you have given me to contribute to this Bill. I must say that I have also extensively consulted in my Constituency in Katikamu, and they have no problem with the establishment of the Constituent Assembly.  However, what they told me was that, when the commissioners went round, none of their sub-counties mentioned the issue of establishing a new Constituent Assembly. But they say that, if the other Ugandans want it, they have to go with other Ugandans, and they have to submit, because they are only 140,000 people.  So, they are willing to submit what other Ugandans want.  They are now supporting the Constituent Assembly, and they feel that we should make a Constitution which will not be disputed, and that everybody should be given the opportunity to contribute and they like the idea of a direct election.  They go even further to say that even the political pressures outside, should be invited to come and participate! They say that as much as this Bill is giving opportunity to the political pressures inside here, but are wondering what is wrong with inviting people like those in Luwero and elsewhere to come and participate in the deliberation of this Constituent Assembly?  With the demarcation of the constituencies, they have no problem.  They are saying that a county should be the constituency for each candidate.  However, they observed that some counties are too small, that they should be merged.  There are counties with less than 10,000 people, and they have, according to the Bill, they have been given opportunity to send candidates to the Constituent Assembly.  And there are some counties which are too big.  The Bill is only giving a provision for a county with 160,000 to be divided, but what about a county with about 140,000 like Katikamu, a county with a population of 120,000. What is going to happen? Their recommendation is that the population in the county should be revisited and that each delegate should represent a population of 70,000 people.  

On the question of making a deposit of 100,000/=, the people of Katikamu have no problem. That if a person wants to be a leader, he should really be financially viable to command respect and that 100,000/= shillings is not too much for a candidate to deposit in order to stand.  The problem came with regard to the youth and women.  They say that numerically, the youth are more than the total number of women.  If you add the female youth and the male youth, the overall total number is too big compared to the total number of women.  So, they are recommending that the youth should send eight delegates and the women should be given four because of the reasons I have outlined.  The figures are there.  

Regarding NOTU, they are not in support of giving a provision to NOTU to send delegates. They are saying, let everybody compete.  They know that members of trade unions will have the same opportunity to compete.  Regarding candidates standing, they are of the view that if you allow people of 18 years to elect, why do you not give them the opportunity also to stand? They are recommending that any candidate who would like to stand, should be of the age of 18 and above.  

They are also very appreciative of the arrangements put forward for the election; the registration, counting on the spot and all the monitoring, and they are in full agreement with what is contained in this Bill. 

So, briefly, the people of Katikamu, are in full support of establishing a new body to enact the new Constitution. Thank you very much.

MR. LUKUMU (Bulisa County, Masindi): Thank you Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this ‘mother of Bills.’ (Laughter) This Bill is indeed, the mother of all Bills, ever since I came to this House.  In the first place, allow me on behalf of the people of Bulisa County, to commend the NRM, and the NRA in particular, for having made possible the debate of this Bill, in the process of democratisation.  Uganda has gone through a lot of difficulties because of bad governance.  Today, the people of Uganda and those in the neighbouring countries, as well as in the entire world, are waiting to see how Ugandans manage affairs of their own nation, to make their nation a better environment to live in.  Those of us who are bordering other countries - Bulisa county borders Zaire - we have been despised by our neighbours and those of you - for a long time we have been considered permanently backward people who never understood.  I am glad to say today, as many of you are aware, that the trend has been reversed.  Those who used to call Uganda a country - a centre of turmoil, are really envying us.  Many of them are running to the Uganda they used to despise.  I do not need to mention what is happening to our neighbours.  The Constituent Assembly Bill has been the centre of interest not only by the of Uganda, but by everybody in Uganda. The NRC as portrayed in every paper in Uganda has been the centre of concern. We have been considered as people trying to resist democratisation because of our selfish interests. But I think the manner in which this Bill is being handled by Members of this House is openly reflecting that Members of the NRC, and indeed, that they are patriotic.  They are part and parcel of those who wish to see Uganda turned into a good environment to live in. We are not actually after perpetuating ourselves in office, or in power.  This business of no change has been reflected here by Members openly, by them proposing that this House where they are should be dissolved.  I do not think it could have ever been thought of in the past! 

Addressing myself most specifically to the Bill, I actually had a lot of question marks from the people of Bulisa whom I widely consulted.  These people indeed wondered, why there was need to constitute a new body to debate the Constitution; because they felt that the Members composing this august House, were indeed adequate and they could tackle this business very competently and without any fear or favour.  But as I explained to them, it was fear of the present administration, given the internal problems and pressures, the external pressures and suspicions, to have in place a new body that would promulgate a Constitution which will be respected, not only by Ugandans, but also by the international community.  

So, on this point, they agree and when I say that I will not really be like I have heard elsewhere, rehearsing or rather reading the minutes, but my views are mixed with the views of my people. (Laughter)  Bulisa County was of the view that Presidential nominees should be - not be provided for.  However, with the army, they had no quarrel; and they agreed that 10 members from the NRA, in fact others were suggesting that 10 was a reasonable number to debate this Constitution.  

Regarding the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, it is provided that the Chairman be appointed by the President.  The people of Bulisa were of the view that for the same reason that the NRC was considered not appropriate to promulgate this Constitution as submitted by the Constitutional Commission, it was not really proper to have the Chairman of this body appointed by His Excellency the President.  This would bring unnecessary suspicion.  So, it should be left to be done by the forces of democracy, and regarding the fear that these people may not have the ability to choose the right person, it was stated that whoever is given consideration as a person of unquestionable ability and considered patriotic, he would be elected by the people of his Constituency or county irrespective of their political affiliations and other considerations.  And indeed, regarding representation by special groups, particularly parties, the people of Bulisa were of the view that it was really not necessary.  It was even reminding the people of the things they had forgotten.  So, they were even wondering the method of arriving at this.  Were the UPC, DP, and CP parties going to do this democratically? At Delegates Conferences, were they going to be allowed to arrive at the decision as to who should represent these respective parties? So, they felt it was not necessary.  After all, out of these many counties in Uganda and other electoral areas, was it not possible to have - could there be any miracle that we would not have a member of DP, UPC, UPM or even CP?  (Laughter) Those people must be there! So, it was really unnecessary. 

Regarding the youth and given the background of our youth under the NRM, and since we are trying to groom our youth to become good leaders, it was agreed that they be represented as a special group.  Because if we leave them, we are giving opportunities to those people who might, like it has happened before, misuse them to the detriment of this nation.  Therefore, let the youth know that they are not for destruction.  They are there to learn how to manage affairs of their nation in a good manner.  Indeed, the number for the youth was proposed as eight, because surely, their presence should be felt.  If these people are two or three only, they need also consultation.  

Regarding the co-existence of the NRC and the Constituent Assembly, the people of Bulisa are of the view that there was no need for this duplication.  It must be understood that they felt, if this does not agree, for example, if the dissolution of the NRC is not possible now, this House in the process of debating this Bill, could find a provision of making this possible.  Because they felt that in a situation whereby NRC Members, for example, are competing or contesting with the RC IV Chairman, the good working relationship which has been prevailing to develop the area may not exist either way, whether the Chairman wins or the NRC Members.  So, they were of the view that surely, the NRC should be dissolved, if we are to operate without any conflicts.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. E. A. ORYANG (Gulu Municipality): Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I thought I was going to wait until Tuesday, but since you have given me the chance, I want to support this Bill.  I also consulted the people of Gulu along with my Colleagues, though the consultation was not complete.  Before I go into detail, allow me to convey the appreciation of the people of Gulu Municipality for the Government’s support during the visit of His Holiness the Pope. (Applause) Also, the Committee that organised this function in Gulu had asked me to convey to my Colleagues here in Parliament who, contributed in one way or another towards the preparations in Gulu.  In the consultations that we carried out in Gulu, the people of Gulu had not discussed whether the NRC should debate this or another body.  I think they were yet to meet and make up their minds on this.  But they debated the Constituent Assembly as it is presented.  They thought it was very important to have a type of preamble that the Minister has produced here, and they singled out three cardinal points in the preamble of this Bill. The first one was for the development of a new national consensus upon the Uganda Constitutional arrangement as a pre-requisite for the democratic process and rule of law.  We really support this idea and pray that it is followed throughout the body of the Bill. 

The second point is that this is a concrete step towards achieving the ideal for procuring a national constitution freely by all the people of Uganda.  The third cardinal point was that the constitution making process should be a true representative of the Constituent Assembly that is established.  If it is truly representative, then the people go in and to talk about what should happen to it.  Under Clause 3, that is the definition, where it is said that ‘delegate’ means a person elected or appointed as a delegate to the Constituent Assembly.  The people of Gulu feel this person should not be called a delegate for this reason.  A delegate is a person who delivers a message of the people.  Because the constitution-making process is such a serious thing.  You would not want a delegate who will come and get stuck.  Because of that, the people of Gulu feel, this word should be changed which we shall propose in the Amendment later to, ‘a representative.’ Because a representative can reason out, and share views with others, and follow the democratic system as well. (Applause)

Turning to Clause 4(2), the people of Gulu were thinking that for this to be a very effective body, it is necessary to elect all the representatives to the Constituent Assembly.  Of course, they did not talk about whether the Head of State should not have any mandate to appoint a few key people.  Regarding the appointment of the Chairman of this august Body, the people we had consulted said that he should be elected.  They say that the Constitution is the way the people choose to be governed and it is something that people set up for posterity.  You do not want a Constitution that somebody will claim tomorrow that it was one person’s making; we want to make our own.  It should not be regarded as being biased. So, they said that once representatives are elected, let them come and those representatives will choose a name to be confirmed as Chairman.  

They also talked about the contribution by intending candidates.  They said that the fee of shs.100, 000/= for an intending candidate may discourage some good candidates who have got no means.  They feel this is not necessary.  They also say that any person should be eligible to go and stand for election to the Constituent Assembly without reference to his party background or his religious background or any other affiliation, so long as he is a Ugandan.  

I have not had a chance to refer to my notes, because I thought I would talk later.  But generally, the people thought that whenever the Chairman of this Constituent Assembly is appointed, he can only be removed by a majority of the Assembly vote.  The Chairman can be appointed by two-thirds majority and be removed, if anything, by a simple majority. 

With respect to the First Schedule where there talked about the composition of an electoral body, the people of Gulu thought that to define an electoral area on the basis of population, will be detrimental to proper demarcation.  The people of Gulu feel that the demarcations would rather be based on the extent of area; that is geographical consideration other than population.  For instance, if you take the case of municipalities. Some municipalities may have as little say 50,000 people.  The people of Gulu feel that a Municipality qualifies to be an election area and there are some counties that are very extensive.  It is necessary to think of the distance covered by a Representative and to define the electoral area accordingly.  Here, I would like to talk about the representation which was recommended.  The people of Gulu said there should be no representative of interest groups, and that everybody should be directly elected.  (Applause) 

With reference to youth, I add my own view that the National Youth Bill that we recently passed here was good enough to give representation to youth in any forum that may come, be it the Constituent Assembly or National Assembly.  It is necessary to prepare people to take over administration in future. Because of that, it is important that the youth should be given opportunity to participate in Government when there are elders around who can still correct them. The problem in Africa is succession; leaders fear handing over power because many times, leaders look behind and see nobody capable of taking over the ideas that they have formulated.  Because of that, it is necessary to incorporate youth; our future leaders, so that they are prepared to take over in the future.  Because of that, let the youth compete in their own right to come to the Assembly.

Since I had not consulted my notes properly, I expect my Colleagues who will be speaking after me later, to highlight the points that I have not made.  The point is that it is very important for us Ugandans at this point, to think and talk very maturely.  Because we are at a crossroad where, if you make a mistake and make a poor Constitution, posterity will judge whether we are thinking of the trend now, or going across Africa and maybe the world of multi-partyism or otherwise.  The cardinal issue is Uganda.  With all this in mind, thank you very much.

MR. A.B. SSENGOOBA (Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the principle of setting up a separate body for the purpose of debating the Constitution, and I support the fact that the body should be directly elected.  I have made consultations in my constituency and the people I represent agree with me that there is need to elect a new body to debate the Constitution.  The present legal position which requires the NRC and Military Council to debate the Constitution is not democratic, because the NRC was not directly elected and the Army Council, as one Member has already said, we do not know how many people are in it. So, the only alternative which would make the whole process democratic is to elect a new body.  However, considering what Uganda is and considering the role the NRA has played in this country, I support the idea that the NRA should be represented in the Constituent Assembly by the proposed number of ten people.  It is not new that the armies are represented in constitution making, especially armies which have been liberating armies.  When the United States Constitution was being formulated, soldiers like George Washington were delegates to the Constituent Assembly, which made the United States Constitution.  So, it is correct that the NRA should be represented, so that in future, the army does not come forward to say that they were not part of the arrangement.  By the same token, I support the idea that political parties should also be represented.  Because the question of whether the multi-party Government will fall or not, has not yet been decided.  It could very well be that Ugandans will say that they need parties.  And what will happen if one of these parties wins elections in future and forms a Government, would it not say that they were not party to the constitution making and then try to make its own constitution? So, to avoid all that, I think it is prudent that political parties should also be represented in the Constituent Assembly.

With regard to women, I support the idea that they should also be represented in a special way, because as we all know, because of our cultural backgrounds and the need to bring women into politics, it is necessary that they are specially catered for.  Because they may not be able to compete effectively with men.  But I say that the number proposed is okay and that it should be divided into regional representatives so that the ladies come from different regions.  The same goes with the youth.  The four youth should also come from different regions of Uganda because it would not make any sense if all the four youth came from Kampala, it will not serve the purpose for which it was intended to serve.  It is the wish of my constituents that among the special groups, farmers should also be represented, especially now that there has been an organisation of farmers into a national farmers organisation.  They have organised themselves; and they are an important group in the country and in the economy. I support the idea that they should be represented so that the delegates representing the farmers take special interest in the farmers’ interests.  

On the question of numbers, I note that the Bill states that municipalities with a population of 50,000 and above should have a delegate.  As we all know, it is much easier to represent a municipality than to represent a county, because you can traverse the whole municipality in one day, but for a county, it is practically impossible.  So, if a county which can very easily be traversed in a day has got 50,000, the number for a county should even be less.  So, I am proposing that the number, for convenience’s sake should be 50,000 or more, so that wherever there are 50,000 people they should have a delegate but with one exception.  I also accept the idea that a county should be represented, and that should be basic, regardless of population.  Because counties have been demarcated not only with regard to population but also with regard to other interests such as size and geographical area, and some are islands and so forth.  So, I accept the idea that a county should remain with a delegate, but counties with a population of 50,000 and more should be demarcated in such a way that 50,000 people are represented by a delegate.

With regard to qualification of people who are going to stand for election, I have noted that the Bill requires that one must be ordinarily resident in the electoral area where he is going to stand.  I submit that this is very restrictive.  I think all Ugandans should be free to stand wherever they want, so long as they can get the number of people to nominate them and a number of people to second them.  This is not a parliamentary representation where one must go back and report the condition of roads, or about the hospitals.  This is a taskforce, as the Deputy Prime Minister said.  So, if the people of an area accept a person to represent them for the purpose of making a Constitution, qualification should not debar if the people want him.

With regard to language, I recommend that the delegates should be able to express themselves in the official language and that the qualification for a delegate with regard to language and educational background should be the same as that of the NRC.  Since you are asking me to wind up, I thank you and the other points I will pass to my Colleagues.

DR. F. BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Kaborole): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to make my contribution to this very important bill. It has often been said that the voice of the people is the voice of God. I have learnt from the Press and from the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs that the people requested for a special House to be elected to enact the new Constitution, and, therefore, although my people were not very keen on this idea, I am prepared to support this Bill in as far as it sets up a new House elected on universal suffrage, to debate the new Constitution.  I am reminded of an ancient Roman Dictum which runs as follows, ‘Caveat consures nequidi respublis detrimenti caperet.’ This means ‘Let the Counsels see to it that no harm comes to the State’. 

As the NRC, we have tried to protect the State, but sometimes the official arm of Government has neglected our advice.  Examples in point include the disposal of the Departed Asian Custodian Board Properties exercise among many important issues, where the executive has acted as if this NRC does not exist.  (Applause) I am, therefore, moved by my conscience to give my Counsel, although it may be quite different from what other Members have already made on this Bill, whose importance to the nation cannot be under-estimated. Some people have been moving around the country setting up mobilisation committees and charging the religious leaders. These people want to turn the election of the Constituent Assembly into a show of force by political parties. They want to hijack the constitutional making exercise and overturn everything that the people have given to the Constitutional Commission. I want to clarify that I am not against political parties, but when they continue to seek their support along religious lines and completely refuse to accept the mistakes they made in the past, I fear for the future of this country. Under such a climate, one must expect a patch and an attempt by such a Constituent Assembly to get other powers, claiming that after all, they are the only arm of government elected by universal suffrage.  

I, therefore, recommend that the present National Resistance Council be dissolved and the people of Uganda be allowed to elect a new National Resistance Council by universal suffrage and by secret ballot.  Let this new National Resistance Council, which shall not be a political arm of the National Resistance Movement, have as few nominated members as possible; let the new NRC enact the Constitution and also deal with any other Parliamentary business.  This will protect the supremacy of Parliament and give continuity to the revolutionary process that has been going on in this country.
	
I wish that we should also avoid the scenario where after the Constitution has been enacted by the Constituency Assembly and promulgated, it is grossly amended by the NRC, since the present NRC will continue existing and having power to amend the Constitution before the general elections.

Allow me now to make a few comments on some clauses in the Bill, and the Schedule.  Clause 4, Sub-clause 2(a) and referring to Schedule 3, Sub-clause 2; I recommend that the minimum number of people to cause division of a county into more than one constituency be reduced from 150,000 to 140,000, but the number of constituencies in a county should not be allowed to be above that population of the county divided by 80,000. Sub-clause 3, of Clause 4, I concur with hon. Oryang that every municipality, since it is already really an entity, should be allowed to be a Constituency.  I know we have some small municipalities like Moroto and others, but since they were granted this status long ago, we should not deny them the opportunity to vote delegates to our Assembly; and those municipalities, of course, outside Kampala, which have more than 140,000 inhabitants can be divided into more than one Constituency.  Clause 4, Sub-clause 4(b) and (c), as I have already said, I wish that special representation be kept at a minimum and, therefore, I am recommending that the Army - only the Army, be allowed ten people and the President also be allowed ten people since he has this usual prerogative.  The rest of the interest groups should struggle to come into the House directly.  Under Clause 5, Sub-clause (d), I talked about the ordinary resident; that for a person to stand in a Constituency, he or she must ordinarily be a resident in that area. Since we are struggling to build a united Uganda, I think and I believe that we should allow one to stand anywhere he wishes within the Republic.  Clause 9, which deals with the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, I wish to propose that the House be allowed to elect three people, by voting for them separately as we do for the two members of the District Council from the sub-county and these three names should be submitted to the President, from which the President will appoint a Chairman.  Clause 18, refers to issues of a local nature being referred to government, but this Clause, is confusing to say the least, because if a local issue is of a Constitutional nature it will definitely be deliberated upon by the House and be decided upon.  It is only when it becomes contentious that the government comes in. This is where I see a problem also.  Why does the government come in only when the issue becomes contentious? Therefore, to avoid this inconsistency, I suggest that contentious local issues should also be settled by a referendum, but the scope of the referendum should be limited to the geographical area and inhabitants affected by that local issue.  But I can see another problem. Who defines that such and such an issue is a local matter and not of a national nature. What parameters does he use, because this should be defined early enough.  This country, is one unit.  What happens in Karamoja affects me in Kabarole and what happens in Gulu affects somebody in Kabale.  

Let me end by repeating that I am for the resolution of the present NRC setting up of a new NRC that will be elected on universal suffrage, to debate a new Constitution and handle any other Parliamentary business, and that I am for democracy, peace and development for this nation.  Thank you very much.

MR. EKWARU (Amuria County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to add the voice of the people of Amuria to the debate of this Constituent Assembly.

As you are aware, Amuria Constituency is in Soroti and in the North-East which was badly hit - very badly hit by insurgency, and it has just tried to heal from it, and what we are now trying to do is to think of ways to regain total security, and thereafter try to unite ourselves as a county and district, and as Ugandans as a whole, and then eventually develop. 

The idea of election is looming in the Constituency of Amuria and it gives them a bit of worry, having come out of insurgency.  They are now beginning to imagine that, ‘we have come out of problems’, and looking back at the history of our country, they also begin to worry that, ‘are we going into more turmoil again’.  It is because of the experiences that we have had in this country.  So, the nasty historical past, and the experience of the struggle in the past elections, especially by political party contesters, is still very alive in the minds of the people of Amuria, and I think even in the minds of the people of Uganda.  This cannot be ruled out.  Now, the idea of parties is resurfacing after that experience.  I would like to assure the Members that there are politicians here, who have already definitely schemed.  I would like to advise here, therefore, that if you are scheming, do not scheme for problems and do not scheme to put others into problems; and I would like to assure you that some of us have not come to this House on opportunistic lines, and we have sweat, even blood; this one you know, and this peace that we have already attained should not be manipulated by opportunistic politicians who will draw us backwards.  I am telling you, in my own Constituency there are people spreading the gospel that NRM has failed, so we want to hold elections.  This one is there and you cannot rule it out; that is why they say that the NRC Members are incompetent, because they want to bring another force.  I would, therefore, like in supporting this Motion, to thank the NRM Government for being flexible and revolutionary; because in the past, once a government has come into power, it does not listen to other forces; it wants to operate alone.  Even in the House here, they will never agree as we have been agreeing, and I do not want this to be repeated, personally but I would like to urge the NRC Members also and those of you who will have a chance to come into this House, to make sure that such a situation does not come into Uganda. (Applause) I would also like to thank the NRC Members for having been so patient with the Government, by accepting Government weaknesses and also accepting the Government’s strengths. This is very healthy.  I cannot forget to thank the NRA for pacifying almost the whole country, and especially my Constituency, and also to commend them for their high discipline which, in fact, if they had not exerted this discipline, there would be no peace.

Turning to the Bill I would like to inform the House that I had the opportunity to mobilise my people and tell them about the coming Bill which we are now debating, and they were very positive.  Just as we opened Parliament they sent me their resolutions after we had discussed, with speed delivery. (Laughter)  it is here.  So, I would like to inform you that we are also very serious in Amuria, and with your permission, Mr. Chairman, I would like just to summarise, I am not going to read - in fact, I am a teacher and I can summarise very briefly; they have got five resolutions.  One resolution which is their own resolution and also my contribution was that, they actually attached Section 4(c), and they feel that the President is the head of the NRM. So, they say that he should not be given a chance to appoint 15 members, because they feel that he will influence, as we have got also the idea of creating this Constituent Assembly, we feel that if the President gets involved very much, then they will say that it is the President’s Constitution.  Resolution No.2 was that they were not in favour of the Minister controlling the finances of the Constituent Assembly. Experience has shown that this money is normally embezzled -(Laughter)- for example, the work of the Human Rights Commission and other commissions was adversely affected by lack of funds and equipment - even the coming of this Draft Constitution was also delayed because we read from the newspapers that some money was swindled.  The members also said that since everybody is going to contest in the election, they felt that to keep Uganda together, everybody should be allowed to contest in the electoral area regardless of whether he belongs to any party, or whether he is historical or what; we should all go and contest.  They also attacked rule 12, about meetings. These meetings are to be conducted and supervised by the Returning Officers, who will be out to identify any utterances by the candidate.  They feel that this is restricting too much, and someone is trying to add words - it will not show that we are creating something which should be free to everybody.  We should actually agree rather than restrict.

So, I would like to thank you very much for having spotted me almost at the eleventh hour when we are about to close.  So, I thank you very much for allowing me to contribute.  I beg to move.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Mr. Chairman, first of all, I thank you very much for allowing me to debate this Bill.  In the first instance, I thought I would come to debate this one next week, but since you have called me I will not miss this opportunity.  First of all, I would like to inform the hon. Minister that this NRC is competent, and I will maintain that.  So, the feeling that the people of Uganda have requested for another body to debate this Constitution, I do not subscribe to it. This could be purely foreign pressure, either the donors - I want my fellow Members of this House to understand this, this is what is derailing this country, because we are not very honest with ourselves, and we get politicians who do not tell the truth.  They come up every year, and they talk this and they go; then they plunge a country into chaos and they go.  People come here and pretend to support the Movement yet they are wolves. Some of us have really suffered; and because we have suffered and we have entered the Movement, and we must protect it. This is an institution which has enabled us to be here, live together, and discuss national issues and tear them into pieces.  

So, my Colleagues, I am praying that when my Colleague hon. Butagira brings up an Amendment next, I hope you will support it.  Because as you can see, it has been practical today, the hon. Deputy Prime Minister has told us that this is gong to be a taskforce for four or seven months.  But we realise that we have sat down and studied the implication of this Constituent Bill on our people, the unity of this country, and on the future of this nation; and we have looked at opportunists who are coming, and who do not really want this country to continue in what it is now.  So, to marry the two, we said that let us reserve this House which I know still has the mandate of the entire population. If we can marry the two, then we can get a candidate from each constituency to come and discuss, to have more people.  So, even if we have a thousand delegates, we can reach a consensus with no quarrels, wars or guns, I support it.  Recently, we hosted His Holiness the Pope, we have spent, maybe, about 6 billion - okay, if we have spent about 6 billion, why can we not spend 10 billion and have as many representatives as their interests are, so that they do not create a crisis hereafter -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, from rumours being received, it is not ten billion, it is 14.5 million dollars, estimated just for the election of the Constituent Assembly.  So, you might have to double that amount.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI: So, the question of money really - money should not be the issue, God gave this country all the good things, it is green, we have plenty of rain, we feed ourselves, and we can survive even without foreign donations.

HON. MEMBERS: How, how?

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI: Yes, why not?

MR. OBWANGOR.  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my Colleague holding the Floor of this House that the State of Uganda will not be dependent on the money, it is only the will and spirit of the nation.  Where there are people there is money, we can organise the making of the Constitution in Uganda - money or no money, people will work together - not donors, not going to Geneva, accommodation and what not; no! We cannot tie ourselves on debating the most important, when we claim that we are beggars, and that we are poverty stricken.  There should be no question about money delaying the Constitution of the nation. Money or no money, the Constitution must be made.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI: My main worry that I am really emphasising to the House, Mr. Chairman, is to accommodate - we must be accommodative if we are to survive.  Even when the NRM came from the bush they had to forego other interests in order to accommodate other people, and this has helped us.  So, really the question of saying this one is out and this one is in, should not prevail.  So, that is why I am requesting this honourable House to support this Amendment so that we can accommodate this House, and get more delegates elected - if we think that, other people could bring in more views while making the Constitution.  If the foreign pressure comes in as we are reliably informed that they are going to cut off this country’s aid, let them do so because we can survive without them. But these guys are always interested in plunging countries into problems before they begin supplying weapons.  Can African countries afford to live in that kind of dilemma? So, I am told, some people have been lobbying from Embassy to Embassy trying - you know, this Bill, you see we must make sure that this it is thrown out; people have been going around lobbying in all these Embassies so as to get support.  So, we are not independent! Next week, one of my Colleagues is even going to bring some specimen to show this House what has been going around.  So, we cannot be taken for a ride like this.  We are an independent country.  If these people want to come back and colonise us, let us go back and let them to take over, so that we are independent.  

Concerning the Constituent Assembly Bill; since you have elected one from every constituency, then I would prefer - I mean the question of women representation will not be rigid, because parties are also here.  So, -(Interjections)- yes, maybe, but you can invite parties, maybe soon.  On the question of women, we have got 40 women already catered for.  The deposit of Shs.100,000/=, I also support it that it should be there, and on the election of the Chairman by the President, I think we should allow the delegates to elect their own Chairman, so as to make it more transparent; but the President should be given a chance to have some nominations, since we have nominated members, so the President will not need - so that there will be no election by the President in the Assembly, and they will be catered for, even historically. Because you know, like history, historicals are also an essential element in our context.  So, Mr. Chairman, I think when we are bringing our Amendment, you will allow me to speak.  Thank you very much, Sir.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to associate myself with the contributors who have thanked the Movement, and particularly the Minister who has brought this Bill for us to deliberate on. I want to be fair, therefore, and say that despite the shortcomings of the Government through the Minister, I am very grateful that ultimately this Bill has arrived.

I thank the NRM for delivering the goods and keeping on a correct political course.  I equally thank the NRM leadership at all levels, right from the President to the Members of this august House, for staying and working together in diversity. I have just been thinking about the people I usually see across there on my left, hon. Balaki Kirya and in the middle hon. David Pulkol, in Government.  I have also recalled the membership of the Constitutional Commission and seen hon. Cathbert Obwangor across and then hon. Lt.Col. Sserwanga-Lwanga. With these disparities, particularly, in party origins and age, it was natural to expect inadequacies in coordination which has sometimes resulted in the absence of vital information to this House.  This is only natural.  Mr. Chairman, it is my submission, nevertheless, that the independence of mind of the hon. Members of this august Assembly in this august House, certainly has helped to deal with the capacity of the executive to raise to the occasion in future and become more accountable and humble servants of the people of this country.

Permit me also to pay tribute to you personally, for tirelessly sitting in your high Chair and critically oversee and guide our deliberations, never to have once gone for a short-call.  In all the ayes and nays that I have heard, my ears have only let me down twice when they did not rhyme with yours, for which I offer apologies.  Apart from many other Parliamentary issues, I have also learnt this one, though I have not started practicing it, namely, the difference between real truth and political truth.  Probably, when I leave this august House I will never forget these two.  

Concerning the Bill the hon. Minister on presenting the Bill told us that unlike the British  Parliament, the Ugandan Parliament has no supremacy, because the supremacy here resides in the Constitution.  I think, with due respect, the hon. Minister missed the point.  The argument I want to put, is not that the Ugandan Parliament is supreme vis-a-vis the Constitution; no! I want to argue that this Parliament has the supremacy in matters related to all business brought before it, including this Bill. We must make a difference.  I would also like to argue further that this same Parliament has supremacy of authority in questioning any detected misrepresentation on the sovereignty of the people of Uganda until all required proof is presented -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker holding the Floor that yesterday, the Minister gave us some information.  He quoted Article 63 of the Constitution - of the 1967 Constitution; I would like to read from that Constitution: Proclamation No.1 and Legal Notice No.1; and I will just read the part stating that, “the following provisions of the Constitution are hereby suspended: Article 3, Chapter 4, Chapter 5, and Article 63.” 

I would like to register this one, “The National Resistance Council which shall have supreme authority of the Government is hereby established.” And I would like to go a little bit further, Proclamation No.1 is so clear, it states that, ‘Whereas of the 26th day of January, 1986 the National Resistance Army for the reason given in the statement to the National Resistance Movement on the day took over the powers of Government of the Republic of Uganda and vested those powers in the National Resistance Council.’  Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to advise the Minister to go back and clarify it, probably I misunderstood him yesterday; thank you very much.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Thank you very much, hon. Babu.  Mr. Chairman, I think that adds to what I have been arguing, that this Parliament is supreme, particularly when it is discussing all the matters, resolutions and Bills that have been brought before it.  Section 4 of the Bill covers establishment and composition of the Constituent Assembly.  I will be satisfied, if and when the hon. Minister produces statistics showing that the overwhelming majority of Ugandans directed as has been provided for in the Bill.  I will then go and tell the people of Ruhama County accordingly, because that will be the verdict of other constituencies other than Ruhama, which in December 1992, gave me a message to bring when this discussion came up.  As a democratic Ugandan, I have never nursed any idea of life steerage in this House. I have the democratic right to present myself again to the Constituency of Ruhama in the new district that is coming, of Ntungamo, and I would like to suggest that I also retain the right to abstain.  I think we must really get democracy clearly defined.

When we are debating here, we are not engaged in any assessment or semantics. I think the life and future of Uganda is in our hands, and I think it is very important that when we address issues with the magnitude of the ones we are handling today, we are not trying to take anybody by surprise; we are not trying to make up the numbers.  I think in my view, we must face the situation squarely so that when Ugandans have said that the current NRC Members go back and seek our mandate, we do so without any reservation whatsoever. 

I am ready, when you close this debate to go back.  So, I think we really must get the situation very clear because if we do not get the situation as directed by the people of Uganda, we shall have betrayed their sovereignty.  The people of Ruhama also indicated clearly that they love democracy because they love the Movement, and because they appreciate the role the Movement has played in ushering in this democracy, and because they do so, they suggested that the President opts not to insist, even the Government does not insist in the Chairman being appointed on the advise of Cabinet.  They would like the members to feel free to appoint the Chairman whom they would be sure is answerable to them collectively, so that there are no chances of any suspicion arising that when the crisis comes, the Government pulls the leg of the Chairman.  

I would also like to present the position of Ruhama.  The people of Ruhama respect democratic decisions.  They feel that should this House decide to change this position, they are willing to go with the majority here, because there is no way Ruhama can stand on its own when the rest of Uganda has decided differently.

With reference to Section 5, it is my submission that qualifications similar to those required of the current NRC, be called for.  I think this House has indicated to me that every Member who has contributed has had vast knowledge and experience in his field from which each one of us has benefited; and I think if we can maintain this kind of level of interaction, I think this nation will benefit as I am sure it has done.  I would like to suggest, therefore, that the qualifications of the NRC Members be the qualifications of the members of the Constituent Assembly.  I would also like to submit, with reference to Section 18(3), particularly that matters of local character be left out of the national discussion.  But if they happen to be brought for national discussion, then they are subject to national resolution.  We must be consistent, or we leave them out and know that we do not have to waste time on a matter that we do not qualified for. But if it merits coming before me, then I must contribute to the Resolution.  

I would also like to suggest that the people of Ruhama, with whom I agree have no complaint whatsoever in the numbers - the extra numbers which have been suggested, that is ten members from the NRA, eight members from women organisations, and ten members from other groups - all totaling 42, they have no objection, and have left this issue to be handled by this august House.

Finally, because this is a debate, probably not at Committee Stage, allow me to make my personal recommendation based on a very strong desire for unity, democracy and financial prudence for the country. I propose that the referendum be held ahead of the Constituent Assembly to determine whether we proceed along the Movement or along the Multiparty line.  I would also like to propose that having been settled, this august House is dissolved and the one elected will continue from the date of elections, and discusses the Constitution, and becomes the first Parliament after that.  You know what it means?  We shall only be adding on one year, and it is not strange to me that immediately after the Constitution, that kind of House will translate into a National Assembly.
 
Finally, I would like to suggest that in order to reduce the number of Members of Parliament, not everybody from the Constituent Assembly should go into the membership of Parliament, except those who have been directly elected, and probably a few additions in the membership of the army, as well as some nominees from Government.

With these remarks, I thank you very much for allowing me to contribute. 

CAPT. GASATURA (Rushenyi County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  As many other hon. Members have mentioned, we are indeed at crossroads.  

AN. HON. MEMBER: Why?

CAPT. GASATURA:  At crossroads because this is coming to the apex of a resolution that you, Mr. Chairman, and several other patriotic members of our community made a number of years ago; many of them lost their lives; and many of them have been maimed, while some of them are here with us today, in this august House.  It calls for humility on our part, which is a revolutionary virtue.  

At the same time, as I have mentioned before, when the NRA and the historical NRC took-over the reigns of power in 1986, you sold the NRM idea of unity, peace and development to the nation; we bought your idea and today we own the idea equally with you.  The citizens of Uganda now own this NRM idea and it is a call, therefore, to everyone in this august House; the hon. Members, there is a call on each one of us to be true to our conscience so that tomorrow’s history may not judge us as being in the wrong; we seek the peace of Uganda.  Today, there are a few clear issues that arise from the Bill, and is there a need for a new Constitution? Are there any fears about maneouvering; fears of the NRM Government? Is the President trying to manoeuvre, or is the Chairman trying to manoeuvre? Yes fears have been expressed.  Do we need a new body? And what constituencies should we have, or what mode of election? And it all boils down to one thing; how do we continue the process of building the national consensus and legitimacy of governance?

I believe that one major problem that has bothered Uganda since Independence is that of legitimacy to rule.  The hon. Minister in presenting the Bill asserted that the population wants us to go back for elections.  He used some statistics, and a few of us have had access to these statistics; the Rt. hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and the National Political Commissar notwithstanding, came and said ‘no, no, that in fact, is secondary’. This alone confirmed it, and the speaker before me, hon. Rwakakooko, said it and I would like to add to his voice and the voices of many; it is not the fear of election that this House would like to pursue, question or even to amend in the Bill.  We are not afraid.  Shakespeare once said, ‘cowards die many times before their death, the variant never dies. But once …it seems to me most strange that men should fear death, a necessary end that will come when it will come.’ 

In 1986, when you and your comrades took-over the reigns of power, you were really powerful. But over the years, we have seen flip-overs from the front bench to the back, and we have seen a defacto reduction; a voluntary reduction of powers of the NRA, the President, and of the Chair, where you have voluntarily conceded power to the House, and through the House, to the people of Uganda.  It would be a tragedy, it would be treasonable, if this House was over considerate in denying the people of Uganda the right to chose their own leaders. 

Item No.1 on the Ten Point Programme, is democracy, followed by security, and then by unity. I will just deal with those three.  If we want democracy, and we declare that we want it by discussing this Bill, debating the Constituent Assembly Bill which Assembly will debate the Constitution, I would rather think of the Constitution not so much as rules by which to be governed, but rather as rules by which to live.  In the Bible, there is a king Nebbucadnezzar who said the laws of the Medes do not change.  The Constitution, should be considered more like the law of the Medes.  It does not change except as previously decided upon, but not as the ordinary laws we make, where we give even the Ministers powers to make instruments where Parliament is not involved.  Mr. Chairman, I will revisit again, some of the major issues on this.

Where are the constituencies we are referring to?  We are trying to put out any possible fire, the learned hon. Kanyeihamba said that he does not actually need a team. It can take one man to draft a Constitution and put it to a referendum.  But we want the people of Uganda to feel that they are part of it.  Suppose one individual said the President should not serve more than five years in a term, and no more than two terms, and put it to a referendum. We do not need to pay billions of shillings to actually say, ‘yes, Sir’; the ‘ayes’ have it.  We can have the right answers through different ways, but we are afraid of certain other salient areas, for example subject or correction by the hon. Minister, since the press is the only reference we have so far had, in looking at the item of citizenship. Yet previously, the cut-off point was 8th October, 1962, and they are now back-tracking to 1st February, 1962, and I have talked to several members from the border areas such as the Alur, the Lugubara, the Madi, the Ateso, and I have also talked to hon. Etyang who may have cousins across the border -(Laughter) suppose, some members  - a citizen - from Bugisu or Tororo, was told your parents came in 1928, and you were born in 1942, and your children are born in 1963.  Since none of your parents was born here, or were citizens, you are not a citizen and your children are not citizens, and their children and posterity will not be citizens.  So, some Ateso from Tororo walk over to Kenya; since he has been de-citizened in Uganda and on the Kenya Border they will say; ‘oh, please, in our Constitution, the citizen cut-off point is 1963, the year of Independence’.  So, you go back and become a permanently stateless person.  It is such things that we fear. The hon. Members from Teso, Madi, and Ntungamo have an alternative; to take up arms. As hon. Manzi Tumubweine put it, one man has no right to silence 99, and neither have the 99 to silence one.  

We seek the peace of Uganda through this Bill.  By supporting it, we are making a step toward what is already in this House, once a principal is established, to go back for the mandate; it is our democratic duty to go back and be voted. 

I want to touch, Mr. Chairman, just only a few areas of the Bill. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up please.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Yes, Mr. Chairman. There are just two things, one is of the Chairmanship.  On the Chairmanship, because Rushenyi shares the sentiments of the NRM Leadership, that we create a consensus and a strong legitimacy to rule, for which reason we all agree to go back to be subjected to a new election.  The people of Bushenyi also suggested that the President should not appoint the Chairman.  Rather, the President seeing that Members are newly elected and do not necessarily know one another, the President nominates five persons in his view of good standing; and these members be subjected to an election by the National Assembly to select the Chairman and his dependents.  We cannot easily come to an agreement of which five, but the President can pick five and we can elect.  

Concerning those who participate in the Constituencies, the people of Rushenyi endorse entirely the special bodies, particularly NRA, who in the first place handed power to the people willingly and shared the power with the people.  Mr. Chairman, I do thank you very much for having picked me.  

MR. MATEKE (Bufumbira County Kabale): I thank you, Mr. Chairman. This House is debating a vital Bill affecting the future of this country. I consulted my people, the people who elected me, and they support the Bill. (Applause) However, they had some amendment to make which I will point out at a later stage.  I was not happy with the remarks made by the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, when he said that the British House of Commons is supreme and our Parliament here is not supreme. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. MATEKE:  Meaning that because the British Parliament is made up of Whites, maybe, or the British House of Commons is in a developed country, and here we are in a developing country, therefore, there are different standards in judging the sovereignty of Parliament.  Mr. Chairman, we have been making fundamental laws -(Interruption)

MR. NJUBA: Point of information.  I expect, Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member who is an old Member of this House, to be able to follow these debates. I made a clear distinction between two institutions and I was expounding because they do not have a written Constitution.  They have an unwritten Constitution, and in that situation they are not limited by any written law and, therefore, in England, Parliament is supreme; it is where the supremacy lives or resides.  Whereas in the case of Uganda, the Constitution is supreme because it puts in place Parliament and gives it power; it is as simple as that, and I think it is elementary.

MR. MATEKE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I do not agree with the Minister.  I feel we are supreme and we were elected by the people; they vested their sovereignty in us, and as such, I think we are competent enough to make the Constitution -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. MATEKE: What I am trying to say is that, if it is within the national interest that NRC should not make the Constitution, then we have to support the Bill because it has been alleged on several occasions by top leaders of the Movement that if the NRC makes the Constitution, that Constitution is not going to get legitimacy.  Simply because first, it is full of very many historicals, and secondly, it has very many nominated members and so on and so forth. (Laughter) But I do not know whether the fundamental laws we have been making since we came here, are going to be repealed by another Parliament that will come after us. (Applause)

LT. COL. SERWANGA-LWANGA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I think we should be very clear on this issue.  The Law refers to the NRC and the Army Council. But when Members are debating this motion, they are discussing and leaving out the Army Council, which is about 200 people plus; that is exactly what the people are rejecting, not the NRC alone.  So, I think, when the hon. Member holding the Floor is discussing he should refer to both the NRC and the Army Council.  The Law we have been making here has not been including members of the Army Council.   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that regarding the contention on Historical Members, history repeats itself. When we were in the bush, we had a bush council, and when we took over power we formed ourselves into a Council.  This Council that comprises of many of us, including you, was expanded, and, therefore, you are a continuation of this Bush Council, so you are also a historical. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. MATEKE:  Mr. Chairman, I take those pieces of information, but I do not know whether those people who were elected in 1989 have been promoted to being called historicals? But, on a fundamental note, we are here to make things straight for the future of this country. I feel that if NRC Members insist on making the Constitution and it is against the wishes of the majority of the people, it would be undermining the sovereignty of the people of Uganda.  So, as such we must bow to the wishes of the populous of this country. We must be careful when we are making the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  A situation should not arise whereby it is going to be called a ‘Museveni Constitution’ or an ‘NRM Constitution’. Let us avoid that possibility, meaning that we shall have to amend this Bill fundamentally, especially in the nature of the composition, because:

1. When a provision states that, ‘the President will nominate 15 delegates’, thus putting the President in a precarious situation, the people will say ask, ‘how is he equivalent to 15 constituencies?’ So, I feel that this provision must be deleted. 

2. The question of the President nominating a Chairman of an elected Assembly, is dangerous.  If the Chairman makes a mistake in that body which is going to be elected, will he be making that mistake on behalf of the President? So, we must bail out our President.  Our President is a good leader  -(interruption)

MR. MUTEBI-MUTWANIRA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The hon. Member raised an issue that has been disturbing the mind of very many of us.  He has talked of avoiding this Constitution from being connected with the President.  I would like him to clarify to the House, whose baby, the idea of formulating this new Constitution is. 

MR. MATEKE: Mr. Chairman, I think NRM believes in corrective responsibility and I do not think the hon. Member is trying to say that the President is responsible for the entire Constitution making exercise, and that the Constitution we are going to make is going to be his baby.  It is going to be the baby of the entire population of Uganda. (Applause) You see, we should not repeat what was done in the past -(Applause) - let the president be above suspicion and we should avoid a situation of making heroes and worshipping heroes; it is very, very dangerous.  Then another provision, which is controversial, is the appointment of the Chairman of the Electoral Commission with his deputies.  I feel that this should be done with consultation of major political forces in this country, so that in future, people will not have an excuse of saying this thing was done without adequate consultation.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. BUTIME: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What major forces is he referring to? For my record, because I have to reply.

MR. MATEKE:  There are many political forces in this country and if you want to avoid controversies, I feel the President could courteously consult some leaders of existing political parties.

CAPT BABU: Mr. Chairman, I do not want to disturb the hon. Member on the Floor but when he talked about the political parties, something suddenly came to my mind.  Two days ago, there was an article written by the Secretary General of UPC in the newspaper, insulting the Constitutional Commissioner Chairman and he was so debasing that I wonder what courteous request he would expect from the President if such insulting press releases are being made by the so-called political forces in this country, especially insulting a very highly respected Supreme Court Judge publicly by calling him all sorts of names. I would like to suggest that this should be the beginning of us respecting each other.  Thank you very much.

MR. MATEKE:  Mr. Chairman, Uganda is not a homogeneous society -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House that, we should not fear political parties, because they made history and brought independence to this country. (Laughter) What is important is that there have been changes in leadership, and we are now lucky to have the NRM/NRA.  When His Excellency the President leaves tomorrow, we do not have to say that NRM did this.  Even now UPC, DP and UPM are all political parties; we call them political social forces, but do not fear them. They will come because they are in our hearts. (Laughter)

MR. MATEKE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I am surprised, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the one immediately before he had come to resume his debate that it is on the ground of the recognition of the forces being mentioned that the NRM decided to form a broad-based government recognising all these forces and allowing all these forces to participate in the broad-based movement -(Applause)- thank you.

MR. MATEKE: I thank you for your information. I think you are with me. The mere fact that NRM accommodates all shades of political opinion, it would be courteous enough to consult them when they are doing a very important exercise of making the Constitution.

Another Section which I feel should be deleted is 14(2), which allows the usage of any language spoken in Uganda, during the deliberation in the Assembly.  I feel that whenever we want to come and debate the Constitution, we must be competent enough to debate it in English. I think the level of education in this country is such that we cannot have illiterate fellows in the Assembly to make our Constitution.  We would not like a situation whereby a person comes here and starts talking Lukiga and then some people start translating. (Laughter) So, Mr. Chairman, this -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up, please.

MR. MATEKE: So, Mr. Chairman, this Section I feel must be deleted, so that our level of education and civilisation should not be downgraded.  I thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAJUBI (Kasanda County, Mubende): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Point of procedure.  Mr. Chairman, in view of the development of staying here a little bit longer, I would like to request that the assessors give us some water for refreshment.  Because we have been here very long and we are very hungry, and Mr. Chairman, I do -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is okay. You will get water. 

MR. KAJUBI:  Mr. Chairman, I bring proposals from the people of Kasanda, Mubende.  Regarding the minimum age, the age of 21 is regarded as too low for the task of deliberating on such national issues. I mean, if one is 21 he/ she is more or less a juvenile -(Laughter)- because people leave university at the age of 23 years; I mean, even at that time they are given probation and even internship if they are doctors, to acquire experience, before they are confirmed on their jobs.  

So, a person of 21 years will have only experience of a textbook, because his knowledge will be from the textbook. Therefore, I think he cannot really debate matters of national concern. Therefore, the age proposed is 25 -(Interruption)

MRS. KAZIBWE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor, that at the age of 21 years the brain is at its best in absorbing what comes to it -(Applause)- and at that age also, the process of learning is quite first.  So, I would like to inform the hon. Member that even if these young people are just fresh from school, they are able to discuss affairs that affect them in the future.  Thank you. 

MR. KAJUBI:  Mr. Chairman, the speaker was referring to hereditary sort of development, but not experience. We get -(Interjection)- I appreciate the points raised, but at 21 years, I agree one reaches a peak, but a peak of his natural in-born tendencies, and not experience. Yet we learn through experience.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification form the hon. Member holding the Floor that even now that we have passed a new Bill to set up the National Youth Council, with the age limit ranging from 18 to 30 years, and that the youth can now come and have their own representatives from amongst themselves, what will happen and how shall we determine that they ensure that in they never choose leaders below the age of 21 years?

MR. KAJUBI:  Anyway, I do not want to delay you, but experience is acquired through learning, and from the age of 21 years, one begins to learn by experience. Below 21 years, he gets school education and whatever, but after that you must give him two to three years to really mature so that he can be able to engage in a very sophisticated debate.  So, the age suggested is 25 years instead of 21 years, and that is for standing to be elected, but one can elect at the age of 18 years; that is okay.  

Concerning the historical members, well, historical Members are referred to as political, politically charged, or whatever, and that they should not really take part in the Constituent Assembly. I think this is wrong.  Historical Members should really take part and I think we should have about 10, because these, like soldiers assessed in the peace that we are really enjoying now, and it is really irrelevant to really consider them alien to development. Therefore, the people of Kasanda suggest that about 10 historical Members should be elected by the people because they have the development of this nation at heart. They fought for it and they shed their blood for it. They lost limbs, eyes and other parts of their bodies.  So, I think it will really be very inconsiderate of the nation to leave them out.

About the minimum number, they confirm 80,000 as the minimum number for an electorate.  And concerning the appointment of the Chairman, the people of Kasanda feel that the President knows the people of this nation more than anyone else.  The President holds the interest of this nation at heart. He is, therefore, the only one who qualifies to appoint the Chairman on a non-sectoral ground. Otherwise, others will have their personal, political or religious views while electing, and these views might affect their choices about the definition of a contentious matter which is of a local character to a particular region, district or community, and which will, therefore, not be settled by a national referendum.  Anyway, this was really spelled out very well and we, the people of Kasanda, request the Minister concerned to be very particular about it.  Because things of a local nature should not really be put to a referendum such as the circumcision of male children of Bugisu, or the Kabakaship of Buganda should not be debated  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. 

MR. KAJUBI: Should only be put to a national sort of - I think this has been really hard.  So, the Kabakaship of Buganda, Omukama of Toro, Kyabazinga of Busoga, and so on, should be left to the areas where these cultures belong.

On the question of campaigning, I think the rule is very restricting.  I think people should be left the liberty to campaign on their own. Why should the poll officers burden them as if they were schoolboys being taken from place to place? Let them be left the liberty to campaign in an acceptable way.  So, we feel that they should not really be taken by the polling officers; this will really be very expensive too and time consuming, and if a group of people are going to Muluka, I may not - so and so may not really have time to go.  So, let the people be left the liberty.

About people belonging to areas where they live, I think this is very important because this is going to eliminate mercenaries of politics who move from place to place looking for greener areas -(Interjection)- yes, I call them mercenaries because you see; when they cannot eat here, then they prospect an area where they will eat and when they fail then they will look for other areas. So, I think we should really stick to this.  

About us going back for re-election to seek a new mandate, we have no fear at all, but the problem is, this is going to confuse our areas.  We are going to have a divided constituency because we have really done a good job, we have held people together, we have made one citizen, and we have brought oneness in the area.  Now, just imagine, a man like you or me beginning to talk against - to start anyway, urging to be elected by an RC IV Chairman or RC IV Executive and these people have been respecting us.  But from the time we started campaign against each other, we are going to lose respect completely. So, I would rather resolve this House and then go and seek a fresh mandate.  Thank you very much, Sir.

CAPT. F. BABU (Central Division Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. First and foremost, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity, but my thanks go to the Government. The Government is here to cover another milestone on the road to democracy.  I would also like to extend my sincere thanks to the Constitutional Commission that has already given us the draft within a reasonable time, and I hope that the Prime Minister’s promise on Tuesday will make sure that all the Members in this House have got at least a copy of this draft Constitution. (Applause)  However, before I go to the Bill, I would like to ask your permission to allow me condemn in the strongest terms, certain sections of our society that have turned political alignments of some of our people, and I am talking about the Constitutional Commissioners.  These people are people of high stature in our society. They are people who are respected where they come from. Some of them are Judges, Lawyers, or very senior politicians, like the hon. Obwangor here whom I have a lot of respect for. He has taught us quite a lot, and we have soldiers with very high ranks, housewives and professionals; they are twenty of them in number. 

There are people in our societies here in this country, who think they can get political score by insulting our Commissioners and I think, this is extremely wrong.  These people had jobs to do, they went out and taught us, and after teaching us, they came back and produced what the people had given them.  If you have a point of contention, why do you not talk about the Constitution and leave them alone?  I think it is totally wrong, debasing, and demoralising, for a man like a High Court Judge, to be called all sorts of names in public by people who are trying to score political achievement.  Everybody in this country, including this Parliament, should condemn this in the strongest terms possible. (Applause) 

We have talked about how Constitutions have been written on the African continent, and a few days later, they have been found in the dustbin.  They had been thrown on the heap of history and people are forgetting one thing, that going out and making a people’s Constitution the way we did it, gave everybody an opportunity first, to understand what a Constitution is, and secondly we are supposed to have at least cultivated some sort of discipline.  Discipline to respect each other. I used to wonder why we do not respect each other, until I found out that historically, when they brought these Western Laws our method of settling disputes was removed.  Even the Europeans, before they started respecting the Law; they had a dual system. If you insulted one gentleman after another, we would challenge you in dual.  Today, we have a law such that if somebody insults you, he/ she goes in the tabloids, and the scribes will write all sorts of things about you, and you sort of hide and fear.  

However, as we go along, I think time has come for us to recognise one word; we must compromise; we must give and take, respect each other, and we must look at issues and the principles of these issues.  There all sorts of people in this country who have called this House all sorts of names, and they have even gone out and blatantly lied.  They said we were bribed because we were given pick-ups, and I want this to be put right, that we bought those pick-ups and they were not given to us.  It must go on record.  Secondly, they have said that apart from those who were nominated and the historical Members, we were elected by an electoral college.  I want to challenge even those who are saying that there are two electoral systems in the world and they are recognised. One is an Electoral College and another one is a direct and popular vote, and the American President today, is elected by the Electoral College and his the most powerful man in the world. The pope of America are also elected by an Electoral College and the President is, therefore, recognised internationally.

 So, these are the kind of issues that I would like the people in this country to put correctly, starting with the Minister.  The Minister should not at all have said that we were indirectly elected here and, therefore, we have no legitimacy.  This is extremely annoying and I would like everybody who has been on this line of political scoring to stop, because this is not the truth. I want us to get this point very clear.  

The other point, is that, I want us to get it very clear that the Members of this House were elected in 1989 by our Constitution, and we have stayed here for five years and our term ends in 1994. You never extended yourselves.  The NRM as a Body extended itself; but let us get this point very clear; we are being accused of extension; there was no extension but we were elected in 1989 for five years; if you know mathematics its 1994. (Applause) I want this thing put clearly down on paper because some people are using them to score political accusements and they are capitalising on this thing, Mr. Chairman. These are the few things that I wanted to point out to make my point clear  -(Interruption) 

MR. BARIGYE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since the hon. Member holding the Floor wishes to put the record straight, may I also inform him that in 1989, when we were elected, we were elected clearly with a mandate to discuss and debate and promulgate the new Constitution. (Applause)

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, one of the hon. Members has already clarified the present Law.  The present Law does not give the NRC the powers to debate and enact the Constitution -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI: The present Law gives the NRC and the Army Council to do that. (Applause) Now, once the Army Council opted, out the Law does not automatically give the balance to the authority to do that.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member who is holding the Floor that the Army Council has not opted out and the legal Notice No.1; has not been amended. In fact, it is this House to bring the resolution of amending that Legal Notice, then that is a time when we shall lose the chance of making the Constitution. But, even that resolution has not been done, you can see  -(Interjection)

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank all the hon. Members and to appreciate the hon. Minister’s information, and I am sure it has now been clarified that the Army Council can opt out, but the Law has not been changed.  Mr. Chairman, I am very grieved the way Historical Members of this House have been treated. I am one of those who do not agree with the line that historical Members have served their usefulness and, therefore, they can go wherever they like. I do not agree with that statement.  Historical Members in this House came a long way, and they started this system. They came out with a programme; this programme and even Statute No.5 of 1988 was enacted by them.  The Constitution Commission was formed by them, and for that matter, historical Members of this House, with a lot of respect, would also be a compromise group that should be allowed in, one way or the other to be in the Constituent Assembly. (Applause)

Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the National Resistance Army, if they have opted out as I have been informed by the hon. Minister -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN TUMWINE: Point of information. Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the House that the Army Council has not opted out from participating in the Constitution making. What the Army Council has said - it has made it clear in view of the feeling of the people of Uganda, that it is willing to be represented by the few people and, therefore, they will not have to insist on the right as contained in the existing Law of having to participate in the National Constitution as it contains.  Otherwise, it should not be taken that they opted out. We can never give up that right, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the hon. Member for that information. I am very grateful, however, with some of us, including Kampala District, which has no problem with the NRA being represented in the Constituent Assembly. People have said all sorts of things about the Women Representatives. I believe very strongly that women form 51 percent of our population and if they do, then I think, they should be represented.  I would like to agree with one hon. Member who said we should get a framework so that we get a woman from every district. (Applause) Although I am told that certain forces have said that this is Museveni’s formula and, therefore, they cannot be in that.  We, as the authority and I think, I would like to convince the hon. Members that we should have these hon. ladies in this House and they have performed beautifully; they have represented their areas very well and I think every woman in this country should be represented.  If we live on ten Members only, a certain elite group will hijack - I would like to suggest very strongly that each district, if we can get some sort of framework, should give us a lady representative.
 
We have no problem with the other areas.  We do not even have a problem with the elections and with the nomination of 15 Members by the President. But we would like to suggest a slight dimension to what is proposed in the Bill.  We suggest that after the Chairman has been nominated he must be subjected to confirmation by the Committee of the House. The Chairman -(Interjection)- I am saying for a matter of compromise and this is a compromise looking at all views, I think the President can nominate the Chairman. But we should have a Committee of this House - elected by this House this time not NEC, and that House should confirm the Chairmanship of that nominated Member.  I think that will remove the fears that the President and the Cabinet might corner the Chairmanship.  Let us also subject -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up.

CAPT BABU:  Okay, Mr. Chairman. Otherwise, the rest of the Bill is acceptable. Kampala would like to have an election, and we have been sent here strictly with a view that an election should be held. I would also like to say that we have to support the Constitutional Assembly Bill. Unfortunately, although some of us - and this is my personal view of what has been given as an error of creating confidence and creating legitimacy and giving this Constitution a political consensus. Therefore, Mr. Chairman, we support the Constitutional Assembly Bill.  Thank you.

DR. LUYOMBYA (Historical Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  People should not have the idea that they are going to seek a fresh mandate. The NRC has not been dissolved and it cannot be dissolved unless NTM is dissolved.  It is historical; and we all know that historically, the NRM has a task, and that is to run this country through this interim period, and the interim period will end with a new Constitution being enacted and then the NRM will hand-over power to whoever that Constitution will direct them to do.  So, we cannot just be dissolved like that; we still have a role to play.

It has become necessary to enact a new Constitution because this country is looking at the past with regret and the future with anxiety, and that being so, we believe that the power should rest with the people and the leader leads the country in trust, and the Constitution is just a document from the people, laying down terms and conditions for the trust of the people, and the Constituent Assembly is helping the people to spell out the terms and conditions for the future leaders.  Looking first with regret at the introduction, it states that the Constituent Assembly was set-up for the purpose of considering and enacting a new National Constitution for the Republic of Uganda.  Even the term ‘Republic’ I think, is a Constitutional matter, and we should leave it out, as well as the term ‘Uganda’, then the Constituent Assembly will determine which term -  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

DR. LUYOMBYA:  Mr. Chairman, about the election, I feel that we should follow the procedure of ‘one man one vote and one value’, and for that matter, I think when electing the Constituent Assembly, we should take population into account.  But as a compromise, I would accept to use the county as the basis of a constituency.  But any constituency or county that has more than 60,000 people, should have an extra representative for every extra 60,000 people, if we have to be transparent and democratic. 

About the nomination of the Chairman to the Constituent Assembly, since we want to be transparent, and having listened to some earlier views, I would like to suggest that the President in his wisdom, and knowing many people in the country, should invite views from the public as to who should be suitable for Chairman, then he will nominate five people from those people, with curriculum vitae of those people, and their names should be subjected to another body which would come out with the final Chairman, and the second man with the highest vote will automatically become the vice-chairman. 

I concur with those who suggest that when it comes to the delegate, this is not an exercise where we are looking for a representative who is going in for development; to see that roads are made.  It is a short-term exercise of four months maximum or seven, and we need somebody who is articulate on matters of the Constitution.  There are many people who are born within the districts, but do not reside in those districts, constituencies or counties, though they frequently visit those counties and they are highly regarded in those areas where they come from. If you insist that somebody should just be a local resident in that area, they may lose good people would be part of the Constituent Assembly and I, therefore, support the view that a representative or delegate should be somebody who is known in that area where he is standing -(Interruption) 

MR. NJUBA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, although we have not circulated an Amendment, I think it will save time if I inform the House that one of the questions Government has reconsidered, is its position on this particular one, and it has agreed that it should discard the Bill and people in the local areas should decide.

DR. LUYOMBYA: Mr. Chairman, part (4) of this Bill, is very important because this is where the House is going to give the terms and conditions for the Constituent Assembly.  It is a pity that we are debating this before the draft Constitution is given to us. Otherwise, I am not going to be given another chance, because we need that Draft Constitution to define the terms and conditions of service of this Constituent Assembly.  For example, we have to tell them what will constitute the contentious matter and what we have to tell them - which sort of matters, will necessitate a referendum.  

About the appointment of a commissioner, this officer has a lot of powers and this House must make sure that chances are not left for any rigging at all.  We must close all the loopholes for this Commissioner, to ensure that no rigging takes place.  For example, Clause 21 Section 4 (a), states that the Commissioner is qualified for appointment with the office of a Permanent Secretary - it should be equivalent to the office of a Permanent Secretary.  We all know that many Permanent Secretaries and other government officials, have been appointed on political grounds and there are no procedures laid out which are followed.  I suggest in some of these cases that some of these positions should be advertised and people should compete for them.  

Let me also comment briefly on the finances. This is going to be a very expensive exercise and if we go by the formula I suggested, of a country and then the population, we may find that we shall end up with more than 180 elected representatives.  For the sake of finances, I would like to suggest that since funds are in short supply, there should be some sacrifice in that, whatever budget the Government had made for 180 people, should remain the same and be shared out by whatever number of delegates will come. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up please.

DR. LUYOMBYA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Yesterday, a sad development was registered in the House when Members demanded copies of the reports, and rightly so, because these copies of the Reports and the Draft Constitution ought to have been made had the funds not been mismanaged. I know that the Treasury has been religiously releasing money to the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, although that money has not been reaching the Constitutional Commission.  Donor funds have been released regularly to the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, but that money has not been reaching the Commission.  Mr. Chairman, in November last year -(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to make such a serious allegation and we do not get any response from the hon. Minister who Minister is here? 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is quite in order.  Proceed please.

MR. PINTO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since last October or November, some donors suspended any financial dealing with the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs because these people in the Ministry have failed to account for the money that was given to them. Mr. Chairman -(Laughter)- this is one of the self-inflicted problems for this nation, and we are almost being derailed from not discussing this Bill because somewhere, the people concerned have failed in their responsibility.  

I would like to use the same voice the people exercised yesterday, to challenge our Rt. hon. Prime Minister to take immediate action in this serious investigation so that when we get the reports on Tuesday, we shall also get a report on the finances that have been advanced from Government and from the donors, to the Commission, and what has happened to them.	

MR. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, this matter was alluded to on several occasions in the course of yesterday’s debate.  It was also alluded to in the Newspaper.  I was asked about it sometime back and I deliberately refused to give any detail.  However, I had not given details because this matter as you say, is subject. Investigations are going on in certain quarters and it would be premature for me to judge or issue a verdict.  However, let me say from the outset that I have been forced to say that I am not aware of any funds not reaching the Commission.  I am aware of the fact that for a long time, and for the last three years, Government departments including the Constitutional Commission have had problems of obtaining funds.  I am not aware that any of the government funds did not reach their destination in the Constitutional Affairs, except that I am aware that a donor has decided to withdraw or withhold his funds on the ground that there was some mismanagement of finances.  This was in October last year.  When this matter was drawn to my attention, I was informed also that the donor had instructed a private firm of auditors to look into this particular funding from that particular donor. I will probably go back and state that a donor decided to give us money as a Constitutional Commission, to finish the work and an agreement was entered into between the donor and the Commission, directly to finance the remainder of the exercise, and the funds were being released from day to day by joint meetings of the Commission, the donor and the Permanent Secretary.  When allegations of mismanagement were made and the request was put to the donor by the Commissioners, to call in their auditors, they appointed an auditor; a private auditor. He looked into the affairs of these funds and made a report to the donors.  In his recommendation, he mentioned the fact that although there appeared to be some irregularities, the funding could go on while they sort out the irregularities.  I am made to understand that some members of the Commission were not satisfied with this finding.  These are the facts.  So, the donor continued to withhold the funds.   When it came to my attention, again that the money was not coming and there were some allegations of misappropriation of the funds, and my Permanent Secretary sought the assistance of the Auditor General, and the donor agreed to that arrangement. As we talk now, the Auditor General is again examining these funds and it will be unfair for me, or for the people who are handling the funds or even the Commission, to say that there was some fraud or mismanagement.  I repeat that as far as funds have been coming from government, we have had problems. But the only time I have heard of mismanagement has been on that occasion and that occasion is being thoroughly examined by the Auditor General.  I did not want to interfere with investigations of the Auditor General and the IGG.  Thank you very much.  I hope this will satisfy Members.

CAPT. BABU: Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Minister of State, whether this would affect the donors financing the election of the Constituent Assembly. Because I am told they are more or less wholly supporting the election.  Secondly, there is information in town that the constitutional drafts are being sold and I would like to know whether the Minister has heard of this information, and if it is a private firm or if it is being done officially so that at least we can know, because we have already received this information. As I talk right now, there are people who are selling them in town.

MR. NJUBA: On the first point on whether or not the irregularity in the administration of funds will affect future donors, is not for me to say. But as government, we are bound to finance this exercise.  Whether they find out or not, that is for the donors.  And I do not know what is in their mind.  As regards the question of the constitution being sold in town, I am not aware.  (Interjection) I am still saying; I can say and one of the Commissioners is here. He will tell me that I did not get a copy - there are two Commissioners here. I was given a number of copies for the Cabinet already addressed by the Commissioners and previously, as my Friend said, delivered them to Cabinet.  That is all.

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, out of the extracts or series made by Topic and by The Monitor containing part of the Constitution that was delivered to His Excellency the President at the end of last year, it is what people have taken business upon actively.  Even my Colleague Basoga here got it from that source.  So, they are taking these copies, binding them up and making business ahead of the government.  (Laughter)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Point of information. Once this document was released to the President, it became a public document and we have even been reading within the paper excerpts of the whole Constitution and the hon. Members who have been active - I am sure there are Members - have full copies of 314 Articles either reproduced in The Monitor or in any other newspaper. I am sure circulation will be in a number of forms.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Chairman, the hon. Minister has said a lot, yet there is nothing substantial to allay my fears that the mismanagement of the funds has reached very big proportions, to the extent that the Constitutional Commission was almost grinding to a halt.  I am not impressed with his not being aware, and I am not impressed because I think this is a very serious and fundamental problem which we must address, and I have made my request on the Floor of this House.  I would request very kindly in the same voice; Members requested for the Constitutional Report documents, and that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister takes charge of this issue so that he comes here to give a statement.  I am prepared to testify that there may be some fictitious documents that are purported to justify purchases, which never were. I am talking of many important things and I am responsible for my actions. We are at a crucial stage of this nation. I am responsible for my actions and I can only challenge the leader of government business that what we pledge for most of the future has been mishandled.  Mr. Chairman, it is a serious matter.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that, we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Tuesday, next week.

(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. on Thursday and adjourned until Tuesday, 2nd March, 1993.)










 

