Wednesday, 19 February 2003

(Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, while we were in recess, there was sad news of the demise of the wife of the former President of Uganda, Godfrey Binaisa. The body arrived in the country and there has been a funeral service at Namirembe Cathedral. I was unable to attend, but on your behalf I sent a message of condolence. Also, the father of hon. Mukabera died over the weekend. I propose that we stand for a minute’s silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute’s silence)

DR FRANK NABWISO: Mr Speaker, when I was travelling from Jinja to my constituency on Saturday, I overheard two people engaged in a discussion on the U.S.A and Iraq war. They were both peasants. One of them was saying that this country has not made any statement on the U.S.A/ Iraq war. The other peasant was wondering whether the instability in the oil gulf countries will not seriously affect our fuel imports, and whether this will not destabilise the economy of Uganda? Can I request whether Government is going to come out with a statement on this matter?

It is important, Mr Speaker, to clarify this because we are members of the UN, and during the Afghanistan war, I think Uganda supported President Bush to the hilt. Since the Minister of Finance is here, and we have five Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and all sorts of economic advisers, might we be able to know what is likely to happen to the economy of this country if we continue to get shortages of petrol as a result of the instability in the oil gulf countries? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is a matter for Foreign Affairs I suppose.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very important question, and I have no hesitation in asking the honourable Member of Parliament to put it to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs so that you may receive a well considered answer. I thank you.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification related to a news item that appeared in the headline of the Monitor newspaper of today. It states that His Excellency the President of Uganda, who is also Chairman of the Movement, has okayed the opening up of space for political party activities.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will realise that this has for sometime been a point of contention, not only in this House, but also in the country at large. His Excellency the President does give reasons, which in my considered opinion are solid reasons, reasons that hold water, and the President needs to be supported in this opinion.

I would like to ask, probably the Leader of Government Business or the National Political Commissar or even the Vice President, to tell this House or at least tell me whether this is the position of Government. Give me the assurance that this is the position of Government because a lot of questions are going to be put to us when we go down to our constituencies. I think it is necessary for us to have the correct answers and not speculate. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable colleague, who has raised the question.  

First, for sometime I have been wondering how we relate to newspapers, because every time there is some story in the newspaper, it is almost an obligation that we start with that in the House. I hope that our regulations could be clear on this subject.

Secondly, all of us honourable Members of Parliament, under the Movement political system, are Members of the National Conference, the highest organ under this system, the policy setting organ. Any major decision cannot be made except through that body.  

I also read the story attributed to the President. I just want to recapitulate and inform honourable members that in the National Executive Committee (NEC) in 2001, a committee was appointed under my chairmanship, and the instructions to us were to do a certain job and report back to the Chairman who in turn would report to NEC. We finished our work, we have reported to the Chairman of the Movement, who in turn is due to report to the National Executive Committee.

What you have seen in the newspaper, in my judgement, is at best a speculation trying to provoke us to act out of procedure. Therefore, as I have said to the public, I would like to appeal to the honourable members of this House to respect our procedures, await the National Executive Committee and the National Conference so that the contents of the reports we have made can be properly issued. What is in the newspaper can be treated as rumour and speculation, Mr Speaker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this procedure of allowing Members after the communication to say something is only for emergency matters. It is not for general debate, it is not as some people are treating it. If something is of an emergency nature, then you say it. Otherwise, other matters should come formally.

MR JACK SABIITI: It is an emergency, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much. I thank you and the management of Parliament for having put in place security measures to make sure that all Members of Parliament are safe. I would like, however, to bring your attention to one problem which Members of Parliament are facing, and that is the speeding vehicles from the other side of the President’s Office.  

I would suggest, Mr Speaker, that the other gate which connects Parliament and the President’s Office, be closed so that they use their office. A number of Members of Parliament have nearly been hit by the speeding vehicles from that side. So, I request that this matter be taken up very seriously so that the lives of Members of Parliament are safeguarded.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall look into this matter and then appropriate action may be taken. 

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, when we started this sitting after recess, four honourable Members made very serious comments and even quoted people that had been tortured under detention. The Minister of Defence promised this House that he was going to investigate this matter and report to the House. To me, the longer it takes to clear the air, the longer the public tends to believe that what was said was the absolute truth. I am just wondering whether the Minister of Defence has undertaken the investigation and whether he is going to report today. If not, how soon is he going to report? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I undertook to investigate the allegations, particularly as Minister of Defence, on the expenditure of the extra defence budget that we have received in relation to the allegation of torture. I have subsequently put our mechanism in motion to investigate the matter. Although I did not make that undertaking that time, I actually have the intention of coming back to Parliament and inform you of my findings when I am ready. Thank you.

MR BENEDICT ETONU: I thank you, Mr speaker. In connection to this alleged torture of people who are detained in Kigo, I would like to inform the honourable members that the Committee on Defence left this morning to go to Kigo, although I missed the bus, to try to investigate, and I think we shall be reporting accordingly.
             
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I want to apologise to you that I was not able to present the statement yesterday because of reasons beyond my control. This is a statement on the food situation in the northern region; internally displaced persons (IDP) camps; and Karamoja and Katakwi on the 19 February 2003. Add the date please, they missed it out.  

Insurgency in Northern Uganda has displaced up to 800,000 people who are in need of food aid. At the same time, drought in Karamoja has subjected a total of 351,922 people to a famine situation. Another 88,632 people in Katakwi are in need of food as a result of displacement by the Karimojong cattle rustlers. 
A total population of 1,240,554 in the country will need food aid for at least three months covering February, March and April this year.  

The most affected are the internally displaced persons in Pader, Gulu and Kitgum districts who continue to live in 60 protected camps with very limited access to arable land and social services. The three districts of Kitgum, Gulu and Pader cover an area of 28,000 square kilometres with a population of 1.07 million. The population for each district according to the 2002 census is 468,407 for Gulu, 286,122 for Kitgum and 293,679 for Pader.

People in internally displaced persons camps account for about 76 percent of the total district population. 

As portrayed in table 1 below, when compared to the year 2001, displacement of the population in 2002 almost doubled. This severely affected food production and household economy.

Table 1: Internal displacement in the Northern Uganda: 

District             Dec.02            Dec. 02




Gulu

 

Pader  
370,000

390,000 

Kitgum

50,000 

120,000 

Pader 	
 5,000 	
271,000    

Lira
 
10,000 

Total	
425,000	

791,000

Estimated Children under five	
85,000	

158,200

The general disruption of economic activities and rain failure over the season have constrained the food acquisition strategies of the internally displaced persons and people in Karamoja region, who completely depend on food aid for their survival.

World Food Programme (WFP) and the Office of the Prime Minister have been providing food aid to IDP and drought victims under this arrangement. 

World Food Programme is currently implementing a Protected Relief and Recovery Operation (PRRO) and a County Programme (CP). The PRRO assists the IDPs of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader, all refugees, HIV/AIDS patients and their families and vulnerable groups. The County Programme is composed of three major components: supporting vocational training for street children and orphans, school feeding and adult literacy in Karamoja, Arua, Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Gulu, Kitgum, Kotido, Moroto and Adjumani. It occasionally supports Pader and Lira districts.

The Office of the Prime Minister on the other hand has been responsible for assisting the following: 

• 88,623 internally displaced persons in Katakwi.

• 47,000 transitory IDP in Lira and Apac districts.
  
• IDPs residing outside registered camps in Gulu, Pader and Kitgum and in such places as trading centres, sub-county headquarters and health centres. 

• Primary and secondary schools displaced from Pader and Kitgum districts in Kotido District.

•1,500 IDPs in Pakwach and Panyimur.

•800 internally displaced persons in Adjumani.

•Famine victims in Moroto, Kotido and Nakapiripirit.

•Natural disaster victims such as victims of hailstorms (e.g. Kisoro), windstorms in Budadiri, evictions in Mukono, wildfires in Masaka fishing villages.

It is now the view of Government that the WFP expands it programmes and takes up some of the above functions of the Office Prime Minister. For example, Government will now be supplying food through WFP and it has been given an initial pledge of one billion shillings to be paid in four instalments starting this February.  

Since June 2002, the WFP has been providing 70 percent of the food needs of people in camps in Gulu and Kitgum as part of the humanitarian assistance to the affected population. However, the quantities distributed do not meet the recommended daily food requirements. 

This is partly due to the fact that calculations were based on the situation before the increase of rebel activity, when the population was able to access the fields for local food production, but this has significantly decreased due to the escalation in insecurity.

The problem got worse when WFP ran into a funding pipeline problem early this year and was not able to cope with the increasing food aid needs. 

In response to the changed situation, the Office of the Prime Minister made an international appeal on Tuesday, 28 January 2003. A number of donors pledged to raise funds for both Northern Uganda and Karamoja.

Following contributions from donors below to WFP, the WFP resource situation for February improved as follows:

• Britain contributed US$1,639,344.
• USA donated US$20,978,493 but in kind to arrive end of May or early June.
• Ireland contributed US$214,883.
• Japan contributed US$420,782.
• Sweden US$2,900,000
• Italy US$1,000,000
• Germany US$500,000
• Uganda US$550,000 (Shs 1 billion)

The Government is very grateful to the above donor community for their generous contributions

This resource, however, is only adequate for WFP food programmes for the period, February and March 2003. The funding pipeline will break again in April for all food commodities. Additional cash contributions are therefore still urgently required to bridge the period from April to early June.

In the event that security improves and the population can access their land, the next harvest will not be ready until August 2003. This means that the population will continue to be heavily dependent on external food assistance. 

In summary, the total estimated additional food requirements for the period March to August 2003 in metric tons for WFP are:

• Maize - 54,700 metric tons.
• Pulses - 8,200 metric tons.
• Vegetable oil - 4,720 metric tons.
• Blended food  - 12,045 metric tons.
• Sugar   - 2,270 metric tons.
• Salt  - 683 metric tons. 

The total is 82,618 metric tons of food commodities.

As regards the GMO - maize, Government has formed a Cabinet sub committee under the leadership of Her Excellency the Vice President, to study the situation and come out with a report.  

Events that led to the displacement. 

On 5 August 2002, the district experienced the influx of Acolpii refugees in which over 20,000 refugees camped at the cultural centre in Lira municipality on transit to Bweyale. 

Therefore, bandits crossed into Aromo, Apala, Okwang, Adwari and Orum subcounties. By 20 September 2002, they had reached Adekokwok, Barr, Omoro, Alilim, Ogur, Aloi, Adyel and railways division of Lira municipality council as well. 

Meanwhile the Karimojong cattle raiders started grazing their cattle in Olilim, Omoro and Orum sub-counties in October 2002. Later they started raiding cattle from the locals with guns. The situation worsened as UPDF encountered them and recovered some of the cattle. They became wild, killing, looting, and raping, and two women were abducted. The effects of these raids were far reaching.

The Way Forward:
Apart from the Office of the Prime Minister and World Food Programme contributions, there are various organisations like the Pentecostal Church of Uganda with the support of Fida International, who have also come up with a relief project for the IDPs in Lira, Nebbi and Gulu districts where they will supply survival kits to the affected families. This relief is also very much appreciated.

There are other humanitarian organisations who are also making contributions to the noble cause. These include ICRC, Uganda Red Cross, the Norwegian Refugee Council, Caritas and Samaritan Purse.

In Lira District, the Office of the Prime Minister and WFP are working out plans of availing food to people affected by cattle rustlers and drought. In Moroto County, the sub-counties of Apala, Omoro, and Aloi are targeted. In Erute County, the sub-counties of Aromo and Oyur are targeted while in Otuke the sub-counties of Okwang, Adwari, Orum and Olilim are also targeted.

An assessment mission composed of officials from the Office of the Prime Minister, WFP, UNHCR, OCHA and other stakeholders in Kitgum, Gulu, Pader, Lira and Apac districts are assessing the situation in these districts. After the assessment, the Office of the Prime Minister, WFP and UPDF will work out a plan of availing food to the IDPs and people affected by drought, especially those living outside the camps. The people with that plan will work together and see how food will be sent to them.

Annex II, Mr Speaker, talks about the deliveries of food from the Prime Minister’s office in September 2002 and below you can see delivery of food from the Office of the Prime Minister’s office in October and November; and in February, to the internally displaced persons in Katakwi District; this is also how food was given.  

In this month, we have given food in Lira to the following places – I will read Lira because I think it is very important that the House gets to know that much as we have problems, Lira is not being left behind. Railways Division – these are the IDPs population. 

Railway Division - 3,444 
Ajwina Division - 6,004
Adyel Division - 21,688 
Central Division - 3,546 
Adekokwok Sub-county - 4,488 
Adwari Sub-county - 2,000 
Institutions  - 1,461 
Lira Sub-county - 5,442 and 
Aloi Sub-county - 906. 
Adwel, Kola/Aliwang Mission - 3,000 
Orum trading centre (Gombolola headquarter) - 5,000 
Olilil trading centre (Gombolola headquarter) -5,000 
Okwang trading centre (Gombolola headquarter) - 2,000. 
All these people are receiving attention.  

The following page is the list of Pader in February.  Appendix II, this is delivery of food in September in 2002 in Lira, Apac, Gulu, Kotido, Nebbi, Pakwach, Adjumani and Moroto. It is the same list for food for October, November, December last year, and January this year. So, you can see that the purpose of this report is to up-date Parliament on what is happening and the effort of the Government in trying to save the situation on the ground. 

Various people have different information, we also have our purpose; that is why we are presenting so that Parliament is aware, and I am very grateful for the time. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and the colleagues for your attention. Thank you very much.

MRS MARGRET BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister in-charge of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I would like also to thank him and the Government for the effort they are making to provide food for the internally displaced persons. 

During my consultation in the Northern region, I received some complaints which I would like to be clarified. The displaced people say lorries of food go during the day and in the morning half of it is gone or all is not given at all. So, people are starving. What measures have you put in place to ensure that the food taken to the displaced people really reaches the people and they consume it?  Thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the 2nd Deputy Prime Minister for his statement and for the efforts he is personally making, together with the Minister of State and his Ministry, for this unfortunate situation. I know the problem of resources and unpredictability when it comes to disaster, so I do appreciate the shortcomings and other problems  

But in this report, I would like to draw the attention of the Second Deputy Prime Minister to page 7. Although the report talks about the food situation, there is a very important aspect. The effects of these raids, and there are only three words there: “Were far reaching.” Mr Deputy Prime Minister, I would have thought that this civil servant should be asked to do a little bit more research and you come out with an in-depth report on the effects of these raids on the society in the area. 

I also think Members of Parliament are entitled to know and to go on record. When you just say effects of these raids were far reaching, it leaves out a lot.

To go now into the report, Mr Speaker, there is tendency among Government and donor communities to send this food aid to camps. Well, because of the history in Acholi and the length of time there, there are what we call “camps”. But I want the Deputy Prime Minister to appreciate that, there is some degree of uniqueness in Lira District where possibly this displacement has just started about a year ago. People get displaced and filter into community, and therefore, the attitude of our donor communities and the department of disaster preparedness is to go and see people physically displaced. If they do not find people physically displaced and in camps, then they say people are not there.  

I want this concept of addressing disaster in terms of camps to be looked at differently when it comes to Lira and Apac districts. And I think it is something, which the Second Deputy Prime Minister may wish to appreciate and to let the donor community understand, that when people come to their few relatives, they are still displaced. I have been keeping 20 to 30 people in my small place. But when the donor community goes to Lira community, they want to see people in railways, Ojwina etc. I want to see how all this can be addressed.

Secondly, not everybody in Otuke, Aromo, Gulinaloyi has run to Lira municipality, and I want to repeat this. Like in Otuke, now the situation is such that people are displaced from their villages to safer areas where the soldiers are. I am happy the Deputy Prime Minister has corrected the statistics, which were given to him. Unfortunately, when these people go to collect statistics, they more or less stop within the safer area in Lira municipality and come back and leave areas like Olilir, Olumu and so on, where people are now crowded. I really want the Deputy Prime Minister also to address that problem.  

Mr Speaker, I know this statement is addressing the issue of food, but I am requesting the Deputy Prime Minister and the Prime Minister that this House deserves a more comprehensive report than simply the issue of food. I think these displaced people also lack certain vital aspects.  

The hon. Minister Mukula was in Lira about a week ago; he saw it with his own eyes. The issue of medicine, for example, you are not going to give food to people who possibly do not have drugs for malaria. People are displaced; there is no water, no hygiene, no pit latrines around. So, much as I appreciate the effort and the statement of the Second Deputy Prime Minister, this House deserves what I call a really comprehensive report addressing all these issues. 

Like in Otuke, you have 40 primary schools, and four secondary schools displaced. How is that being addressed, even if you are giving them food? The schools had opened in safer areas of Lira District and Apac. What are you doing about these schools, which have to get out of their county? I believe it is the same in Kitgum and Gulu. So the issue is deeper than food.

Finally, I also think that in view of the budgetary re-allocation and the fact that the insecurity is the root cause of this problem, you are dealing with symptoms when you just say you are taking food, clothes and this and that. The Deputy Prime Minister has drawn our attention to the fact that even the money which is available is going to last for the next two months only. And he has rightly said on page 7 that in the event that security improves and population can access their land, the next harvest will not be ready until August 2003. 

So, what is the key factor in the solution here? It is security. So, I would really like this House, now that we have resumed in the new year, to be told what the security situation is as of today. With all the money that has been pumped there, a lot of money from the budget, billions have gone there.  So -  (Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: While you come in, I want to remind Members that we have only 30 minutes to comment on the statement.

MR OMARA ATUBO: I think the Minister for Defence can have an occasion. I am sure you will give it.  So, security please.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you my good friend, hon. Omara Atubo. Mr Speaker, I simply wanted to inform the House that first of all, I am going to the North tomorrow, and early next week I intend to give a comprehensive statement on the security situation in the North. Thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, that ends my remarks. Thank you. 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. On behalf of the people who are in internally displaced people’s camps, I would like to take this chance to thank the Prime Minister’s Office and Government of Uganda for taking some effort to look after us who are displaced. Our people appreciate the little effort you have put in, and we think that Government can do more.  

On the report that the Minister has given, I would like us to turn our attention to page 7, on the effects of the raids. The Second Deputy Prime Minister has given just a small dose of what happened in Lango and not what happened in Teso. I would like to give the House information on what happened in Katakwi and more so in Kapelebyong which I represent.  

On 12 December 2002, the Karimojong warriors forcefully came to the Kapelebyong Constituency. One month later, contrary to Article 24 of our Constitution, they started their usual thing. They intimidated my people physically and psychologically. So far, records show that between December and now, 17 people have been killed, 544 head of cattle have been raided. A number of rape cases have been witnessed. I know of one case of a woman whom one Karimojong wanted to rape, and when she resisted, the man shot at her thighs so that he would access what he wanted.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House and the country at large that there is slow and sure genocide taking place in Karamoja. Much as we are trying to address the issue of food, I think the disaster preparedness department should be helped to address the issue of war that is taking place in Karamoja. I will take give example. 

Inside Karamoja, the Jie are fighting Bokora, the Matheniko are fighting Bokora, the Pian are fighting Bokora and they kill themselves in tens or hundreds in one war and nobody stands up in this House to say what the Government of Uganda is doing to stop this event. We are quick to stand here to say we are giving posho and beans. What about these dead people? Will they rise to eat this posho and beans?  

Mr Speaker, I am strongly convinced that the Government has the ability to stop this kind of activity. I am only wondering if our good Government has the will to stop these activities. I remember very well on the 26 January 1986, His Excellency the President made a statement that this was not a mere change of guards but a fundamental change.  Much as the change has taken place in other areas, I do not think it has taken place there. All we have seen now is a change from militia to vigilantes to anti-stock safety unit, and now to LDUs. That is all; but the story is the same.

Now that this Government is making statements, I do not know whether they are changing to another Government or what. The supporters and sympathizers of the Movement in the area in Karamoja will be embarrassed because after 16 years of governance, Karamoja region, one of the areas the Ten Point Programme specifically highlighted to deal with, is still in the same situation that the NRM Government found it. We shall be very embarrassed and even worse.

Honourable members, I would like to turn our attention to page 2, number 6 which says that there is a general disruption of the economic activities in the Karamoja region. I would like to assure you that the activities in Karamoja have not only disrupted the activities in the Karamoja region, but it covers Kitgum, Pader, Lira, Katakwi, Kumi, Sironko and Kapchorwa. 

When I look at the report of the Second Deputy Prime Minister, I do not see Sironko, Kapchorwa, and Kumi and these are the areas that are affected by these problems

When I look at the activities that are taking place in Karamoja, I doubt if the description that the Second Deputy Prime Minister has given on page 1, number 2, of the Karimojong’s cattle rustler - I think these people are really terrorists - (Laughter)- and they should be dealt with like terrorists!  

What is the way forward? How do we think this problem should be settled? When we had a few problems in Kampala, a few thieves came and disturbed people in Kampala here, how did Government respond? They gave Wembley. Why do we not send a bigger Wembley and disarm all these people and we bring peace to the seven districts plus the three of Karamoja?

I also think that the disarmament process should resume and the money that Government puts in Karamoja should be utilised. There is a potential in Karamoja; all these NGOs are hurrying to give food. I wish these NGOs were turned round to deal with development activities in Karamoja. To turn round to exploit these minerals that are abundant in Karamoja; to turn around and set up a leather tanning factory in Karamoja, for example.  We have plenty of hides and skins in that area and these people can be made to produce.

MR LOOTE: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to supplement and inform my colleague. It is not only Karamoja’s potential but it is also wealth for this country. For example, the limestone, which is being carried to Tororo now is in tons and tons and over 40 lorries get to Karamoja almost everyday.

There is also marble, which comes to Jinja. So, Karamoja had the potential but the disarmament exercise, which took off very well and excellently, created high hopes for the people of Karamoja. They had hope that Karamoja will be part of this country. But because of the UPDF going to handle the insurgency in the North, that is why you are talking of killing now. There is a lot of fighting among the people within Karamoja, which Government should handle seriously. Thank you very much, for allowing me.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for that information. As I wind up, I would like to make two suggestions. One is in form of a question to the Minister of Defence. People in this region strongly believe that the will of the Government is not strong enough to solve the problem. If it is, then the army is letting us down. Shall we get clarification from the Minister of Defence to demonstrate that Government is willing to solve this problem once and for all?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the statement I referred to earlier on, which I intend to present to Parliament next week, will be a comprehensive statement on the North, including the question of disarmament in Karamoja. Thank you.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Thank you, Mr Minister. Finally, I would like to inform this House that there are a lot of problems in the leadership of the people of Karamoja. Nakapiripirit, for example, where the Minister goes, where the Chairman goes, some of our Members of Parliaments will never step. (Laughter). I wanted to ask your legal counsel so that we ask His Excellency the President to take over the governance of Karamoja until the disarmament exercise is done. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister for the statement he read to us and also to thank the Government for the effort put in food supplies to the Northern region.

Mr Speaker, I would like to express my sympathy to our brothers and sisters in the Northern region who are subjected to this problem. However, much as the Government cannot do much about the natural causes of drought, I always wonder why there is plenty of maize and beans that are exported to Zambia, Malawi and other countries, yet it is not surplus that is being exported. 

Yes, we need to export but we should first satisfy our people before we sell products off and leave our people to die of this problem. Mr Speaker, we had silos in Kyazanga, Kasese, Masese, and in Jinja but all these were passed onto private hands. 

I would like to ask the hon. Deputy Prime Minister whether the Government has any strategic plan in place as far as food security is concerned. We need to save our people from dying of hunger. If the Government had strategic food reserves, I am sure such a problem would not arise. So, I would like the hon. Deputy Prime Minister to explain to us whether there is a plan put in place for that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

DR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the hon. Deputy Prime Minister for the information he has given us. I want to draw his attention to the statistics which he has given us. They have, as of now, tripled. 

We have been suffering a lot from the rebel activities of Kony and in the last two months this had subsided a bit. People were thinking of going back to their own villages. However, as they were meditating to go back, the raids started. My constituency neighbour, hon. Omara Atubo, has talked of displaced people but I want to inform him that many of the displaced people from Otuke are residing in Moroto County. 

The latest information I have received is that they have covered one full parish of Adiya where they are residing now. The information I have, which I got from the local Government of Lira District, is that after the Kony raid, we have about 47,000 internally displaced people. But now, together with the Karimojong raid, we have over 100,000 displaced people. 

I have statistics pertaining to the different camps, which have been established in Lira Municipality. I can give you a copy later. What does this say? It shows that the situation has gone terribly bad. If within a period of two months displaced people’s numbers can rise from 47,000 to over 100,000, that means it is a disaster. I ask that as the Minister of Defence goes upcountry, I would even prefer that somebody from the Office of Disaster Preparedness accompanied him, assesses the situation and gives the hon. Deputy Prime Minister the details of this.  

Mr Speaker, I also want to bring it to the attention of the House that some of the people who are employed by this Government to assist it understand the situation seem to be doing contrary work. We have a situation in Lira District, in the name of the Deputy Resident District Commissioner. Last Saturday as he was addressing people at a function at St. Kizito Primary School, which got 64 first grades out of 64 candidates, he informed the people of Lango to return the cows of the Karimojong. That way, he is informing the Karimojong that, “the Langi have taken your cows, if they do not return them, come and collect them.” 

This is the Deputy RDC about whom we have been complaining to Government. We tell them that he is misinforming Government, and that he is destroying the Langi people, and we have prayed several times that he be removed from Lira District, but he has never been removed. The people of Lira District are beginning to think that Government has an agenda, through this Deputy RDC, of destroying the Langi people. We pray that Government, perhaps through the Office of the President, takes this matter very seriously. 

We are very concerned about this influx of refugees and with the conflict being created by the Deputy RDC between the Langi and the Karimojong. The Minister for Disaster Preparedness should begin to prepare for the remaining 70,000 people who will soon become refugees, or even lose their lives, because of such comments.  

We want Government to take this very seriously. We want the Office of Disaster Preparedness to get closer to the people of Lira District. If you go to Lira. you will not find these people in camps yet Government is talking of internally displaced people, not people in camps. I think those are two different ideas. They may be in camps because they have been displaced, but they may also not be in camps. Most of the displaced people from Lira District are not in camps and they have problems 

In my home in Lira town, I am keeping 70 people. The toilet is full; there is no water. I have always been praying for assistance but I have to part with what I am given from here as my salary, to keep these people. The food items which go to the district, are not reaching the people in the sub-counties - those who have not run to towns.

The displaced people of Otuke who are in Moroto are receiving no help. What do they do? They have resorted to clearing what is in the fields, all the animals that were left behind. It is a terrible situation. It is a disaster and we wish that Government would show itself more visibly and nearer to the people. It is the duty of Government to defend the lives and property of the people. Now that times are difficult, Government should be nearer and closer to the people. It should at least assist them in these small problems they are facing, so that they do not die. Thank you.

MR JONATHAN NYENDWOHA (Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first of all thank the Deputy Prime Minister for his statement, and the Government as a whole for the efforts they are making in feeding displaced people. 

However, I doubt the accuracy of the number the Deputy Prime Minister has given. I have read through the list and I do not see Masindi on his list. Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that there are a lot of displaced people in Masindi District, particularly in Kibanda.

THE SPEAKER: I thought the statement was confined to the Northern region, particularly Karamoja and Katakwi.

MR NYENDWOHA: I am coming to that, Mr Speaker. All these displaced people we have are not from anywhere else but the North. So, when we talk of displaced people from the North, these people in Masindi should be included. 

The impression I get is that these displaced people in Masindi are not catered for. If they are catered for, then they are catered for inadequately. May I know from the Deputy Prime Minister why the displaced people in Masindi have been excluded from the list? There are more than 10,000; they could even be 40,000. Thank you.  

MR JOHN ERESU: Mr Speaker, in the same spirit as the member who has been on the Floor, I seek the following clarification from the Deputy Prime Minister. We have been informed, and very loudly so, by the newspapers, most recent of which was Sunday Vision, that 400 head of cattle were found in the kraal of hon. Lokeris, Minister of State in Charge of Karamoja Affairs.

Along the same line, Mr Speaker, I seek another clarification. When the minister was contacted about the 400 head of cattle, he said they either belong to his brother or next of kin and they were paid as bride price. Yesterday, the honourable minister was on television, WBS, and he put out another statement that political opponents are just planting the allegations of the 400 cattle on him. It is no longer bride price now. We get reports –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: As you appreciate, the member who was on the Floor was talking about issues of Masindi. I thought you had stood to give information in respect of Masindi, but you are taking us to Karamoja. How shall we follow? Let him conclude and then we shall deal with your issue.

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, I wish to –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: But, is it on Masindi?

DR CHEBROT: Yes, not only Masindi, but I also want to seek clarification from the Deputy Prime Minister whether members of the Cabinet –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a problem here. The member is talking about not having included Masindi because Masindi is hosting a number of people from the North. I think that was his contribution. Let us follow that one instead of jumping here and there.

MR NYENDWOHA MUTITI: Mr Speaker, the information I have is that we have more than 100,000 displaced people from the North, in Masindi District. The Masindi Local Government has really been strained. It is giving services but it appears the Prime Minister’s office, responsible for displaced people, is not actually assisting Masindi District as a whole. Masindi District will also at one time give up because they lack assistance from the centre. 

I want to request the Deputy Prime Minister that when they are thinking of displaced people, Masindi should actually be the first, and it should be catered for adequately. Thank you very much.

MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, for really being outspoken on the crisis in Northern Uganda. Through him, our people have been helped, the international community has given us support, and we have survived for all these years because of such contributions; and we are very grateful.  

However, honourable minister, when you were contributing, you alluded to the fact that the Office of the Prime Minister is supporting some internally displaced persons outside the registered camps in Gulu, Pader and Kitgum. You know this matter is very contentious especially in Gulu because some of these camps were excluded, as some people in Government wanted a specific number of camps to be mentioned. 

A good number of camps were excluded and these people have not been supported at all. They have not been supplied with food relief at all. In my constituency, if I give the example of Bungatira sub-county, in Chope, in Layila, in Rukodi, in Ruwodobiru, people are displaced and they have been there for all these years and they have not received any food at all.  

My concern is whether you have been trying to find out if this food you have been sending from the Prime Minister’s Office actually reaches the people. This is because these people outside the camp have not received any food - to the best of my knowledge. 

Secondly, what is in Acholi sub-region is a humanitarian crisis. I want to associate my feelings with those of colleagues when they say we should not really focus on food relief alone. I have heard some colleagues alluding to the fact that food is not going to their areas because it is all going to the Acholi sub-region. I heard this from some of my colleagues from Karamoja and I felt bad because the situation in Acholi is completely different. 

People do not have homes, people do not have any property, people are completely displaced, and they are surviving on food relief. At least if we had animals like our brothers in Karamoja, we would not be desperate. At least we would be able to slaughter these animals and eat them. Unfortunately, our people do not have anything, not even goats. 

I urge Government that apart from food, more focus needs to be put on the areas of health, schools for displaced persons, and greater focus needs to be put on areas of water. There is a big crisis in these camps, especially during this season when most of the rivers dry up. Focus should also be put on shelter. We have seen these camps get burnt: Pabo, Amoro, and others. So, Government should also focus on assisting people there.

Pajule was overrun on the 23rd of January. The camps were completely burnt down, and people were displaced. The grass is all burnt, they cannot go out to get grass and re-build. So I think that in addition to food, Government should also focus on this area.

Lastly, I want to dwell on the question of assessment. I think there has always been a very wrong assessment about the population of the affected people, especially in the Acholi sub-region. Looking at the figures given here alone, it indicates that the displaced people in Gulu camps are 390,000. That therefore means that, according to the population census of this year, there are only 77,000 people who are not displaced. 

Looking at the population of Gulu Municipality alone, which stood at around 120,000 people in the last population census, it would give us a rough estimate. If you look at the population of Aswa County, people who are not in camps stand at the figure of 63,000. These are people who do not rely on food relief. In Omoro County, 50 percent of the population are actually not displaced, they are at home. In the areas of Kilak, especially in the periphery of Gulu Municipality, over 15,000 people are displaced. That gives us a total figure of 229,000 people not included in these statistics.

My colleagues from the Acholi sub-region know very well that we disputed the population census. After the last population census, we engaged the Ministry of Finance and the Population Secretariat in this matter because the estimate is wrong. Therefore, if we are to base our assessment on these estimates, then we are not going to reach our people.

The nature of displacement in Acholi sub-region is as follows: there are people who are living in recognised camps. These ones are being supported as the figures are given here. There are 390,000 people in recognised camps.

There are thousands more in unrecognised camps that do not get this relief food at all, and I have given you some of the names of these camps.

There are those who live in the perimeter of about 10 kilometres from the town centre of Gulu, who are themselves displaced. We call them “mobile displaced” because by evening they flock to town and sleep, and they go back home in the morning. These are in the thousands. Even when you look at the population of Gulu Municipality, you may not see them in camps but the people living there are actually displaced people. Gulu Municipality had very little population before this war erupted. 

So, my appeal is that this assessment needs to be re-done. We should critically look at this situation because our figures tell us that the population in Gulu alone is approaching 600,000 people. If we base our statistics on 390,000 displaced people, then we are sending very wrong signals. We are not going to get adequate support for whatever food relief we are looking for.

Lastly, Mr speaker, I want to urge Government, especially the Ministry of Defence that something should be done to make our people go back home and cultivate, this month and next month. We have been contacting some of the relief agencies and some donor countries and they have told us in no uncertain terms that they will not be able to support us with food relief from the month of May onwards. Therefore, the Ministry of Defence should do something. The Ministry of Defence should co-operate with the local people.

The incident which happened in Pajule on the 23rd, should not repeat itself. The local people informed the Army in advance that, “We are not safe, and things are going to be bad. You must prepare yourself and get ready because the rebels are likely to storm town.” Surprisingly, the rebels stormed at 6.30 p.m on three fronts. The first group went to Pajule Mission, the second group went to the trading centre and to the camps, and the third group went to the barracks. Those who went to the barracks engaged the Army up to morning.

There are tanks and Mambas in Acol-Pii and in Corner Kilak. These tanks could not even reinforce the forces that were holed up in Pajule, because they did not have fuel. The Mambas could not move because the Army did not have fuel! This is a shame. You come here and say, “Give us money to do the job,” and you cannot transform this into tangible things!

The Ministry of Defence should really wake up. We are tired of the propaganda war, of them deceiving people that things are okay. Things are very bad in the Acholi sub-region and therefore more effort should be put, more emphasis should be put, especially into the peace process. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have sufficiently covered the areas subject of this statement. I will only allow the minister who says he wants to clear something tarnishing his name, and then I will ask the responsible minister to respond.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, KARAMOJA (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. For the last two weeks there have been operations in Karamoja. Some were to flush out the Karimojong who are said to be disturbing neighbours in Lira and Katakwi more especially, and then there were also operations to recover some of the stolen cows, specifically from the areas where they are said to have entered.  

The first operation was in Katakwi. Cattle were rounded up, some of which were brought to the Katakwi area for identification. Identifications were made, those belonging to Karamoja went back, and those of other people went to the rightful owners.

Then there were also operations around Lira. I did not go there. The cattle there were also rounded up and I think a similar activity was done later - identification. Then recently there was an operation in the South to recover some stolen cattle from Kumi. I was told they were 14 cattle. What the Army did was to go and round up people’s cattle generally from a place where they were watering, from a dam. They brought them to a camp at Namalu Prison. 

The owners were requested to go and look for criminals and get the cattle, and possibly get the guns they used to steal cattle from the neighbours. I was informed about it. I drove there, we mobilised the population and we managed to recover 12 cattle and three guns from the raiders and handed over all those to the Army -(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr speaker, I really want to save this House time in a way, and also assist us to focus. I know that my good friend, Peter Lokeris, is Minister in charge of Karamoja. The issue he is talking about is a very important issue, which has recently taken place in Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. 

I am just wondering; in order to save time and allow us to focus on the statement of the Deputy Prime Minister, would it not be fairer to this House that the Minister in charge of Karamoja, hon. Peter Lokeris, makes his own statement later? This should enable us address it in the true sense of what it is all about, rather than divert us from the food situation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the matter arose because somebody here -(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: I understand, but I do not know whether you could rule on this?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I will come to that. When dealing with the Deputy Prime Minister’s statement, a member pointed out that some cattle were stolen. So the minister’s statement should be limited to that incident instead of going round.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. Since the matter he is trying to inform the House about seems to cover a slightly wider span of time, would it not be in order for him to put it down chronologically in writing so that we follow it in detail?

THE SPEAKER: I thought he was just going to confirm or deny the allegation and that would be the end of the matter. That is the limited statement which I expected.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On the 400 cattle, the cattle that was collected from the population at the dam and taken by the Army are the ones that are purported to be mine. The bull they said belongs to me and to my kraal, I have no kraal, and that bull, I do not know. 

What I am anticipating is to go to the courts of law to discover where this bull is and whose it is. I do not have any of those bulls. However, this problem of mine has become annual. You notice that they talk about me every year. It is now, I think, normal. Whenever they want to quote me, they do it. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Any response, honourable?

MR MWANDHA: Can we get a statement on Karamoja? Mr Speaker, part of my constituency covers Karamoja and - (Laughter)- and more and more people are becoming disabled because of the insurgency in Karamoja. The disarmament programme has caused more disability. So, we would like to get an official, well considered statement from the minister on the situation in Karamoja. 

The honourable member has made a very sensitive statement. He said that the Karimojong are killing themselves in big numbers, in tens and hundreds, and the Government is looking on in spite of the provision in the Ten Points Programme to cover that. Therefore, we need a proper statement on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister’s statement was in respect of food. The kind of statement you want should come from another minister, either the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Minister of Defence, on Karamoja. Let us deal with this one from the Second Deputy Prime Minister. Do you have any comments to make so that we –(Interruption)

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I want to thank colleagues for their comments and indeed the report. First of all, I consider it very important that the report is made. This will let people know what is happening, whether correctly or not, whether it satisfies your knowledge about what you know or not, a statement is made and you have now told us to what extent we are either off the target or not.

I want to comment on figures. These figures you are hearing here are not created in our heads. Each district has a District Disaster Committee chaired by the CAO of each district. The figures I read here are from your own districts. If you defer with these figures, you go back and compare notes. Here in Kampala we deal with figures from the CAOs, not from anybody else. 

Secondly, this report will continue to be made so long as the problem continues to be there. We shall continue to make the report, but definitely if it is not up to your standard, first of all, we do not know what your standard is. (Laughter). At least we tried our best. We shall try to make our report better in future. What I know, I cannot, as Minister of Disaster Preparedness, stand here and talk about health when I know they have done a lot of work in the sector. 

To include a health report here means that I must ask the Minister of Health to talk, then I ask the Minister of Defence to talk, literally all the Cabinet Ministers will have to talk about the situation in the North. For that matter we shall perhaps co-ordinate for the next report, with some colleagues, and then bring here reports that cover two, three, four areas. Then our colleagues will be happy. 

For those people who are not in the camps but live in their own areas bordering these default areas, I already have my Minister of State in the field to head an assessment team there. They will go and assess the situation. When they come back, we shall sit down and have a plan of how to approach these people wherever they are with whatever we have in terms of food, drugs or whatever. This is for people not only in the camps but also wherever they will be. This I have said here, and we shall do it.

Mr Speaker, this problem is being handled the best way we can. Whether people consider Government to have the will or not, we are trying. And I think that is a wrong statement. Government has the will, otherwise it would not be doing all that we are doing.

On the issue of Masindi, these people are not internally displaced. These are immigrants who moved in from one part of the country. (Laughter). Even before this problem in the North started, Masindi was already full of people. They are not internally displaced; they are already people of Masindi. They are paying taxes to the District of Masindi, they marry Masindi people; so they are not internally displaced. They should be considered as people of Masindi. They are settlers, they should be taken and handled with others –(Laughter)- they are not internally displaced. 

The issue of Karamoja should not be confused, Mr Speaker. When these people come to raid, they displace people at the same time. But it has always been like that. So you should actually appreciate when a minister stands here to talk about the problem. I am grateful that many of you have done so. But next time before I come here, I will call you people. We will have a meeting before we come here so that when we disagree, we shall disagree before but reconcile and present this paper together. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE SALE OF THE UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK LIMITED

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gerald Ssendaula): Mr Speaker, I would like to register my personal appreciation to the members of the ad hoc committee of this House, which prepared what was presented here in the House yesterday.  

We received maximum co-operation from the members of the committee and I am indeed sure they also appreciate that. There is no record in their report that the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda in any way stood in their way when they were preparing their report.

Mr Speaker, it is a matter of great regret that the first attempt to privatise Uganda Commercial Bank Limited, with the sale of 49 percent stake to Westmont in 1998, failed. It is with regret in that if it had succeeded, we would possibly not be debating UCBL now. We would have been debating something else. But it is extremely unfortunate that that effort did not succeed.

Currently we are locked up on issues that are centred on the law, the laws we enact here, the Constitution and so on. Why am I saying we are locked up on the laws we enact here? Basically we have two issues that need to be sorted out. Would the bank have been privatised under DRIC or should the Bank of Uganda have disposed of the bank? 

As you appreciate, we have a Bank of Uganda Act. That is the Act that establishes the Bank of Uganda. At the same time we have a law which governs the financial institutions. Within the Bank of Uganda law and in the Financial Institutions Statute, there are powers that are given to the regulator, in this case the Governor of the Central Bank. At the same time, we have the divestiture exercise which we are undertaking as of now, and that is also governed by a law. That law demands that public enterprises should be privatised under DRIC. This, I think, is the centre of all this.

I would like to say that fortunately it has been possible to successfully resolve UCBL. It is necessary to recognise what was achieved by the resolution of UCBL and, if any, were there realistic alternatives? The ad hoc committee has voiced many criticisms of the Bank of Uganda and the Government, but what cannot be denied is that the resolution of UCBL was amicably successful. 

First, it ensures the future safety and soundness of UCBL’s deposits to the fullest extent possible. This is by selling the controlling stake in UCBL to a strong international bank with a history of sound, successful banking, stretching 140 years, and with vast financial, managerial and technical resources at its disposal. Standard Bank Investment Corporation, the parent company of Stanbic, has worldwide capital amounting to over US$2,316 million.  

Let us not forget that UCBL has twice, in the space of the last ten years, been mismanaged into insolvency. The costs of this insolvency were borne by the taxpayers of this country.  

In the ten financial years, from 1988/1989 to 1997/1998, UCBL made a loss in nine of these years, and a profit in only one. When UCBL was first listed for divestiture in 1997, Government had to re-capitalise it by issuing to it bonds worth Shs 72 billion. As we stand now, because these were part of the assets that were sold, we have so far had paid Shs 48 billion. They were four bonds. Of these two have so far been presented.

If the sale of UCBL to Stanbic ensures that the UCBL never again goes bankrupt, the taxpayer and the people of Uganda will have reason to be grateful.

Secondly, the sale of UCBL to Stanbic maintains intact UCBL nation-wide branch network, which is vital for the country’s payment system for providing banking services in rural areas. Here I emphasise “in rural areas”. Again this is an achievement which cannot be dismissed. Banking in rural areas is not always a very attractive commercial preposition, but Stanbic are prepared to take on the challenge.

I would like to point out that while we, as Parliament, set up an ad hoc committee, there were also other interested parties. Our donors were equally interested in knowing how we had gone about resolving UCBL and accordingly the DIFIT, which is a UK Department for International Development, did finance evaluation of the resolution of Uganda Commercial Bank Limited. That financed the report, which was produced and distributed to all members of the House.  

I would like to quote - when I talk about branch network in the rural areas - what was stated by some of the banks that had been approached to take interest in UCBL. The report, on page 26 states, “we spoke with Mr Ofman, Head of Business Development of Barclays Africa. He told us that while Barclays was interested in buying certain assets of UCBL, they viewed the bank itself as attractive in view of its size, condition and record of profitability.” 

Then the Managing Director of Standard Chartered stated, “Standard Chartered had considered, very seriously, making a bid for UCBL and had sent a team of 10 bankers from its London Head Office to carry out due diligence. Despite the enthusiasm from local management, Standard Chartered’s decision not to proceed with the bid was driven by a number of factors including the size of UCBL branch network, the state of banks information technology system and UCBL’s business mix. A high percentage of its customer base did not fit the Standard Chartered market profiles.”

These are some of the statements of would be buyers of this bank. Some stated because of the nature and the type of customers that patronise UCBL, they were not interested in looking at it. 

Thirdly, the sale enabled the 10 percent equity stake in the merged UCBL/Stanbic Uganda Limited to be retained by Government for sale to the public through a stock exchange, thereby allowing the public to participate in the future success of the bank. This was possible to be negotiated against all odds. As you can imagine, someone may have a second opinion before deciding to go ahead with the merger. However, we retained the 20 percent value and sold 80 percent, as you instructed me. 

I now wish to deal with issues raised in the report of the ad hoc committee. I will start by explaining how the sale price was computed. The market value of UCBL, the price that an investor could be prepared to pay for its equity, was estimated between Shs 45,000,000,000 and Shs 60,000,000,000 based on conventional valuation techniques such as discounts cash flow and price-earning ratios, undertaken by a reputable accounting firm. 

For the sale of UCBL, Government received US$19.55 million, converting using a rate of exchange. If, for example, we were to use the exchange rate of Shs 1,800 to a dollar, an approximated US $19.55 to US $20 million, would be Shs 36 billion. However I can quote the figure that was there then, the Shs 34 billion, from Stanbic. Government also received Shs 8.6 billion, which was removed from UCBL immediately prior to the sale and transferred to the Bank of Uganda, thereby reducing the value of the bank sold to Stanbic by the equivalent amount. How did this come about? 

It will be extremely abnormal when you are selling an entity, for there to be cash, which cash cannot be equated and considered a surplus. We had to have that cash removed. When that cash was removed, it was taken into Bank of Uganda. That was part of what we also got. 

In addition, Government retained a 20 percent stake to UCBL, which has been converted into a 10 per cent stake in a combined UCBL/Stanbic. This 10 percent stake in UCBL/Stanbic was worth approximately Shs 15 billion given the market value to the combined bank, which is approximately Shs 150 billion. Consequently, Government has received the equivalent of Shs 58,000,000,000 from the sale of UCBL. 

If the estimated value was between Shs 45,000,000,000 and Shs 60,000,000,000, and you achieve Shs 58 billion, I really do not feel comfortable when you then say we under-sold or we did not get as much as we expected to get. You realise that even when you ask me to go and take a commodity to the market, I am going into the market to bargain with the others. Those with whom I am bargaining also tell me that the type of commodity you are offering has this problem, or the other problem and we cannot give you the final price that you want. 

Given that scenario, I think what we got, the Shs 58 billion, was extremely high. The Bank of Uganda should be commended for the effort they put into the negotiations. While it is important to look at the price received for the sale of UCBL, it is also important to note that Bank of Uganda sold UCBL to a bank with an international reputation for safety and soundness. The Bank of Uganda could have sold UCBL to an unsuitable buyer for a higher price, but this would risk a repeat of Westmont. The buyer would mismanage UCBL or even loot its assets such that the eventual loss incurred by UCBL would render the sale price meaningless. 

The point that I am trying to put across is the overall position of the bank.  If you are looking again at the report, as at December 2001, UCBL had total assets of Shs 473,000,000,000 billion. This is page 37. Shareholders’ funds were Shs 49.8 billion. The difference between these two is depositors’ money. Naturally, anybody who is dealing with such a bank has to be extra careful.

As you realise, the experience we went through in this very House - and when I say this very House, it does not necessarily mean the 7th Parliament. But I recall that during the 6th Parliament, when Bank of Uganda intervened in the Co-operative Bank, the International Credit Bank and in Greenland, a decision was made that all depositors should be paid 100 percent. That money came from the taxpayers. So when you are dealing with these assets, you have to be extremely careful and pass all the depositors’ money to a reliable bank that has a name to save. 

It is not a question of advertising and any top bidder will get the bank. If he got the bank under the understanding that there are heavy deposits, tomorrow, he could take all the depositors’ money after he has got the bank. Will the Government not continue to be reliable? While it is important to look at the price received, it is also important to note that this bank was sold to a sound bank. 

Mr Speaker, the ad hoc committee accused me of breaching an understanding given to Parliament on 31st December 2001 to retain 20 percent of UCBL shares for sale to the public. This can be explained as follows:

Stanbic purchased 80 percent of the equity in UCBL, leaving 20 percent of the equity with Government. The central words I am using are “20 percent equity”. I am looking at value, not percentage. This should be our starting point. I am looking at 20 percent equity; the value. 

It was a condition of sale imposed for prudent reasons by Bank of Uganda that Stanbic Bank and UCBL should be merged to form a single bank promptly after the conclusion of the sale agreement. This was necessary because it was not sound practice or healthy for two banks operating in one country to be owned by the same owner. What can happen in that kind of situation, if the same owners owned 80 percent in UCBL and on the other side they have Stanbic where they own 100 percent? You can see that they would have a problem deciding whether to attract more people to a business which they own 100 percent against attracting people to a business where they own 80 percent; where they know that the accruing profits will ultimately be on 80 to 20 basis.  So, naturally, it was necessary that a merger had to take place.  

To conclude the merger, Government exchanged its 20 percent equity stake in UCBL for a 10 percent equity stake in the merged bank. This was a very fair exchange of shares, implicitly valuing UCBL and Stanbic Bank (Uganda) on equal basis. But was this the case?  

Given what I said at the beginning, the low opinion that different banks had of UCBL and the opinion that you all have as owners of the bank - you know exactly what has happened. You have got to appreciate that it is an issue of privatisation when we are looking at a bank in this order. That it was a bank that was being subjected to chits from politicians, “give so and so a loan”, and then we ended up with non-performing loans.

Given that background, I want you to appreciate that an  international bank like Stanbic to come out and say, “we accept to be rated at the same level, so we shall give you 10 percent.” I think this was a very fair exchange of shares, implicitly valuing UCBL and Stanbic Bank on equal basis. 

 I wish to add that Stanbic Bank had originally offered Government only 4.4 percent equity stake in the merged bank, but after long negotiation, Stanbic and Government eventually settled on a 10 percent equity stake.  Government’s 10 percent stake in the merged bank will be offered for sale to the public on the stock exchange once the merged bank has established a strong track record of profitable operations.  

In addition to that, Stanbic bank has confirmed to me in writing that they will be putting the 10 percent, which we retained as Uganda, and another 10 percent of Stanbic Bank.  So Ugandans will have 20 percent to buy on the market.  They will buy the 10 percent, which they own and the 10 percent of Stanbic bank. So they will own 20 percent in the merged bank. (Applause).

The proposal that UCBL should be taken out of the statutory management of Bank of Uganda and handed back to Government and that UCBL should be privatised under the PERD Statute was not possible to implement.  

Honourable members, you should appreciate that the Bank of Uganda statutory responsibilities as a bank regulator meant that this resolution could not be implemented without seriously undermining its responsibilities and authority as the bank regulator in Uganda.

At the beginning of my address, I did clearly say to you that our problem today about this UCBL is nothing other than the issue of the various laws we pass on the Floor of the House.  We passed a law which gives the powers to Bank of Uganda on how to deal with banks.  Even those who participate in the constitutional making did participate effectively and said that the Bank of Uganda should be independent.  

Given that scenario, I want you to put yourself in the position of a regulator. And if we are really going to attract investors in this country, we have got to ensure that the powers of the regulators are not adjusted from time to time to suit our conditions. Because the same regulator is the one who only yesterday was dealing with Greenland bank; they said closed, sold and moved.  The same regulator is the one who closed the Co-operative Bank, and then this is how we are going to deal with it.  People cannot understand our message if we are changing goal posts everyday. A regulator clearly must retain his powers, and if we remove the regulator’s powers or reduce them in any other form, then we are inviting danger.  

Once a failed bank such as UCBL has been taken into statutory management by the bank regulator, the regulator can only lift the statutory management when the bank has been successfully resolved, and the future of its deposits are assured to the greatest extent possible. Even if the failed bank has been nursed back into solvency under statutory management, as was the case with UCBL, the Bank of Uganda cannot hand back this failed bank to existing owners, because the owners must bear some of the blame for the bank’s failure in the first place.

Here I am not narrating anything new because we contributed to its failure at the time of divesting it when we gave it to Westmont. Westmont started playing with the depositor’s money and there we are. The regulator would be questioning, “ when I hand it back, aren’t they going to look for another Westmont and we end up in the same position?” Then the regulator will be looked at as a laughing stock. So the regulator could not afford that kind of situation (Applause).

For the Bank of Uganda to do so, it would create more hazards in the banking industry, because it would effectively send a message to bank owners.  It is not only to us but even to other bank owners that there are no penalties for gross mismanagement of the banking industry, even if it results into bank failure.  Instead, the Bank of Uganda must resolve the failed bank by finding new owners who can be relied on to manage the bank prudently and to safeguard its deposits. This type of resolution of failed banks is carried out all over the world by bank regulators. In Uganda, similar bank resolutions were also implemented by Bank of Uganda in respect of Sembule Bank and TransAfrican Bank, which were taken over by the Bank of Uganda and sold to new owners.

Honourable members should also appreciate that the sale of UCBL was not a normal privatisation. It was a resolution of a failed bank. This point must be appreciated. This is a first failed bank. A bank is fundamentally different from any other type of business enterprise because of the fact that it holds deposits of the public. In the case of UCBL, this entailed a very large amount of deposits - approximately Shs370 billion at the time.  

The protection of those deposits must take precedence over any other objective of privatisation, especially where the bank involved has a long history of bank failure, as was the case with UCBL. This is why the Bank of Uganda Statute clearly gives Bank of Uganda the responsibility for resolving failed banks and why it was not appropriate to reprivatise UCBL under the PERD Statute.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, before I go to the next point, to react to what I heard from my colleague when he was presenting his report. He said that now that we are about to deal with a new Financial Institution Bill, we should address this matter. I really call upon you, honourable members, to stand up and be counted on this matter.  Let us leave the powers of regulator with the regulators.  

I would also like to be understood that this goes further in the soliciting of who would be the possible buyers. I would like us to look at page 18 of the report.  On the 15th February 2001, the Governor of Bank of Uganda appeared before the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Economy and Finance to answer questions on UCBL. He announced that the BOU in conjunction with the consultant (WPA) would shortly dispatch information to prospective buyers in order to test their appetite of the market for sale of UCBL.  

The market testing involved approaches to 11 International Banks which were engaged in retail banking in Sub-Saharan Africa.  These were ABSA, Banco Santanda, Barclays, BNP, Citibank, Fortis, HSBC Equator Bank, Nedbank, Societe Generale, Stanbic, and Standard Chartered.   

When we talk about retail business in the banking industry, we mean branch network where you receive money at the counter and pay out in a manner that you are seeing most banks do in this country except with Citibank.  

In this country, it is only Citibank that is involved in wholesale or corporate banking.  The rest are all retail banks. In a situation like we are in, we had to attract a bank that was familiar with operating a branch network in Sub-Saharan Africa. In the absence of that experience, you will be in trouble, because you would have all sorts of things. At some stage we had to advice them to split this bank into two so that we sell the urban branches separate from the rural branches, but we could not afford that kind of situation. So, the best that could be done was to go out physically and persuade them. That is the process that was undertaken. 

As I come to the tendering method, I know this was the centre of criticism in the report, that we did not advertise.  Yes, to advertise when you know out there, there is three hundred and seventy billion; why not answer that I am going to pay fifty billion?  Why not answer that I am going to pay one hundred billion for this bank? Why; are we not getting another Westmont in this respect?  

So, this is why we devised this method. We were able to follow and this is when people started making statements like the one I read earlier where someone said, “no, we are not going to participate because the number reduced to about five”- including these two, and these two are the ones who gave the answers that I read.  I can repeat.  He told us that while Barclays was interested in buying certain assets from UCBL, they viewed the bank itself as unattractive in view of its size and condition of profitability.  

Then another one said: “Despite the enthusiasm from local management, Standard Chartered decision not to proceed with the bid was driven by a number of factors, including the size of UCBL’s branch network; the state of the bank’s Information Technology System; and UCBL’s business mix (a high percentage of its customer base did not fit Standard Chartered’s target market profile). 

When I go to the process of tendering, you will appreciate that we had to resort to the method that we used.  The ad hoc Committee criticised Bank of Uganda for its method of approaching potential bidder to solicit interest, claiming that this failed to generate competitive bids. This criticism is unwarranted. It is extremely unlikely that any other suitable buyer would have come forward to bid for UCBL if BOU had adopted another method, such as advertising the UCBL for sale in the media. The fact that BOU approached the entire international Banks who have investments in retail banks in Africa, no other reputable bank outside this group is likely to have been interested at all in purchasing UCBL.  

It should be appreciated that quality bank investors are very scarce and were certainly not queuing up to buy UCBL, which is not a particularly attractive investment for a private investor, given its long list of poor financial performance, including bank loans and large losses. 

It would have been easy for BOU to have attracted investors who were wholly unsuitable to own and manage a commercial bank, such as Westmont, and these investors would have offered a higher price than did Stanbic. But the BOU would have been grossly irresponsible and would have failed in its statutory responsibility to protect deposits if they had sold UCBL to anyone but a quality bank investor which has the financial and managerial resource to manage UCBL prudently in the interest of its depositors.  

Unfair treatment to DFCU: This was another issue which was raised, but this report extensively deals with DFCU.  It deals with its offer, which among others, included what they were looking for. I can read it if you permit me. The price which they offered, and finally, why they were not found suitable.  They were not found suitable because, compared with the package that they were demanding, it was much higher than the package that was being demanded by Stanbic, but you can read for yourself on page 30 and 31, paragraph 72, and 72.1. 

In any case, within the report, there is no specific point mentioned about DFCU being mistreated by this or the other. Because in the one incident that was stated, the Governor straight away, after it had been brought to his attention, he invited the negotiating team of the DFCU.  The only difference here was that the meeting took place on Friday and the exercise was to end on Monday, but negotiations of this nature are marathon.  A meeting on a Friday is as good as a meeting on a Monday. They had to meet on Friday, Saturday and Sunday because they were to close on Monday.  So, any problem DFCU may have had was solved.  

Not only that, even in the news, DFCU came out clearly and stated that they were not badly treated. So, I do not know what else I can provide.  

Merger ratio: It is a mistake to believe that, because UCBL has more deposits than Stanbic (Uganda) Ltd, it is worth more to investors on the stock market.  How do people decide to buy shares on the market?  You have got to base on the profitability of an enterprise when the markets open. 

Honourable members, now that we have a capital market, kindly when you go in there, you should look for profitability of the company before you buy shares.  This is the potential of the business in which you want to buy shares.  

I hear my friends in the committee - I really beg your pardon. There must have been something else, but as far as I am concerned, you could not equate the two - where someone is offering shares of Stanbic and another one is offering shares of UCBL and then you say “no, I am going to buy UCBL”. You must be extremely patriotic, and patriotism in finance is not very common – (Laughter and Applause)

No rational investor would believe that UCBL had better prospects for earning future profits than Stanbic. Therefore, Stanbic is bound to be valued more highly than UCBL by stock market.  Investors buy shares on the basis of hardheaded decisions about the prospects of earning profits. Consequently, the BOU did extremely well to negotiate with Stanbic for “a merger of equals” of UCBL and the Stanbic (Uganda) Ltd.  

I hope members of this House will one day pass a motion to register appreciation to the work done by BOU. (Applause).  By the way, I have only said “one day”. It is possible because today you are looking at things differently. But I am only saying “one day”, let it go in the Hansard, that one day, you will sit here and pass that resolution because already we are seeing a lot. The branch here on Parliamentary Avenue has already been refurbished and the ATM machine is operating; it is worthy walking in and bank.  

Now, Mr Speaker, there is no reason why prices which Ugandans pay for shares in the merged bank, when these shares are floated on the stock market, will be unfair to Ugandans. The price which they share on the market, should reflect the value of those shares to investors.  These shares are tradable commodities and the price depends on how the commodity is. If it is a good commodity, therefore, the price is good. So, as far as I am concerned, I am convinced that the Ugandans will certainly be extremely happy to be buying shares at a price when offered on the market in a merged UCBL/ Stanbic because the shares will be strong.  

The merger will boost the value of Government’s shareholding in the merged bank because of its efficiency, improvement generated by Stanbic bank management. The merged bank will therefore become more profitable, and thus each of its shares will become more valuable.  It is unfair for Government to sell shares which have increased in value for higher price.  In any case, Ugandans are free to choose for themselves whether or not to purchase shares in the merged bank. 

I will just give a small example.  Recently there were shares offered and people made applications, and we were even made to believe that they were over subscribed because this was a point which was being made, that the sale of the 20 per cent of shares should have been made before the merger.  But you are not going to make people line up like the way we used to do when electing LCs in the 1980s.  You say, “Look, you must line up”.  No, people choose to go and buy.  

Recently shares were offered and people applied, and we were told that they were over subscribed. But when it came to actual payment for these shares, we were being told another story altogether. So it is not automatic that the process would have been delayed substantially to the extent that the bank would be damaged. 

I heard this morning on the radio a statement to the effect that what was the need for a hurry; the bank was in competent hands and it was well managed. But the bank would eventually deteriorate. You would not stop politicians from issuing notes or taking their voters to that bank to say, “please, help this one. He has got a tender, tomorrow he is going to be paid.  Please, give him a loan of Shs 100 million” Eventually payment would be made and the money diverted, and the bank would degenerate to the same position.

Recommendations: Partnership in the government system.  Mr Speaker, as I reduce my tone, allow me to say this is a very welcome statement. It is stated that ad hoc committee’s recommendation– and I will read the first one under partnership in the recommendations, because it requires to be read for all of us to appreciate and then accept that we are moving together in the much needed partnership. This is on page 7. 

The committee recommends that “while there must be separation of powers between the three arms of Government, namely, the Executive, the Legislature, and the Judiciary as essential for democracy, the three must work in partnership and must show mutual respect for the good governance of the country and the benefit of all Ugandans.” You should disregard the resolution. Allow me to stop at that level before I go to the next one.  

Sir, this is what we must all strive to achieve because we are all serving the same master. We are certainly willing, and this is what happened even when the committee was preparing its report.  

There was that partnership between the Executive and the Legislature. We gave them all the information that they needed and that co-operation will continue to be provided. There was no way we were going to talk about – now when we go to the next stage in this partnership you are recommending, and this is where we start to differ.  I will differ from you on the basis of principle and I want to differ from someone on principle because I know it is a principle.  

The ad hoc committee recommendation that a law should be enacted to make parliamentary resolution legally binding would be unconstitutional. This is very clear. I mean, you will have changed the mode of how laws are enacted in this country. I beg to move that this resolution be- that this be done that everybody should tomorrow move on the left as against moving on the right and so forth; and when we pass it, then we say that is law. I think that will be going very far, Mr Speaker. It would breach the cardinal principle. 

As it is, these laws take time to be passed. As you will appreciate that there are stages we go through, the Westminster system that we copy, where we have a first reading, then second reading and we debate. That process is extremely important because you alert the people you govern that I am going to enact that law.  That is why you do the first reading. I mean if the principle is - I came to this House in 1980 and I have been looking at all these principles and I have been seeing exactly what goes on- (Interjection)- I have over stayed indeed, you are right.  

The position is, the idea of a first reading is to alert those who are governed that “I am due to pass this law”. The minute it is read, they hear it is gazetted, they read about it and then they can even make a contribution through their Members of Parliament. But for you to say that when you pass resolutions here, they will become law, let us not do that please. That is not democracy. It will breach the cardinal principle of division of power. 

Parliament is a legislature and it should confine its activity on legislation and over sight of the Executive.  It will usurp the Executive role by imposing illegally binding resolutions on Executive functions, including function of the central bank.  

If Parliamentary resolutions were legally binding, there would be no point at all in having a Cabinet or any ministers. Instead civil servants would simply implement parliamentary resolutions and Parliament would have turned itself into an Executive. 

This is my view on this and it is straightforward. I am willing to debate on this at an appropriate time. Maybe, when I sit down, you may tell me your views.

Selling of Banks by Bank of Uganda: There is no Lacuna in the Financial Institutions Statute of 1993, as stated in the report. The Bank of Uganda, as a bank regulator, must have the authority; and I repeat, an authority and the power to intervene and resolve any bank where this is necessary to protect its deposits, irrespective of whether or not the bank is solvent. 

This is yet another area, because you might think that the Financial Institutions Statute only confines itself to insolvency. But it has also to look into the behaviour and ability of shareholders and its management.  So they should be permitted to continue with this. 

 A bank which has been restored to solvency through BOU statutory management, must still be resolved successfully to protect its depositors. It cannot simply be handed back to its owners because this would be a repeat of the same management, which caused the bank to fail in the first place.

Independence of the Central Bank. I do not need to repeat this. I have stated this time and again, and I think that independence, as enshrined in our Constitution, should be maintained.  The moment we start, now that we are in the process of constitutional review and someone gets the temptation of reducing the independence of the Central Bank, then you will have closed the doors to investment in this country.

I am clear. It is not only on the Dukawala investments and so forth, but it will be on all the investments, because the operation of the bank in a nation is extremely important.  If the Central Bank has no power to control these banks, then one cannot do business in that kind of country.

Maintenance of branches: Under the sale agreement, Stanbic must keep open, for two years, all the essential branches, which include all branches in towns with district headquarters. This is a point that was undertaken. 

There is a point in your report which says: “then what about the subsidy element?” I think we need to examine this point together, considering the move we have taken on Micro finance, the presence of the Post Bank and so forth. I think we can gradually address the issue of subsidy, which is mentioned within the agreement as we move along.

Payment into the consolidated fund: Mr Speaker, this is an ongoing process and certainly the Bank of Uganda will indeed pay the sale proceeds into the Consolidated Fund.  But I would like to mention that we have two issues that need to be resolved. One, normally the sale of motor vehicles is automatically credited on the consolidated account. But the sale of enterprises, as you appreciate there was a law which demands that the sale of enterprises and its proceeds must go into another account. So we have to sort out this with the Auditor General, and the Attorney General has to ascertain where the proceeds from this sale will certainly land. If they were to go into the consolidated fund account, they would certainly go into the consolidated account.

Escrow Account Transaction: Certainly, they are subject to audit by the Auditor General and it had been given an update; because you could not, in a case like this when you have big amounts of money, just keep them there. I have been told by the Central Bank that these Escrow Accounts were put in a fixed deposit account, which is due to mature on the 21st of February this year.  So they can renew for six months, but the beauty about it is that the Shs 3.9 was invested in the Escrow Account. 

The investment is due to mature on the 21st, which is only two days away. So if at that stage, the exercise is either removed- but as it is, there is a clause in the agreement, which controls and manages the Escrow Account.

Liabilities due for payment: Liabilities for redundancy payments, long service awards, and gratuities are being paid as and when they fall due. So far, redundancy payment for 280 staff have been met.

Value for Excluded Assets. Mr Speaker, the status of UCBL excluded assets, the total is Shs 1,487,292,432.  Now the most interesting point, the biggest item there was the Nkrumah Road Premises.  This was properly advertised and sold, but while its value on our records was Shs 1,300,000,000, it was sold for Shs1,900,000,000 realising a substantial profit- (Applause)- for almost Shs 2,000,000,000.  So this one is available and it is tabled there.  

The Headquarters building: Before I come to headquarters building, I want to deal with the taxes on consultancy payments. The consultancy payments were made and Bank of Uganda is in the process of negotiating with URA to get the taxes paid. In line with what you put in the recommendations, we should be in a position, within three months, to provide you with a report as to how the taxes have been paid.

The Headquarters building: Yesterday, in the course of discussion, there was talk that one time the headquarters building was included and another time it was not included and so forth.  This point was exhaustively explained to the committee, and of course, it is not covered in the committee report.  However, considering that it had been raised on the Floor for the few minutes people spoke, I felt I owe you an answer and the answer is UCBL was sold as a going concern.  

In the instructions to bidders by Bank of Uganda, bidders were offered the choice of excluding a limited number of assets and liabilities which it was thought could not be attractive for any purchaser.  This was because the Bank of Uganda did not want to risk jeopardising a possible sale of UCBL by requiring a purchaser to buy assets which were not wanted. In some cases, a purchaser could have turned up and said, “I do not want that.” And that would not be essential for the long term future of UCBL. The assets offered for exclusion included the headquarters building. Any assets, which the purchaser wanted to exclude from the sale would have to be matched with an equivalent –(Mr Musumba rose _)

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Musumba has been really –(Laughter)

MR SSENDAULA: Mr Speaker, it is most probable that he was the right choice to deputise me, and as my deputy, he has that role to see that I do not collapse- teamwork.  

The assets offered for exclusion included the headquarters building. Any assets which the purchaser wanted to exclude from sale, would have to be matched by an equivalent value of liability so that the net worth of UCBL was unchanged by exclusion.  So, the Government and the buyer suffered no loss or gain from exclusion.  

Therefore, if the headquarters building which was in the books valued at about 15 billion had been excluded from the sale, this would have had to be matched with Shs 15 billion worth of UCBL’s liability. These liabilities would have to be transferred to UCBL, and to the Bank of Uganda along with the assets which were to be excluded. So, when they came in and included it, it was a blessing.  

Anti-trust laws: While anti-trust law is a good idea in principle, Uganda should not rush to pass such legislation. It is necessary to draft the legislation very carefully if it is not to discourage investment by private investors in markets where economies of scale are a normal feature.  Eventually in all countries, a few large banks dominate the banking industry. That is the nature of banking as it is, with many other industries where economies of scale are important.  

The merged Stanbic/UCBL commands a share of the market.  It has approximately 32 per cent of deposits but a share of one third does not constitute a monopoly. UCBL/Stanbic will still face strong competition from other banks in Uganda.  

The legal authority for resolving failed banks: That one, I do not need to repeat. I think the point here is that I need to state or involve the Attorney General. This was also another point that came out very strongly, that we did not involve even the Attorney General of this country, etcetera.  

Mr Speaker, again I go back to the first point I made.  It is the issue of the laws we pass in this very House.  We have two laws at play.  Uganda Commercial Bank exercise through privatisation arrangement- the Attorney General is on a day-to-day basis represented in DRIC, so he is involved in all the negotiations in DRIC. But this bank was being resolved by Bank of Uganda which is set up by an Act of Parliament, which is independent with its legal department, with powers to hire its lawyers and so on.  

They had to draw up their agreement. When the agreement was drawn up- I had to refer the agreement to the Attorney General, because I had to sign it on behalf of Uganda Government. But for purposes of negotiating the agreement, the regulator carried out the negotiations because it was the regulator who was selling.  

I referred the agreement to the Attorney General and the Attorney General gave his legal opinion and I read: 

“The Attorney General of the Republic of Uganda 
Legal opinion of the Attorney General of the Republic of Uganda on the agreement for the sale of majority 80 per cent shares in Uganda Commercial Bank Limited. 

 I, Francis J. Ayume, Senior Counsel, the Attorney General of the Republic of Uganda being required to give this legal opinion pursuant to the terms of the Sale Agreement dated November 20th 2001 between Bank of Uganda and the Standard Bank Investment Corporate Limited and the Government of the Republic of Uganda in Uganda Commercial Bank, hereby state as follows: - 

By virtue of the provisions of Article 119 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am the Principal Legal adviser to the Government of the Republic of Uganda and counsel therefore, competent to give this legal opinion.  

I have reviewed the agreement and I am of the opinion that: (a) The Governor of the Bank of Uganda and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have requisite power and authority to execute and deliver the Agreement and to perform their obligation under this Agreement. 

(b) The Agreement constitutes binding, legal and valid obligations on the Bank of Uganda and the Government of Uganda and is enforceable against both of them in accordance with its terms  

(C) Neither of the execution nor the delivery by Bank of Uganda and the Government of Uganda of the agreement nor the consummation of the transaction contemplated herein will violate any material agreement, commitment, judgement or order to which both are party or contravene any law or regulation having applicability to both of them.  

(d) All consent, authorization or approvals of or waivers or exemptions by or filings of the registration with any Government agency or any person, required to be made or obtained in connection with execution or delivery by the Governor of the Bank of Uganda and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development of the agreement have been made or obtained.  

Dated at Kampala, Uganda, this 28th day of December 2001.  Signed by the Attorney General.”

 I table the document.  Because this was topical, we did not defer. No! It was the law that was controlling all of us.  

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of the signature: There was a signature of the Governor and of the minister. This again was based on a quotation from the Bank of Uganda Act, where it is stated that this should happen or this should not have happened.  Surely, I have explained that the Bank of Uganda legal personnel came to the committee and explained the procedure clearly where it is required to have a Bank of Uganda seal and where it is not required to have a Bank of Uganda seal.  

It is also stated in the law which governs the Bank of Uganda, and this is in the Bank of Uganda by-laws.  There are documents which require the signature and the seal of the Governor of the Bank of Uganda, and there are those on which the Board can authorise another officer to sign on behalf of the Bank of Uganda. So, the Bank of Uganda Board did resolve that Katimbo Mugwanya, the Executive Director, Bank Supervision, was duly authorized by the Board to execute the agreement.  

Under Bank of Uganda by-law, the Governor can delegate authority to sign agreements that do not involve sale of Bank of Uganda assets.  The Sale Agreement had no official seal because the only documents, which require Bank of Uganda seal, are agreements for sale or purchase of land, contracts of guarantee, powers of attorney, licenses, mortgages and leases.  This is stated in this and I table it.  

The sale agreement contained a number of conditions, among which were approval by the South African Reserve Bank, which is a regulatory body in South Africa for all the banks, and that is where the Stanbic bank is headquartered.  

So, before proceeding, there were certain conditions that had to be met. The Stanbic Board of Directors in South Africa, that included other conditions also of the Board of Stanbic Bank. These approvals were subsequently obtained in January and December 2001 effectively.  

In the absence of the approvals at the time of signing, UCBL Committee advised the Governor that as a strategic move, he would not sign the agreement himself but designate an appropriate counterpart, a senior officer of the bank to sign. That was exactly what happened.  

As far as the minister was concerned, because I was the seller, I was not involved as the regulator. It was the other side; it was the Governor who needed a regulator.  So, as a regulator, I signed because this act had to be undertaken.  

The sale agreement which effected the exchange of the Government of Uganda’s remaining shares in UCBL to a 10 percent share in the merged bank, was signed by the Governor in September 2002 as conditions required by any approval by the regulator.  

I would like to end with a point expressed here as a point of displeasure. This point of displeasure, Mr Speaker, is rather unique, unique in the sense that –(Interjection)- page 31 of the report.  

Parliament’s displeasure: The committee wishes to request Parliament to resolve as follows: “That Parliament expresses displeasure with the Minister of Finance and the Governor, Bank of Uganda for disregarding the PERD Statute and the Resolution of Parliament and insisting on selling a solvent bank under the Financial Institutions Statute instead of through the PERD Statute”.  

This point is debatable and defendable. When you look at this very report, it is stated that the Financial Institution Statute is said not to be clear because when you go to page 19 and read paragraph 4.62, Bank of Uganda decided to invoke the purported supervisory power and independence and proceeded to sell UCBL under the Financial Institution Statute. 

 The Committee observed that the current law is silent on the course of action when the bank ceased under insolvency regains under the Statutory Management. Given that argument, how then do you come to charge me? (Laughter).  You yourself are saying this thing is not clear in the law and then you turn round and say I have not applied the law.  

Mr Speaker, entering into a sale agreement of this magnitude without involving the Attorney General as required by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda: I have already presented the opinion of the Attorney General. Now, where is this act of displeasure? I presented the opinion here.  Please, bear with me.  Kindly accommodate me here. (Laughter). 

On recruiting consultancy without competitive bidding, I have explained exactly how all these things came about.  

In conclusion, I plead that we all co-operate and resolve Uganda Commercial Bank once and for all. I think it would be very, very good for everybody to hear that, at last, there is no Uganda Commercial Bank on the Floor of Parliament. We should conclude it so that the investors feel comfortable, because they have already started bringing in their money to make the bank more attractive to the Ugandan population. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, every member did get a copy of my statement, but as is required, I table the report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister.  Honourable members, you have got the two sides. You have the report of the Ad hoc Committee and now the rejoinder from the Minister of Finance, apparently also on behalf of the Bank of Uganda. His rejoinder is made up of the statement he read, and I think he was referring to the report which he has tabled. 

 I think the proper way of handling this debate on the motion is to look at three documents and other papers that have been presented. I had expected to complete this debate today or tomorrow but in view of the magnitude of the documents, I think we may have even to extend to next week to give opportunity to most of you to make your contributions on the two cases as presented.  

Therefore, I think it is proper for you to go and study the two cases and then tomorrow we shall start the main debate on the motion. With this, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 February 2002 at 2.00pm.)

