Monday, 14 February 2005

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to adjust the Order Paper and make provision after the Ministry of Health, for the Ministry of Defence to make a statement on the security situation in the country.  

Secondly, I would like to appeal to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to convene and reconstitute their leadership because there is work, which has to be done. Will you please do that so that we can complete the outstanding work; or if you already have, you can inform me.

MR JOHN ODIT: Madam Speaker, if that committee is not ready, I think there are other items on the Order Paper, which can be brought forward. We have been having our Bills, which are pending for a long time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We want to complete the UPDF Bill; it has some three clauses left, then the others will come forward.

2.37
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, permit me, under an unnamed rule of procedure, to convey on behalf of the male Members of Parliament happy Valentine’s Day wishes to our female counterparts. (Laughter)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, St Valentine’s Day is a day for lovers and that is well known to our colleague, hon. Aggrey Awori. Hon. Aggrey Awori is extending a love message to all female colleagues in Parliament when we know very well that he has got his wives -(Laughter) - including some from Kigezi and Kabale District in particular.  Is hon. Aggrey Awori in order to actually even violate Article 33 of the Constitution which talks about the dignity of women, that it must be promoted and protected? Is he in order to extend a blanket love message to all female Members of Parliament when we know very well that we are not his lovers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I think it is out of order for you to generally love everybody in this House. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do apologize and especially to my counterparts who are appropriately dressed for the occasion. (Laughter)

However, Madam Speaker, on a much more serious note, I want to raise a matter of concern regarding the dignity of the august House. Madam Speaker, I have no intention of breaching the normal procedure of separation of powers, but matters before the court cannot be discussed in the august House.

Madam Speaker, when one of us encourages his supporters to hurl insults at the institution of Parliament and the Office of the Speaker, going out with placards on a national television, Uganda Television, saying “The institution of Parliament is corrupt, the Speaker is corrupt, they have eaten money”, so that they prejudice the decision on a certain Member of Parliament belonging to a certain institution of the state - My concern, Madam Speaker, is really to call upon my colleagues to desist from the idea of lumping the institution and the persons together. It is very sad indeed.  

Madam Speaker, really through your office, and probably with your support, should any person come up with that type of situation, I think he should be called to order. The institution of Parliament is very important and your office particularly is very important to encourage and counsel members of the district, the lumpens and other people matching through the streets of a particular town with placards calling Parliament and the Speaker corrupt.

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on what kind of steps to be taken, because on my own, I have the capacity to take the law in my hands within the precincts of Parliament, where I cannot be prosecuted, but the institution of Parliament should be respected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have also noted with concern that the reputation of this House and its integrity has been brought to question in that particular matter. So, in the meantime I think I will invite the hon. Member for a meeting so that he can understand and appreciate what transpired in the meeting of the Appointments Committee and try to put an end to this very dangerous precedent, which has been set into motion.   

I appeal to other Members, please, you know, you make big news when you are on television and otherwise, but the integrity of this House should never be put into question unless it is very, very clear. Thank you.

MR AWORI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to welcome my colleague, hon. Simon Mayende, to sit on the Front Bench. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mayende of Samia-Bugwe South took oath this morning. So he is lawfully sitting there. (Applause)

2.45
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of concern regarding the way graduated tax is being collected in my district, because the situation is getting out of hand.  People are being beaten up; houses are being broken into under the guise of collecting graduated tax.  

Madam Speaker, we have raised this matter with our district authorities, but it seems they have not taken heed and the time has come for the central government to take action. Only last Friday, a young boy of 15 years was very seriously beaten just because people thought because of his big body; he should have paid graduated tax. When he produced the birth certificate, it was discovered that he was under age; he should not have paid graduated tax.

Madam Speaker, the situation has become so bad that now in some areas of my constituency people are not even sleeping in their houses, because the tax collectors raid the villages during the night to collect graduated tax. I was in the sub county of Kabulasoke yesterday in Gomba County and people told me that these days the men are no longer sleeping in their houses for fear of these tax collectors.  

Madam Speaker, my colleague, hon. Kityo, is around to witness with me; he also had the same nasty incident in his area.  So Madam Speaker, much as we appreciate the need for collecting revenue for the districts, I think people have got to be humane. Indeed, Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate - the Minister for Local Government is not around –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is here. 

MR KALULE: He is here. So, I am appealing to him to take immediate steps; at the worst let him at least come out with a statement, otherwise the situation is getting out of hand. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you please establish what is going on in Mawokota and Gomba?  

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I only want to say that I have taken note and we shall take the necessary steps immediately, Madam Speaker.

MR HENRY KITYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like clarification from the Minister of Local Government whether he is aware that the situation has gone out of control, because people who are hired to collect tax are no longer the Local Administration Police. They are using Kanyamas who have never undergone training to know how to arrest people and treat them, and they have gone as far as beating people so much that some people are already hospitalized. I want the Minister to tell me what his “as soon as possible” would be because as we speak now, people are continually being beaten up. I would like the information as soon as this week.

MR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I am just receiving this information now in the House, so immediately I go back to my office I will cause the relevant officers to investigate immediately then I will report back.

MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we are getting many different statements from the Executive. It is high time they came up with one straight statement on the fate of graduated tax in future, because there is talk that it is going to be scrapped for ten years. That should be put aside, because it seems all that is happening now is anxiety by those who possibly have been benefiting from it when they see that it is about to be scrapped. It is high time that Government came up with a statement either on the Floor of this House or whatever, to tell the country what the fate of graduated tax is, and even to enable the Local Governments to plan accordingly. 

I attended the budget conference of my district; they do not know the fate of graduated tax. They are there planning, but they do not know what they are going to do in July. So, why can’t Government not come up with one statement and clarify on how Local Governments are going to be run in the absence of graduated tax, and how Government is going to make sure that this revenue, which was supposed to be got from graduated tax, is possibly going to be compensated.  

Madam Speaker, they need to come out in the shortest time, otherwise we are headed for more trouble.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Minister has noted. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week we were expecting a statement on sleeping sickness, the Minister is now going to present it.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Members –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, did you distribute the copies?

DR KAMUGISHA: Yes, copies have been distributed and there are more copies - there are some people with copies. The distribution is going on, if you do not have a copy now, you will get it during the course of my presentation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, have you or have you not?  Are they on the table?

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that one of the Clerks of Parliament actually circulated these statements when we were already inside. So, those who came in a bit late, perhaps they are on the tables. But the Clerk, the one who wears white, had a bunch of them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza confirms that they are on the table. Can the Clerk pick up the copies and bring them inside?  Proceed.

DR KAMUGISHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I promised last Thursday, today I am presenting a statement on the update of sleeping sickness in the country.  

Background:

Sleeping sickness is a chronic disease, which is largely confined to two sub-regions in Uganda, the South Eastern region and West Nile region. The disease has been in these sub-regions for a long time since the 1900s. Several major epidemics have occurred, for example, in 1920 there was an epidemic in Busoga on the shores of Lake Victoria, and this is perhaps one of the largest; it caused about 100,000 deaths -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We do not have the copies of the statement. Maybe the Minister should clarify which table he is referring to, in the ministry or here in Parliament, because there is none here.

CAPT. BASALIZA: Madam Speaker, copies were there and I had an extra one. Let me surrender it to Maj. Rwamirama.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Clerk go and ascertain what is on that table outside, please?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm what hon. Rwamirama has said, that there is no copy anywhere.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this sleeping sickness is rather serious; actually it is so serious that the leadership of Kaberamaido District have come here to make a formal report to the Government. So, maybe if you do not mind, hon. Members, you could listen and share the copies because people are dying there in the villages.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance Is it possible for you to exercise your discretional powers to proceed to the next item while we are – (Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, as you rightly pointed out, I have a delegation from my district comprising of the chairperson of the district himself, with the Secretary of Health, the technical team here in Parliament to listen to this debate, because as we talk now the district is a disaster. Madam Speaker, it does not mean that without this piece of paper we cannot listen attentively and follow the proceedings and take a decision.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think this matter is very serous, please listen to the Minister and then we can proceed.

DR KAMUGISHA: I thank you Madam Speaker for your ruling. I was still on the background to this current epidemic, and I was saying that by 1960 in Busoga, Bukedi and West Nile, there was another epidemic causing about 500 deaths.  

In 1976 to-date, the epidemic has spread to Teso and Lango and westwards to Mukono from Busoga. All previous epidemic were contained through multi sectoral efforts especially Ministry of Health for promotion and facilitation of case management and treatment; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries for promotion and facilitation of control and containment of tsetse flies which are the main vectors and Ministry of Local Government for promotion of regulated population and animal movements to and from gazetted areas.

There are various types of sleeping sickness, for those who may want to know a bit of detail. There is a human sleeping sickness which is a chronic debilitating disease characterized by fever, sleeping tendencies when it is in advanced stages.  There are in addition two sub-types of the human illness: 

The rhodesiense type, which is found in Busoga and the gambiense type, which is found in West Nile. I guess this is where these signs were first identified. The main difference between the two is that the rhodesiense type can be transmitted via livestock while the gambiense type is transmitted only from one person to another by the tsetse flies and the rhodesiense type tends to be chronic also.

Animal sleeping sickness:

This disease largely affects livestock especially cattle. In case of the human type, animals are very important sources of infection through tsetse flies, which can bite both man and animals and thus transfer or transit infection.  

The Current Epidemic:

The current epidemic in Eastern Uganda started in Luuka County about 1974 and had spread to Tororo and Mukono by 1995. Later the epidemic extended eastwards to Pallisa, Mbale and recently, to Soroti, Kaberamaido and Lira district. The worst years were in 1981 and 1988 when the total number of cases per annum were between 7,000 and 9,000, and those of you who are interested, there are some Annexes to this statement; you can you look at the figures both in graphs and bar charts and ascertain the magnitude and the trend of this epidemic.

West Nile epidemic increased in 1980 starting from Moyo following an influx of refugees from Southern Sudan. Local spread affected the districts of Adjumani, Arua and Yumbe and containment measures reduced transmission and new cases have now dropped to between 400 and 500 per annum over the last five years.  

The latest spread:

Unfortunately, active disease has seriously spread to the districts of Soroti, Kumi, Kaberamaido and Lira over the last two years. These districts were previously free from such infection and the disease could have been introduced into the area during the uncontrolled restocking of these districts with cattle from endemic districts in Busoga and Tororo.  

As I said, for a long time Busoga has been endemic with this disease and at that time of restocking, there were lots of movements of cattle using all sorts of directions and since cattle is the main reservoir, we think this could be one of the contributing factors to the spread of this epidemic to these districts which previously did not have the disease.

Specific action has been taken and three treatment centres have been established in the area. Up to now 200 new cases are undergoing treatment and as I said you can look at specific details in the Annex, which is attached to this paper.  

Actions taken:

The following measures have been taken in collaboration with other major stakeholders. Coordination has been strengthened through the Coordinating Office for the Control Of Trypanosomiasis in Uganda (COCTU). This is a famous programme known to many of you. The COCTU Statute is operationalised by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to improve the overall coordination, but other ministries are also brought on board to play their part.

COCTU is currently coordinating two important programmes; those which are largely based in the Ministry of Agriculture, Farming In Tsetse control Areas; FITCA in South Eastern Uganda, I think this is also very known. The project has now been extended for one more year. It emphasizes vector control measures such as tsetse traps, treatment of livestock, screening and treatment of human populations. Members would like to hear that we work together with MAAIF in the containment of this disease.

Two, there is a new project, the Pan African Trypanosomiasis Eradication Project (PATEP), which is planning to eradicate tsetse flies using sterile male techniques in which sterilized males are released out to compete with their wild counterparts.  So, these are the two main projects, the first one is already on the ground, the second one is being planned.  It is a very big project and it is supposed to cover the whole continent.

The Ministry of Health has strengthened the National Sleeping Sickness Programme. Specialized staff and clinics have been set up at all levels to support coordination and care at the district.  Special treatment centres have been established in endemic areas as follows: 

Iganga - Namungalwe, Nsinze, Kiyunga and Iganga Hospital
Kamuli - Bulopa, Namukandulo and Namugonga 
Jinja - Buwenge and Jinja Hospital 
Mayuge - Mayuge and Buluba 
Bugiri - Bugiri Hospital 
Mukono - Buikwe, Nyenga and Lingira Health Centre on Buvuma Island 
Tororo – Tororo Hospital, Liri and Busolwe Hospital Busia – Masafu Health Centre
Soroti - Serere and there is one -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister of State for Health to read information to the august House, which is not confirmed. I know for sure there are no such drugs at Masafu Health Centre. All the patients from my district have been going to Liri and I know for sure.  I would like to challenge the hon. Minister with verified information. Is he in order to submit such important information to the august House without thorough check? There are no such drugs, people are going to Liri.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you should allow him to finish and then you knock him down during the debate.

DR KAMUGISHA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I could also verify that these are centres well established for the purpose. 

There is one in Kaberamaido at Lwala; one in Dokolo for Lira District; Adjumani has one at Adjumani hospital; Arua has two in Koboko and Omogo; and there is one in Moyo and one in Yumbe at Yumbe Hospital.  

As you can see these centres are located at Health Centre 4s or at the hospitals. The 26 treatment centres have adequate drug stocks and they are manned by trained health workers, who are trained in case management, screening, vector control and laboratory work. And over and above being health workers, they have had specialized treatment for this purpose.

Active case detection by screening of populations at risk is going on in all affected districts supported by laboratory facilities based at the treatment centres. In South Eastern Uganda, the district entomology units have been strengthened by recruitment of district entomologists. Also sleeping sickness assistants, one in every cub-county, have been recruited for this purpose.  However, in West Nile, mobile teams are deployed to undertake this type of screening. 

Drugs stocks have been ensured through special arrangements with World Health Organization.

Health education on community mobilization has been going on in all affected areas, and the exercise sometimes being assisted by many of you, hon. Members, from these areas. And here I would like to hail the work, which has been done by many of you, especially the Members of Parliament from Keberamaido, the Woman Member of Parliament, hon. Amajo, hon. Orech, hon. Eresu, they have all done very good job in their respective areas, as well as the Member of Parliament for Buvuma who initially brought this question in Parliament; they have all been involved in mobilization. Here you must not forget the local administrations, LC V Chairmen and local authorities for the good work they have done to mobilize the communities in those areas.

Challenges affecting this programme: 

The main problem is that sleeping sickness is sometimes a quiet and chronic illness, which may pass unnoticed at a community level.  This is why sensitisation is being stepped up in all sectors.  Quite often little attention is given to it even at district level, yet a single new case would constitute an epidemic. 

On our part, the Ministry of Health has incorporated strategies in the next Health Sector Strategic Plan II for the containment of these so-called neglected diseases; it is a whole range of these conditions and sometimes sleeping sickness is one of them.  

During restructuring, the districts gave sleeping sickness least priority by laying off sleeping sickness scouts and assistants, but the situation has now been rectified, especially in Busoga area.  

The growing drug resistance is very high, approximately 30 percent; and resistance to the principle drug, melarsoprol, is of concern to us.  But I need to assure the Members that medical research is going on to look for alternative drugs to treat this disease.  

Conclusion and way forward:

Sleeping sickness insurgency is a serious re-emerging problem. However, with current control efforts, the trends are that the situation is improving. 

Sleeping sickness control requires a multi-sectoral response to control the vectors, to treat the patients, as well as the livestock and to restrict their movements from and to all infected areas, and this is going to be stepped up.

Scaling up of measures against tsetse flies will continue through deployment of more traps in all affected areas. At the moment, more traps are being purchased to cover these areas, especially those which have been recently infected.

The PTEC programme is the ultimate answer for this problem in view of the colossal economic implications of this disease because through PTEC, that is where we are seeing final eradication of tsetse flies. And as I said, it is a Pan African programme under the African Union, and once it is fully implemented I think we can get rid of tsetse flies from the whole continent, and everybody is requested to support it.  

I appeal to honourable Members of Parliament, especially from the affected areas, for their continued support and timely information, which has been helpful in establishing quick interventions.  It calls for more strict enforcement of statutory regulations. 

I have appealed to all sectors, especially, MAAIF, Local Government to strengthen our efforts so that sleeping sickness resources could be increased at all levels. 

Honourable members, you can continue assisting in advocacy in your districts and your respective communities. As I said there is a table here, those of you who are interested in a trend of these epidemics both for the two regions, table one, for South Eastern Uganda and table two, for West Nile region.  You can look at the trend of the epidemic.  

Madam Speaker, this is the end of the statement and I thank all of you for listening to it. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Point of clarification. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you are going to contribute. Why don’t you wait and contribute? You want it out of the way before we contribute?

MR AWORI: Yes, because Madam Speaker, it could avoid further debate if he could come out clearly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, clarification.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, this is another lullaby from the government. Often they come up with statement like this, but on the ground they are virtually non-existence or meaningless. In the course of his delivery, I intervened by calling him to order, by the very fact that in my district that there is a treatment centre at Masafu. Madam Speaker, once again I repeat to my honourable colleague in charge of Health, that there is no drug at Masafu.

Two, even the intention was to be honoured, the facility which would have been used is actually at Busitema, that is the affected area. Masafu is way out for patients.

Three, again seeking clarification and calling this another lullaby, Madam Speaker, my own district in terms of facilities, we are now seven years old and more, we do not have a district hospital. Year in, year out, this government has promised us a hospital, but nothing has been done. They have not even identified one square inch where you could put it.  

Last but not least, Madam Speaker, protect me, I am being told I will put it there when I go to State House, - (Laughter) - but my people are suffering.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR AWORI: We still have 18 months before I go there, - (Laughter) - but between now and then, they definitely need treatment.  

Madam Speaker, once again this government told us, they are going to give every health facility an ambulance, instead they have brought us Pick-Ups.  Since when was a Pick-Up an ambulance? Could the hon. colleague clarify when a Pick-Up of matooke will carry a patient especially a women in labour?  Could you tell me, my hon. colleague?

3.13
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I thank the Minister of Health for this statement. I also thank him in advance for the actions that he has promised to take. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Kaberamaido were getting very worried and concerned because the sleeping sickness situation there is actually in a disaster category. It is an epidemic, it is an emergency and therefore, they were getting worried that Government was not being seen to act as a disaster requires. They were acting as if things were normal in a generalized way. So I am glad that the Minister has pledged that he is going to do a little more.

I appeal to the ministries concerned to prove my colleague, hon. Aggrey Awori, wrong by not making this another lullaby to be on the ground and behave as if this is really a disaster situation.

Madam Speaker, in Kaberamaido District, a lot of people have died. Only about ten have been documented deaths, but there are a lot of deaths, which have not been documented because the sleeping sickness situation is very close to malaria and HIV/AIDS. It actually emaciates the patients just like AIDS. So, there are a lot of deaths, which are not recorded.

In terms of the care, which is being given, it is reported that there are at least two patients per day being taken to Lwala Hospital, which is the only hospital with the drugs. As we talk now, the hospital is overwhelmed. So the patients of sleeping sickness are sleeping in a tent; there are only ten beds in that tent, so the rest of the patients have to sleep on the floor and when it rains, it is almost like a floating islands; they are on the floor and they get wet. So I would like the ministry to intervene in that respect.

I would also like to call upon the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to intervene in at least one or two ways. The sleeping sickness treatment from the technical people is very toxic and therefore calls for a very high level of nutrition. Right now the patients who are in hospital are among the people of Kaberamaido who are totally impoverished from the LRA incursions. They cannot even feed themselves properly. So their rate of recovery has been slowed down by poor feeding. I am therefore calling upon the Minister of Disaster Preparedness also to support in terms of treatment.  

Of course in terms of control, Madam Speaker, the Minister has already outlined the need for more than one sectoral ministry to act together and would like to emphasize the block treatment of livestock and the training and sensitisation of people for more treatment.

Madam Speaker, I would like to repeat that let this not be a lullaby because, in Kaberamaido it is a disaster. People are dying, we do not even know how many people are dying. Like my colleague, hon. Eresu, said, it has called for the whole District Leadership to come to Kampala to see what can be done, because from 2003 when the disease struck, it has been taken like a normal kind, not really a disaster, it was almost like business as usual. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.18
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido):  Madam Speaker, I think the report by the Minister, good as it is, brings to this House the challenge that must put us at the forefront of the problem.  I would propose that a disease like the sleeping sickness should not be treated as a disease, which is only found within certain localities of the country, and cannot move to other localities in this country.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would put it to Government that while the disease exists in some places now, and we should make every effort to eradicate it, we must provide a framework, which should not allow it to move to other parts of this country. In that way we shall be preventing it and cheaply containing it, rather than waiting until it has reached a particular locality then we think of a way of stopping it.

What I am proposing here, Madam Speaker, is that since to handle a disease like the sleeping sickness disease requires a multi-sectoral approach, I call up the Government to look at various sectors especially Ministry of Agriculture, the veterinary section, to pull up their socks and ensure that there is treatment of our cows against diseases caused by the tsetse fly. That will help in preventing the disease from spreading. 

Right now in my district it is a dry season, as it is in many parts of the Eastern and Northern Uganda, and forest fires are there. Therefore we expect the tsetse fly to be burned or to fly to other safer areas or to water areas. But this is also the time when they are burrowing their eggs into the ground. When the grass comes up again these eggs will hatch and the new breed of tsetse fly will be in place. Now, they will bite the cattle that will be there, and that is the beginning of another bout of the sleeping sickness disease.  

It therefore means the multi-sectoral approach, especially through the Ministry of Agriculture, must be at the forefront of this war. Our people have recently finished the war, they successfully concluded Kony’s progress in Teso; we are now in another phase of this disease and we call upon Government to assist us. I thank you.

3.23
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. In my maiden speech in this Parliament in August 2001, I did talk about a disease, which was little known in Uganda, and that is bilharzia. I am glad that on the 4th of March 2003, Bilharzia Control Programme for Africa was launched in Jonam County, a county, which I represent in this Parliament. I am also glad to let you know that this little known disease actually is endemic in 39 districts of Uganda, and it is a silent killer. I am also glad to say that through Bill Gates we have got some funding, which is being administered by Uganda through –(Interruption)

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural question I am raising is that today the Minister has brought a report on sleeping sickness, the other day it was cholera; my colleague is raising bilharzia, I might stand up to raise tuberculosis, cancer, flu, etcetera. So, why does the Minister not come up with a comprehensive report on the burden of disease in this country, the status of the whole country as such? 

Why I am saying this is because killer number one in this country is malaria, for example. Why don’t you bring a report on the status of malaria?  How many people are dying per day? What are you planning to do about this kind of killer disease that is almost eliminating everybody? Mothers who are pregnant are dying because of this, the status of Health Centre 4s; some of this equipment in Health Centre 4s, which are supposed to be equipped, are not equipped up to now. For example, in Rubanda Health Centre 4.  Could you come up with a status report of health in this country?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should not bring bilharzia here; this matter is about sleeping sickness; that is what the statement is about. If you have a problem with that one you will bring it separately, not in this debate. But concerning the Healthy centres not being equipped, we are going to the Budget session, you are going to have time to discuss all these things. 

You shouldn’t also expect the Minister to anticipate – “Let me think, maybe today I will report about foot and mouth disease”, then another day he says, “Let me dream about tuberculosis”. If you do not prompt him how will he - other than during the budget. 

MR BANYENZAKI: For this matter, Madam Speaker, isn’t it proper that the Minister should come up with a comprehensive report of the health status in this country as per now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. 

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Why I was bringing this background is because this disease is being treated as if it is only affecting the areas, which are being indicated. And I am raising this because for those of us who go to West-Nile, we pass through the park, which is very heavily infested with tsetse flies, and there is nobody in this country taking care of the tsetse fly in the Game Reserve - these are gazetted areas.  

Why I was bring the issue of bilharzia –(Interjection)- I will give you time to give me information. So, there is nobody taking care of that and that is why I was bringing the issue of Bilharzia because for a long time people thought it was something, which is affecting Jonam County only and a few other areas, but it is now confirmed that is affecting 39 districts in Uganda. 

So, in my area we pass through the game reserve where there are tsetse flies. My people are staying up to 35 miles into Nwoya sub-county where a lot of tsetse flies are coming into Pakwach and the people are being affected. When the Ministry of Agriculture brought out this programme as the Minister is now indicating in this report, where there is some control in Yumbe, in Moyo and in Arua, Nebbi was left out as if Nebbi is not suffering from this problem. I wrote to the Minister responsible for Agriculture with a copy to the Minister of Health, but up to now nothing has taken place. We also requested for the district to have at least one Entomologist, who would be able to help the district to determine the spread of this disease.  

So, Madam Speaker, I need the Minister to respond to this to see how the people of Nebbi can be brought on board, and how tsetse flies can be controlled so that our people in Nebbi District do not suffer from this disease. I can take the information from the Minister now.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can reject information in the other kind of debate where you have only 10 minutes, but I think you should not reject statistical information from the ministry here. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Jovino Akaki): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to give information on the tsetse flies, which my friend is complaining about in the national parks. Our definition of wildlife covers not only elephants, lions and leopards, it also covers tsetse flies, mosquitoes, bees, snakes that other people consider dangerous. 

The reason for demarcating these areas for conserving these species is that we must have them there. It is only unfortunate that at the moment people travelling to those parts of Uganda have got to pass through these national parks and they are affected. But the national park is where you must keep these animals for posterity for people coming to see. There is no way we are going to spray the national parks in the name of killing tsetse flies. This is their place and it is healthy when we find elsewhere to pass.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister of Tourism, are you suggesting seriously that it is the human beings who are trespassing the national park and therefore, how will you help them to pass through the national park?

MR AKAKI: Madam Speaker, it is well known that land use in this country is partly provided for by this very Parliament. When Parliament declared itself and said we are going to gazette certain areas as conservation areas, the first question we should have asked ourselves is; what are we conserving? In the case of wildlife, we are conserving any species; may be you consider them dangerous, may be you consider them not particularly beneficial, but we want to consider the national parks, wildlife reserves, conservation reserves as the real home, and human beings are going to the wrong place when they are there.

MR OMACH MANDIR:  So, Madam Speaker, now you can see how the people of Nebbi are for them – because right now –(Interruption) 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am shocked and I need the minister to clarify whether he is telling the entire House that they actually conserve animals or elements that are dangerous to mankind.  (Interruptions)- No! Madam Speaker, we are talking of something that spreads disease. Madam Speaker, is the minister telling us that they are actually going to sustain vectors? (Interjection)- No, this is different, Madam Speaker. We want the minister to clarify whether they are going to conserve vectors that spread disease between animals and human beings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister that is why I asked you whether you are telling us that the human beings are trespassing where they should not be going, therefore they should remain at risk, because if you were conserving for tourism, I imagine people will go there to see those animals. Now are they going to be exposed to tsetse flies, and you say you are the one who brought yourselves here?

MR AKAKI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am actually surprised that this question is being belaboured. I am surprised because we know for certain that there are some animals that are dangerous. We know that snakes which people come to see, leopards, crocodiles, are dangerous.  Lions –(Interruption) 

MR GAGAWALA: I apologise, Madam Speaker, for interfering with the minister, but I cannot take it lying down. It is clear in the records of history that the tsetse fly was introduced specifically to wipe out the three-four million Basoga who were in that area. (Laughter). Even from his own report, the minister has told you rhodesiense specie of tsetse fly - In fact, the tsetse fly was never endemic in this part of the world. Is he in order to start suggesting that tsetse flies, locusts and other vectors should feast on Basoga –(Laughter)- and we should take it lying down?  

Actually, he is insisting stubbornly that he must run his ministry in tourism parallel to these vectors and yet we know we cannot even do cattle farming and the like; people are endemic with the disease. The rate at which our people and the animals are dying, and the minister seems not to take care at all that this thing – and yet a certain plant called kapanga which is being transmitted was also introduced by colonialists and is being broadcasted by birds whenever they eat those seeds. This plant has now gone to Lango, and he says we should just allow this plant, which was introduced as a foreign plant and it is just taking over the whole area? Madam Speaker, is he really in order to go on with this line of argument? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the minister intends to exterminate the Basoga through tsetse fly, he is out of order. (Laughter).  But on a serious note, Minister, can you tell us how you intend the human beings to co-exist with your ministry?

MR AKAKI:  Madam Speaker, just as every Member in this House is concerned about the havoc being retched by tsetse flies, I too, I am concerned.  I am concerned that mosquitoes are affecting people and people are having malaria and that these must be controlled. But let us make a very clear distinction. What are we talking about here? 

When I rose to give information about these vectors, the tsetse flies, the mosquitoes and the like, it was in respect to a specific area, part of this country which we ourselves as Members of Parliament as policy makers have come out to say there must be some area that is preserved, that is conserved with a purpose. We are not saying we must have tsetse flies everywhere else in the country. But we are saying tsetse flies, loins, leopards, some of the species –(Interruption)

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Point of order.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, why don’t you let the minister explain?  Okay, point of order.

MR ALINTUMA NSAMBU: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the hon. Minister, I rise on a point of order. The Uganda Parliament like any other Parliament gazetted these areas not purposely to keep disease infected insects in one area in order to protect the public, but the main purpose basically is to preserve animals for human beings to consume by way of tourism.  

So, Madam Speaker, knowing that the presence of tsetse flies kills our tourism, which brings us a lot of money in this country, is the honourable minister then in order to persist?  And also knowing that already we have a figure indicated by himself that we have already lost 18,000 people also, is he therefore in order to take this matter so lightly by insisting that it is okay for the vectors to be there and by stopping us from looking at ways of stopping that from killing people? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. minister, I think this house appreciates why we need to conserve animals. I think what we want to know and understand is how do the human beings who go there to tour those places and see those animals protect themselves from tsetse fly? And how do we protect the people who are travelling there by accident?  I think that is what we want to know.  We know why you conserve.

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  We need to get clearly clarified. Madam Speaker, even the tsetse flies, which are within the park, at a certain point will become dangerous to the animals, which are in there because it is not a question of preserving the tsetse flies or anything that is living in the national park. There are trypanosomes, which cause disease to livestock, both domestic and wild.  So, if these tsetse flies get infected with the trypanosome, which is causing disease, whether in the park or outside the park, it will be a problem. The most important is, how do we make sure that the livestock, which is in the park or outside the park are healthy?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we are still having a problem of anthrax. When the Minister makes his presentation then we can say that the bacteria, which are causing anthrax, which is also naturally living in the national parks, can be preserved.  That is causing a problem. So, I do not want him to make the assertion that we should preserve anything that is even causing a problem.  He should be very clear that there is a problem, which we must identify and find a solution on how to handle it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Minister on Animal Husbandry has information. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the two honourable members have raised a point that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should be at the forefront of fighting tsetse flies and eradication of the fly. 

Madam Speaker, just to supplement what my colleague from the Ministry of Health has just said, Government is carrying out a number of activities mainly under the Ministry of Agriculture, together with the Ministry of Health to deal with tsetse flies. I think the way forward, starting with the next financial year, will be to implement the area wide tsetse eradication programme, which is a regional programme under the PTEC, under the African Union, which aims at getting rid of the tsetse flies in the entire country and not just pockets of it.  But that does not mean that there has not been efforts that have been ongoing, maybe not enough in terms of magnitude –(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Madam Speaker, in your earlier communication, you informed us that the whole of Kaberamaido District administration is here, and in my understanding this statement was brought here to respond to the epidemic in Kaberamaido. The Minister has just told us that in the next financial year, that eradication programme of the tsetse fly begins. How does this help a situation in Kaberamaido? 

And looking at this statement, the Minister is telling the people of Kaberamaido point blank that what has been done is what is going on, and I am not seeing anywhere where the Minister is suggesting a response to the epidemic in Kaberamaido. This is not any emergency response because the statement here is saying that there is already one Health Centre in Lwala, and there is nothing suggesting that more than this will be done to rescue the people of Kaberamaido. Can I get clarified by the two ministers. What are they going to do to rescue the people who are dying?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us finish with the problem of moving through the national park, and then we shall go back to the Ministry of Health.

MR AKAKI: Madam Speaker, let me put the record right. I repeat what I have already said here, that like everybody else I am concerned that our people are suffering as a result of tsetse flies and mosquitoes, which affect us. But on a matter of conservation, I would like to say that when we declared certain areas of this country conservation areas, we did not come out to state what category of things we wanted to conserve. 

For that matter, we find that we are having to conserve, as we talk now, both dangerous species and non-dangerous species. If this Parliament decides that tomorrow they are not going to keep any animals in this country, which is dangerous, I will be the first person to support it, but it will be against conservation theory and conservation efforts.  

Madam Speaker, the way we protect the people who travel in the national parks in any national park in this country and in the world, the people working there know where to find what, including things like tsetse flies. When you are travelling through a tsetse fly-infected area, you will find a very clear label, “Keep your windows up,” so that you move there, by the time you move over, you can then roll down your –(Interjections)- I insist, Madam Speaker, that when I was given this portfolio, I was given to conserve all the wildlife in the national parks and tsetse flies happen to be one of them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OMACH: So, Madam Speaker, I was just winding up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, please conclude.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, now you can see the problem the people of Nebbi are in. We have to pass through the national park where the windows up in the lorries are very difficult because we travel by lorries, and then our people are staying in the park. Our people staying are staying in the whole of that area of former Gotofoyo Ranching Scheme. As if that is not enough, the tsetse flies are now coming onto Nebbi side, and therefore we need your intervention as a ministry to ensure that our people are protected from this. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to intervene.  At one time, the hon. Minister of State for Agriculture and Livestock was on the Floor, then her colleague intervened; do I assume she had completed her statement or she had nothing –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister was addressing the future, but we want to know what can be done now in Masafu and those places. Do you have immediate plans? 

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I was going on to say what we are currently doing in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I was saying that yes, it has not been enough but there are activities, which are ongoing and that is why we are looking at the future. In the next financial year we will be implementing PATAT programme, which will involve mass eradication of Tsetse flies at a regional level. That includes the countries of East Africa and hopefully now that Sudan has attained peace, it will probably come on board. However, presently these are the activities that we are carrying on. 

There are two main programmes. One is Farming in Tsetse Controlled Areas, operating in twelve districts of the Southeast parts of Uganda. This programme is popularly known as FITCA and I am sure many of you who come from those areas would be familiar with that programme.

The second one is in the North western Primary Health Care Project, that is in Arua, Adjumani, Moyo and Yumbe and I would like to say to the people of Nebbi that your areas will be covered in the next financial year. 

The project activities have been addressing the following: 

• We have been procuring and deploying treated traps.

• We have established community cattle spraying associations.

• We have also integrated tsetse fly control activities with income generation activities like zero grazing animals, which we also use to get the animals trapped. There is also mass treatment of cattle in high Nagana and Sleeping Sickness areas.

• Promotion of community based selective bush clearing.

• Diagnosis and treatment of Sleeping Sickness cases.

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you honourable minister for giving way and I thank the Speaker. This idea of tsetse flies has been on for many years. At one time I was involved in the aviation sector and we even had bids through the Ministry of Veterinary Services to buy an aeroplane and spray these things. I know we are members and we contribute to the DLCO and, therefore, we are entitled to the services of DLCO. What have you done to utilize DLCO to spray and wipe out these things once and for all? What happened to the project of the aeroplane? DLCO is Desert Locust Control Organization, which also deals with spraying of tsetse flies and the like. Thank you.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, that is why I wanted to mention the activities that are to be held in the next financial year under the PATAT programme because under that Pan African Tsetse And Trypanosomiasis eradication campaign, MAAIF has formulated a program for tsetse fly eradication. That will involve, among others, area-wide tsetse fly suppressing using aerial spraying, extensive tsetse fly mass rearing, sterile release of male insects; and we are strengthening our collaboration and coordination with the neighbouring countries that is Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda. 

We hope that Sudan will come on board and this in recognition of the fact that the tsetse fly does not know borders. If we deal with the fly on our side and our neighbours have not dealt with it, it will not be enough. We will have re-infestation. In areas where the farmers have not taken on the technology of spraying against ticks and other flies, you tend to have a higher incidence of those flies. As a result, our programme also involves – (Interjection)– I feel I have been cut short many times. I am losing the trend –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking this clarification because I got saddened when one Member of Parliament stood up to say, “Why does Uganda not spray”? Uganda is signatory to a number of international environmental protocols and, therefore, it has an obligation to respect certain protocols. Is the minister aware of that? You do not simply wake up one morning and spray. Tell us the areas where you can use your spray at your will and the type of drugs you would apply.

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I think we as Members of Parliament, representatives of people, need to be serious about what direction we want to take. (Applause). We cannot say on one side that we need to get rid of the flies, and then we do not want to spray them. I think we are romanticizing our problem. We have been trying all sorts of methods and technologies that are seemingly not working, so we need to come on more seriously and address the problem in a more comprehensive manner given the experience we have on the continent and elsewhere.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, government does not seem to be serious. We have been listening patiently to the ministers who are trying to make attempts to respond to the concern in this country about the outbreak of this dreaded disease. I have with me a letter, which I picked from my pigeonhole this morning written by one of the ministers in the Ministry of Health –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister of what?

MR ODIT: It is from flight captain George Micheal Mukula, Minister of State for Health, General Duties in response to the question, which we raised over this matter. I remember it was I who first raised the matter of the outbreak of this disease in Dokolo and Moroto in Lira District. In this letter a team was well constituted by government, headed by an eminent commissioner from the Ministry of Agriculture and they were supposed to have moved to Soroti, Kaberamaido and Lira between the 18th and 21st January to verify the prevalence of this disease.

Section 3 of the letter cites the method of work of this team in Kaberamaido: the team briefly met the district technical team similar to that of Soroti. Then they rushed to Lira District and they used the same method like in Kaberamaido and in their findings in section 4(i) they said that generally the tsetse fly and Trypanosomiasis are a big problem in all these districts. 

But in their conclusion they said, “An epidemic of acute Sleeping Sickness has fully taken root in the Teso and Lango regions. The disease problem in Lango clearly originated from Teso, while that of Teso originated from Kamuli District”. 

The story goes on as follows: “ …and in Busoga it was in particular Kamuli District, which was referred to. As a result of the cattle re-stocking project, the disease is spreading further north in a situation of inadequate capacity for control on the part of the affected districts in the region. 

At the same time there is another drift downwards of chronic Sleeping Sickness from the West Nile region. So, while the lower one is moving upwards, the upper one is also spreading downwards. 

There is thus the possibility of these two forms of the disease overlapping geographically at some point. This will cause a very complex situation particularly with regard to diagnosis and treatment. No human and financial resource capacity to handle the epidemic in the affected districts is in place.”  

Now these ministers are here trying to give perhaps an explanation of what they think we should hear, when precisely they have no capacity, they have no money and no recourses. The Ministry of Finance always has an emergency fund to address issues of this nature. They should, therefore, be clear and tell us that at the moment they are helpless so that we can be able to guide where to find this money. Are they in order to keep fumbling with an explanation when they know there is no answer at the moment coming from their side? Are they in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, this statement was in response to an epidemic, which is not the usual quantity of tsetse flies moving about. So in addition to your usual measures, what are you actually doing to deal with the emergency and the epidemic?  

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Madam Speaker, last week this question started with the Member of Parliament for Buvuma when he mentioned that there was a problem on the island. Shortly after that the woman Member of Parliament for Kaberamaido also came up and reported a similar situation and there was indication that a number of members were going to raise similar complaints from their areas. That is when the Speaker ruled that in view of this the minister should go back and bring an update on the situation of Sleeping Sickness throughout the country –(Interjection)– let me first clarify, hon. Dombo, and that is precisely what I am doing, giving you the situation in the whole country. What I hear from members is as if you have not followed my paper, which takes you through the history, and the current situation –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament and particularly the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture read a letter, which clearly stated among other things, that there are no funds for this emergency. You reiterated the same question to the honourable minister, “Do you have the resources to combat this emergency?” Is he in order to keep deviating, meandering and going round and round, sending us to sleep with irrelevant information when you have put it very clearly? Do you have the resources? 

Even in the process I heckled him by saying, “Borrow money from the Ministry of Defense, they have extra money for ammunition”. Is he in order to continue wasting the honourable members’ time in this august House when we could be dealing with issues? We even have honorable colleagues who came from Kaberamaido to know exactly what is going to happen to their people. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know that the Speaker may have asked you to tell us what is happening in the whole country, but I think he also expected you to say something about the emergencies because by the time you made this statement the problem situation had already emerged in Buvuma Islands and Kaberamaido. So, what is it that you are doing to arrest the situation, apart from your usual budgetary provisions?

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, the action being taken is strengthening what has existed. Let me clarify this. I have already informed you that this is not a new issue. It has been with us for long and that is why on page 3 I am indicating to you how many centers have been established throughout the country. That is action.  

Two, I am telling you that these 26 treatment centers have adequate stock of drugs. I am further going on to tell you that these centers are manned by trained health workers. What do you mean by resources ladies and gentlemen? Are these not resources? The treatment is going on actively. 

Further down I have informed you that there is active case detection, which is screening of population, and we have got one scout per sub-county. You tell me that there is none then I – every sub-county in those areas has got a Sleeping Sickness assistant. Is that not a resource? Hon. Aggrey Awori, is that not a resource?

I have further informed you that health education and mobilization has been going on. Does that not take resources? I am going on further to inform you that this is a programme, which is multi-sectoral, and the honourable minister has told you what is happening in the Department of Agriculture. Are those not actions, which take resources? So, why are members saying that we do not have resources?

What hon. Mukula meant in his letter is that at that material time the districts - listen to this very carefully because it is very important, hon. Mallinga. What hon. Mukula meant in his letter is that at the beginning of the epidemic some of the districts did not have adequate resources or had not planned for this problem because it was yet with them. Just like my friend from Nebbi is saying, we have not done anything because it is not there. So the districts of Nebbi cannot – when they have meager resources - put money on Sleeping Sickness because they do not have it. 

But once there is an epidemic then the districts are strengthened from the center. The minister went ahead to say what has been done. A multi-sectoral team went to these districts and met the teams there. This you can confirm with the Chairman of Kaberamaido and others in the districts they went. It is true the minister may have said it briefly but you can meet briefly and still achieve your results.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, the issue that is causing a lot of discomfort here, which we would like you to appreciate, is the fact that last year for some districts like Soroti we were at the peak although some of the counties did not have a problem. We made these complaints in this very House. I came to your ministry, I also went to Entebbe to the Ministry of Agriculture but the problem is even with those interventions you are saying you have put in place. The problem continues to escalate.

We, therefore, are of the conviction that not enough has been done. I do not think that this tsetse fly infection would have spread to Kaberamaido if we had done enough to curtail it from Soroti. If we had done enough -(Laughter)- I am told we would have curtailed it from Busoga. If you walk around Soroti District, those interventions you are talking about, where you used to have three traps now you have two, the wanainchi have torn away the other one to make a mosquito net or something like that. So, it is getting worse. The interventions are getting insignificant every day as the problem is getting worse. No wonder honourable minister in your statement you are not telling us the impact. 

I would have appreciated it if you had detailed out the impact of these interventions and also the level to which this tsetse fly infection has affected the community. We have so many people lying is Serere Health Center needing treatment every other time. They have been made unproductive, they cannot do garden work anymore, everything is wrong and the honourable minister comes to – is it that the multi-sectoral interventions that you are telling us are not yielding the desired results? And if they are not yielding the desired results, we would you like to do more. We are presenting to you a very dangerous situation.  

Then the other thing, which I want to take the same opportunity to raise is, the hon. Minister in charge of Animal Husbandry has said here that in the Southeast there is FITCA in the north there is – I have forgotten the programme. I want to say that at the peak of this programme last year, FITCA came in just as an emergency measure and now when they make this statement, the statement does not reflect what is happening in the mid Eastern part of this country. 

Who is there to address this? I know FITCA was running short of money. They actually wanted a renewal - another phase I think from the European Union, of one year. So, who is now in charge as they leave? You talk about them in Southeastern Uganda, but who is in Soroti, who is in Kaberamaido? Madam Speaker, those are the questions. I would appreciate if they are clarified.

MOTION

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, let the members say a few things first. 

4.17
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I have listened very carefully to the debate on this statement and if I were the Chairperson of Kaberamaido, I would be the most disappointed person because. What would I say go and tell the people; that they are going to address this next year? I am very surprised by this statement. I have known the Ministry of Health as a very focused ministry and one where action is taken immediately. But given this statement, I think there has not been enough consultation within the Ministry of Health. 

For this matter, I would like to move a motion that this statement be referred back to the ministry for consultation and they come to us with a more comprehensive and focused statement that will address the issue of emergency. 

4.19
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Madam speaker, I would like to see this serious epidemic of Trypanosomiasis treated by Government as they did the Ebola. You remember the way the Government treated Ebola? They mobilised resources. Where they did not have sufficient local resources they went ahead and appealed to the international community and the international community responded promptly.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to amend this motion not just to refer it to the committee - because I think the committee will just delay it - it should read that:

“In view of the seriousness of the health problems posed by this Sleeping Sickness, and noting the minister’s report, this Parliament resolves as follows: 

That the Government takes all emergency measures - and I emphasize the word ‘emergency’ - including financial, drugs, manpower, all that is necessary to ensure that Sleeping Sickness in these areas is immediately contained; and should report to this House within seven days -(Interjections)- yes, seven days on the steps taken. It is an emergency; they should report to this House within seven days on the measures taken.” Thank you. 

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I do yield to the amendment to the motion.       

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with the Motion but I want to say something before you put a question to the report -(Interjections)- yes, in support of the motion. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, the motion is very clear. It is urging for urgent action. Okay.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the one who raised this issue and I am actually disappointed. First and foremost I would like to thank the minister for the statement but when you look at the health centre the minister has quoted in Buvuma, it does not exist; it does not! I have always been informing this House that Buvuma is marginalized. Even the minister, when he consulted his technical staff to go and get information regarding Buvuma, I do not know where they got the information because we only have one Health Centre IV –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague has stated a fact, which is devastating, that the minister told the august House information, which is not correct, in form of a statement. In ordinary language, we call it lies. Is that proper? When a person comes here on behalf of the Government and tells the august House information, which is inaccurate, misleading and devastating, shall we accept it or shall we call for measures against the Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. William Nsubuga, the minister said that these are what they call treatment centres; I do not know whether they are all hospitals.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, I want to establish and state it here that the information provided in this statement is authentic and correct. These centres exist –(Interruption)

MR NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for the honourable minister, and I even indeed said that the problem is not his; he is a politician. But the problem is with the technical staff. I even said that time and again Buvuma is marginalized that even when you send the technical staff to get information, they do not reach. 

Honourable minister, I want to just bail you out. The health centre you have quoted, Lingira Health Centre, does not exist. It does not! Lingira is an island. The only Health Centre IV we have is called Kitamiiro on Buvuma main land, and another Health Centre III, which we have, under Busamuzi sub-county is called Busamuzi. So, Lingira Health Centre does not exist. So the honourable minister is technically out of order. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, I think here it is a difference of who calls it what. Our records call it Lingira. If the honourable member has another name on the other side, that is them; but this is what our documents do reflect and it is correct.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What the member is saying is that there is no health centre on that island. But you said it is a treatment centre. Can you define “treatment centre” so that we do not have to argue about a hospital or a treatment centre?

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, a treatment centre is any place, which has been prepared, equipped and arranged in such a manner that it can be used to treat those who are sick. As you heard at Lwala, it could be a tent, it could be a health centre; it could be a hospital or it could be a makeshift. So, Lingira is a treatment centre.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, could the minister tell the House when he was last in Buvuma Islands, and whether he has himself seen the treatment centre he is talking about?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have a motion. I am going to put the question to it.

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, I was still clarifying that what I stated here is correct and one such point is a point, which was raised by hon. Aggrey Awori. Since I came to this podium, my office has contacted the DDHS for Busia, Dr Oundo, who has confirmed that Masafu is a Sleeping Sickness Treatment Centre and the doctor in charge, Dr Francis Wamala and his staff, have been handling Sleeping Sickness cases. It is only the very severe cases that need more specialized handling that are referred to other units. But that does not make it a lesser treatment center. 

So it is confirmed that Masafu is a treatment centre. If you have not been there, I would advise you to go and visit that health centre. So, who is the liar in this case, Madam Speaker?

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, if he is asking me the question, I would like to reply in kind –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the minister has explained that there is a difference between a treatment centre and a hospital. A treatment centre could be a school or it could be a Church. It is a venue where the treatment is done, but not necessarily a health centre. That is what he has explained.  

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, if what the minister is telling the House is to be believed, and if members can specifically look at page 3, at the bottom of (c), the minister clarifies on these centers and he says, “The centers are situated at Health Center IVs or hospitals”. This is in his own statement. I have never seen a Health Center IV in a tent, neither have I seen one hospital in a tent or a school. 

He goes on to say, “These 26 treatment centers have adequate drug stocks and are managed by trained health workers for case management, screening, vector control and laboratory.” The hon. Member for Buvuma has said clearly that this center the minister is talking about does not exist, and the minister was asked whether he has ever been to Buvuma. He dodged the question. 

I do not think he has ever been to Buvuma. If he has, I do not think he has ever been to this particular center. Is the honourable minister in order to continue wasting our time, when in fact he has told a lie to this House? In fact the best he can do is to apologize. Is he in order to continue insisting that the information he is giving is correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you say in your statement that they are allocated at health centers. Now how are they located there if the centers are not there?

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, some of these centers are allocated at Healthy Centers IVs or hospitals. I apologize for that. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let us proceed with the motion. 

DR KAMUGISHA: Before the motion I have some additional information to give, Madam speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe you will bring it together with the motion. Is it very urgent that it should come before the final report? 

DR KAMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, I need to be very clear about the spirit of this motion.  In view of what I have already told you on the action being taken, I should have also added something about the drugs for this disease. Yes, as an important input into this programme. Someone says we do not have drugs. The drugs for this condition are provided by WHO. They are actually donated by WHO and the supplies are not questionable. 

If you want me to come after a week and tell you what we are doing, I will tell you the same thing that the drugs for this condition are there in adequate quantity. The trained staff is there too. I will just tell you that what we are stepping up now are the traps by my colleagues from MAAIF, as well as intensifying social mobilization. That is all I will add. So, I need to tell you that as you table this motion, I will not come back with different information over and above what I have said and what I am telling you now because the resources are –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, this is an august House where members come either to solicit information from the state or to be told the programme of the Government. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to threaten us and say, “No matter what you say, I will not come back with any fresh information”? Is he in order to be so arrogant as to insult the honour and the dignity of this august House? “I will not come back with any fresh information”!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have just discovered here that we are not supposed to traverse the game parks on lorries. That is what we have heard from the Minister of Tourism. If we do it, we go there at our own risk. Then we have also heard that the Minister of Agriculture intends to do something in future. If you say that you are not to consult those people and report to us all those things, I think you are out of order. Yes, you are! (Applause). I now put the question that this House approves the motion proposed by hon. Malinga and amended by hon. Atubo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you report back in seven days.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. This motion we have just passed, I do support it but I think it is premature. The purpose of reacting to this document is to gather information from different speakers, from different experiences and would have helped the ministry and those concerned to make an appropriate report because the report is supposed to cure many things. We have zeroed down on only the curative measures rather than the preventive measures. 

There are also structural problems. You have heard one minister saying they are conserving, the other one is eradicating. We should have allowed time to debate this paper so that we get adequate issues to address a problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, by me mentioning those ministries, which were not part of Health, I am actually guiding the minister about which areas to look at. So, you will bring a statement, which touches on Tourism and Agriculture and all those other institutions, and then we will debate it next week. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SECURITY SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

4.37
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement, which is now being distributed. 

The security situation in the entire country is relatively peaceful. The LRA groups, which have been sources of unrest in some parts of Northern Uganda within the districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader are to a great extent being contained as a result of UPDF military momentum against them.  

The current effort at a peaceful resolution mainly initiated by some LRA rebel commanders who indicated that they wanted to resolve the differences through dialogue, have been welcomed by government. It is cheaper, less harmful and if taken seriously, could bring about the realisation of total peace sooner. 

Just in case they are not serious, however, the UPDF will continue its offensive against those LRA units that have not entered the safe zone. We are certain of victory. (Interjection)- hon. Aggrey Awori is speaking just to confirm that it would be cheaper and less harmful to end rebellion and terrorism by dialogue, he is the expert on it. 

The current situation in Lira, Gulu, Kitgum and Pader:

Most of the LRA groups in this sector have broken up into smaller groups of between ten and 20 persons, for easier concealment and to avoid detection by the UPDF. The continued effectiveness of the UPDF has degraded the operational capacity of the LRA in terms of the number of combatants killed and the number of combatants surrendered and captured. 

The remaining number of LRA combatants, which is estimated between 300 and 400 personnel, has suffered a breakdown in commandant control, lacks food and drugs, is low on arms and ammunition and suffers from very low morale due to the continued UPDF pressure.  

In Lira and Soroti, these regions are still peaceful except for some cattle rustling activities. The region is currently devoid of LRA activity following the relentless efforts of the UPDF and thanks to the Arrow and Amuka Groups, which chased the LRA terrorists from this region. That is except - I am adding this, it is not written - there was a recent incursion into Aromo sub-county, hon. Angiro’s constituency, when some group of terrorists went there and stole food from a village I think called Apuwa. They killed three people, if I am not mistaken, including a relative of the hon. Member of Parliament, and they broke into his house. They had come from Pader, they went back through areas of Atende and Pe-Okuto.  

Since that time security arrangements have been put in place. Some mobile forces of 73rd battalion have been deployed in the area. These units operate in the north of Aromo. We have opened up a detach at Malaba, North west of Aromo, which has been a crossing point of these terrorists. Also deployed is a detach at Otala. This is in addition to other deployments.

For example there are 200 Amukas who guard Aromo Internally Displaced People’s Camp, and we have LDU deployment at Acet-Kum. This is in response to the incursion into Lira District of that terrorist group, and they have now gone back and our forces are trying to track them down.

In Southern Sudan, Kony and some of his commanders are still in concealment since October last year. Kony, with a small group of fighters, is currently roaming the general areas of Kit valley, Panyikwara and the Lomarati Mountains, avoiding contact with the UPDF. In a bid to survive and in search of food, drugs, arms and ammunition, these small groups continue launching vicious attacks on the SPLA and other Sudanese settlements.  

Under the protocol signed between Uganda and Sudan in 2002, and which we have periodically updated – it is not formally updated at the moment but I have a clear understanding with the minister that it is still valid pending consultation to take into account the peace agreement reached in Nairobi recently - the UPDF is still in Southern Sudan pursuing these LRA terrorists. It is expected that the signing of the peace agreement between the Sudan Government and the SPLA, which we hope will be implemented soon, any technical support for the LRA will completely cease. 

Dialogue with the LRA:

The Government has from time to time for the past 19 years been promoting dialogue with all insurgent groups, including the LRA. And indeed many problems have been resolved through dialogue.  In mid-November 2004, when the Government announced a unilateral cessation of the UPDF military offensive against the LRA in a designated area in Northern Uganda, the UPDF had gained military momentum against the terrorists.  

Ms Betty Bigombe’s initiative started when the LRA indicated that they wanted to resolve the differences through dialogue. However, by December 2004 the LRA had started to use the ceasefire to gain some military advantage by retrieving their hidden ammunition caches, carrying out ambushes for food and drugs, carrying out attacks on IDPs, carrying out abductions and generally reorganizing. When Kony showed that he was not interested in peace talks in spite of the Government’s total commitment to a peaceful resolution, the ceasefire ended and UPDF resumed its operations against the LRA. It is now gaining momentum as clearly shown by the recent capture of self-styled Brig. Acellam.

Military pressure is being used to compel the LRA terrorists to talk, and if they are willing to talk, government is ready to talk to them. The ongoing two and a half weeks’ ceasefire declared by the President on 4th of this month is intended for the LRA commanders to use the period to consult among themselves and to respond to the proposals by government, which were sent last year. The ceasefire zone covers an area of 20 square kilometers, which is astride to Gulu and Kitgum Districts. 

Government is supporting and encouraging Ms Betty Bigombe’s mediation efforts. Some LRA commanders have indicated that if Kony is not willing to leave the bush, they will leave. For example, self-styled Col. Onen Kamdule reported on 4 February 2005. The Government is open and welcomes those who surrender. It has already formed a complete battalion of those who surrendered, reorganized and incorporated them into the UPDF.  

Operations outside the current demarcated free zone both in Northern Uganda and Southern Sudan continue with a lot of success. For example from January to December 2004, and including January this year, the total achievements of UPDF in these operations are as follows: 

1. 3,064 abductees rescued.
2. 1,030 LRA officers and men defected or reported to the UPDF.
3. 448 prisoners of war captured.
4. 2,077 killed in action.
5. 1,402 rifles captured.

The UPDF operations continue to cause frustration and loss of morale within the LRA rank and file, plus weakening their command and control. This results in more defections and surrender by LRA commanders while others opt to go into concealment for survival, hence reducing the capacity of those remaining to commit atrocities against the civilian population.

In the West Nile sub-region the UPDF continues to carry out successful operations against the PRA agents in Yumbe and Koboko, including the capture of arms and ammunition. 

At the beginning of this month, February, the following arms and ammunition were unearthed from Lurujo in Koboko, and more than 10 PRA suspects involved were arrested.

1. Thirteen sub-machine guns with 4,000 rounds of ammunition; 
2. Five RPG bombs, one RPG fuse and one RPG optic sight; 
3. 14 anti-personnel mines, plus 10 fuses;
4. One anti-tank mine;
5. One medium machine gun magazine;
6. Seven grenades; and 
7. 15 SMG machines.   

This sub-region has been experiencing PRA infiltrators who have been recruiting and clandestinely acquiring arms and ammunition through purchases from south Sudan. 

The UPDF and other security forces within this sub-region continue to be on full alert, vigilant and with keen scrutiny, closely monitoring the situation, being assisted by the wanainchi who have mobilized themselves to ensure that normalcy returns and prevails.

In Western Uganda, Madam Speaker, the security situation is still calm but the threats exist caused by the ADF, the PRA and the Interahamwe elements, which operate in Eastern DRC along our common border. 

The tripartite agreement reached between the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda and Uganda with the facilitation of the United States Government signed on October 26th last year in Kigali, deals with how to handle security issues affecting the three countries. The three countries have put modalities in place to work together to neutralize these negative forces in the DRC under the Demobilization, Disarmament, Resettlement, Rehabilitation and Re-integration (DDRRR) arrangement as the Lusaka Accord signed in July 1999 provides. This DDRRR is to be done in collaboration with United Nations Mission to Congo, MONUC.

Cattle rustling:  

The second disarmament operation in Karamoja resumed on November 1st last year, with a mission to disarm the Karimojong of all illegal guns and to restore law and order. The operation is still voluntary and so far a total of 560 rifles have been received from the sectors of Kotido, Moroto, Kabong and Nakapiripirit. 

The highest response has been received from Kotido followed by Moroto. The response is generally still poor and this calls for more involvement of area Members of Parliament whose help I must acknowledge today that really they have been helpful. I look forward to visiting the region to encourage them even more, alongside the local district leaders, to further carry out mobilisation and sensitization. 

Although necessary measures to end cattle rustling and armed thuggery are already in place within Karamoja and the districts neighbouring the Karimojong plus Uganda’s international borders, a few incidences of cattle rustling still occur. For example on February 7th this year there was a raid of several animals in Kakamongole, Nakapiripirit, but the UPDF is still pursuing the warriors.  

Relations with Rwanda:

Madam Speaker, the relations between Uganda and Rwanda are steadily on the mend, diplomatic relations have been re-established, regular meetings are held and no more state operation is being carried out. Allegations that arise are always addressed as per the agreed mechanisms such as using the joint investigations and verification committees.

In conclusion, the UPDF is still committed to its cardinal duty and noble constitutional obligation of protecting and defending the sovereignty of Uganda from external and internal aggression. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this statement is not in response to any particular issue but just conforming to an understanding we have that every three months the minister will be briefing this country about defense. 

4.55
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, there are some important aspects of security concerns, which were not addressed in this particular statement and yet they are there. 

Number 1, it is understood, it is written and it is heard in the journalist or media circles that two weeks ago that jam warfare weapons prescribed by the UN, which the UN has actually outlawed, were found in and around Gulu area. These weapons or ammunition had been sent to the US for verification of origin and to determine how lethal they are. The Government has remained quiet about this very worrying information. No news has come out and yet there are people who have verified that ammunition.  

Two, it is in the media, it has been repeated by even the same minister that Uganda is about to send over 10,000 troops to Somalia for the purpose of peace keeping. A commitment has been made to the AU by the head of state and yet according to our Constitution you cannot deploy Ugandan troops outside the country without the approval of this august House.

Three, from time to time for the past 18 years we have always been given fallacious figures regarding the strength of the LRA, now we are being told between 300 and 400 LRA men are remaining. I am challenging this source of intelligence. How do you determine to such an accurate figure, the strength of the enemy troops, when it is not conventional warfare? In conventional warfare you can determine the area the enemy troop is occupying and estimate but in guerilla warfare you cannot estimate. And to strengthen my concern, Madam Speaker, we have been told - the Government has made similar statements for the past 18 years. At one time thee were 1,000 remaining, another time 100 remaining, another time 3,000 remaining. Really, what is the source of this intelligence? Are we supposed to be sent to sleep with this kind of security lullabies by the state?

The honourable minister in his statement mentioned very briefly a matter of cattle rustling, but he did not go into greater depth to elaborate or to throw more light on his statement regarding incursions between Uganda and Kenya on cattle rustling. We know that even human beings, especially girls, have been kidnapped from Uganda and taken to Kenya by Pokot cattle rustlers and other raiders. The same situation obtains in some lower parts of Sebei towards the Kenya border. There have been serious incursions actually between the Kenya troops and allegedly people from our side of the border, that is the Uganda side. Again the honourable minister has conveniently avoided throwing more light on these serious concerns.

On the matter of People’s Redemption Army (PRA), the Government must come out clearly. Are these imagined, real or should we wait until these people have been charged in the courts of law and then wait for their trial to see what kind of information can come up? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.00
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking some clarification from this presentation. First of all, I would like to find out from the minister whether Apac District is peaceful because I have seen in this report Apac District does not appear anywhere. I have a home in Apac District and I am aware that in the last three weeks people were being chased from their homes by soldiers; and those who are resisting to move to the camps, their homes are being torched up. 

I would like to know why there has been that escalation of massive movement of people from their homes to the camps. If there is any threat you should at least come out with it so that we prepare our people and they move peacefully rather than being forced to move to the camps.

Secondly, I am also aware that the brother of the Member of Parliament for Erute North was murdered two weeks or so ago. I am also wondering whether that is an incidence of insecurity. If so, why has it not been mentioned? [Hon. Members: “He mentioned it”.]- Did he mention that? But it should have come out as a key feature of insecurity in the area and justification given of why it has happened that way.

We tried to visit one of the camps to raise funds for the local Church in Aromo and we were blocked from moving to the area. We tried to seek clarification from the commanders in the areas and we were not told anything. So it appears there is some insecurity being provoked from somewhere but we are not being told exactly what. We would like to know whether we were blocked on political grounds or we were blocked because there was some security provocation somewhere, or you are aware of some movement of the Lord’s Resistance Army in the area. But up to now we have not been informed so I would like –(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for giving way. I want to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal and this House that we were blocked because - this is according to what I got later from the military men - the guest of honour for that occasion was the wrong guest of honour because he was none other than Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu. I was told - you can even hear from her that, “Why should you invite a Forum for Democratic Change Member to go in that area?” Even on that day there was not even half a rebel in the area. I went, I managed to drive without escort up to the venue where we found people were already gathered, then when I went to see the army commander in the area he told me he had no idea about the roadblocks, which were put on Apita road and then Agweng road. But then I requested him to go and check, which he accepted. 

He told me he wanted to carry his gun in my car. I told him “My gun is my God, so you just forget about that. Let us just go”. When we arrived there, we found the roadblocks were there and he dismantled them. When I asked him about the rebels he said, “Definitely, there are no rebels here.” The rebel, therefore, was Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu and that is why even in the honourable minister’s statement he has been telling us that there has been no problem in Lira.  

Last night 40 rebels came to Aromo sub-county and they looted goats, chicken and foodstuff and they went without challenge. Even when they went to my home and killed my late brother, they came from Gulu and they passed through four parishes. In the first three parishes there were people there and when they reached my home they rounded it up. On checking they found my late brother was there, they killed him and they went back unchallenged. They were 14 in number, and that was the day when they killed three other people. 

Even last Thursday they came and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Angiro, you are now making your own submission.

MR ANGIRO: Let me finish that one, Madam Speaker. They came to my home again last Thursday and they even thrashed maize in the neighbourhood. They broke into my house, destroyed the window glasses and doors, and they went back unchallenged. That is the information I want to give.

MRS OGWAL: I think it was important that we get that information from the Member of Parliament because it appears there is some movement, which is going on and we are yet to be told what it is. When people were forced to move to the camps they were told not to take the goats, they were told not to take the chicken, and after a day or two the chicken and the goats were found with the soldiers. So, we are wondering what it is that is happening and people are not being told whether there is any fighting going on. They are just being told to move to the camps.  

We are beginning to suspect that it is all about politics because I was with Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu. We were travelling together, we were very humble because in this culture of beating Members of Parliament I was very scared so we were very humble. When we were told to go back we obeyed and we turned our vehicles around. But we went straight to the barracks and we asked the commander why we were being told to go back when the Member of Parliament of the area had already gone ahead of us. The operational man told us that as far as they were concerned, there was no problem but he requested to see the boss. I do not know who the boss is, whether he is the Commander-in-Chief or whatever, I do not know.

The boss said he had information from Kampala that the environment in the area where we were going was uncertain and then the operational man asked the Commander why that information was not passed on to them because he was in charge of information. We saw the two officers, sort of almost at loggerheads, hostile to one another, that means somebody was not telling the truth.  

We did not leave it there, we went straight to the barracks in Lira when we went back and we stopped to know why we were stopped from going to assist the church. We were told that as far as the barracks was concerned, there was no problem.  

Madam Speaker, the reason why I am making this point, I would like the Minister of Defence to tell the politicians to deal with politics and to leave defence to deal with defence.  I would feel very uncomfortable if the Ministry of Defence would allow itself to be used to do the politics of some political parties. 

I am just pleading with you that if there are some politicians who are feeling very scared they would better not go to defence; they would better face us squarely and we would deal with it politically.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.10
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for this statement.  

The clarification I want to seek is based on page three. The Minister in the last paragraph talks about a battalion that has been formed out of those who surrendered and were re-organised and incorporated into the UPDF.  

What captures my attention is the statement by the Minister that this has been re-organized and I really want to know what constitutes this, “reorganization”, Madam Speaker?  We know that the people who constitute the LRA, a good chunk of them were former abductees and the other bit of it is fighters, hardened people who have really gone on to commit all sorts of atrocities against humanity.  

Now, given that background, I want to know from the Minister what constitutes this “re-organization” if we are not simply lending ourselves into a situation where we are collecting all these fighters instead of pushing them through a process of psychosocial counselling and give them some vocational skills for survival, we get people with a hardened mentality, they have known how to torture for years, they have missed formative years as children who are abducted and we simply put them into our cherished UPDF.  Could the hon. Minister tell me what has gone into the so-called “reorganization” of the mindset of these fighters?

The second thing, Madam Speaker, is to do with the continued complaint about the delay of the salaries of the Amuka and the Arrow Boys.  

Time and again these people who have done such a wonderful job go two to three months, sometimes even six months; you find that the Arrow Boys or the Arrow Girls have not got their pay. It is a miserable ugshs60, 000 or 70,000 for a person who has done such a wonderful job for this country; a person who sleeps out their while we sleep in our houses even to fail to have that in two or three months.  

I would also like the hon. Minister to know that there are also complaints now of missing names in the payrolls.  Some of the Arrow Boys just walk there when they want to get their salary; their names have gone missing.  Could the hon. Minister probably shade more light on that or institute an investigation and find out if that is true.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the question of disarmament in the Karamoja Region.  Towards the end of the year, we in Teso started seeing more of the incursions again into the Teso Region and it continues to make us very uncomfortable, very uncertain.  Even after the LRA has left the Teso Region, the people of Katakwi who were displaced from the other camps in Katakwi cannot comfortably go back home.  Actually, they have preferred to remain in the camps because the question of disarmament has not been settled and the temple continues to go down every other day.  

You hear they are disarming, next week you realize, it is as if it has gone to sleep; it has been hit by sleeping sickness of sorts and they have all gone to sleep and then you wait. 

Now it is coming to 2006 probably we are going to say disarmament.  Is there something wrong about this disarmament?  Are we really sure that we are going to disarm at the end of the day?  Is the commitment there, Madam Speaker?

5.15
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke county, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for this Report because for some of us who come from insecure areas, areas which are destabilized, we hope that through these regular reports to the House, we shall be able to let our Colleagues, Members of Parliament, know the state of affairs in our areas and, therefore, to mobilize them together with the Government to see how far the situation can be normalized.   

The Minister’s report is rather incomplete, unfortunately- and this has already been pointed out by my previous Colleagues- I do want to urge the Minister that he should not be afraid to bring a complete report on security situation in the country, because by giving us a complete report, you are- as I have said before mobilizing support from Members of Parliament on issues that affect their daily live and you are also mobilizing the whole country, you are also sensitising them so that when you now come for budgetary increases and other things, people will just say have it.  

But when you give us a report like on Lira and you are missing Apac completely, I hope others from Apac will speak for Apac, it is hurting. 

I know the situation in Lira is calm; it has improved from what was two years ago.  But surely as of now, hon. Minister in the House, the rebels still infiltrate, rather irregularly, in a month they may come twice.  

But if you look at the effect of that infiltration on the general confidence people are building that peace is returning and then rebels; five, ten of them as you have said, come pass through Otuke as they did about a month ago and you have not mentioned it in your report. 

They come through Otuke, through my home area of Alur, come through Aloi, come through Barr, they are being traced, the soldiers are chasing them; they are being blocked.  But the amount of damage they have done is terrible!  It has taken people back and of course, I know it is next to impossible to put a wall where rebels may not easily come, but what, therefore, should be done in a situation like this?   

I want to support my sister, hon. Alaso, that the Arrow boys and the Amuka Boys made a turning point in the security situation, the support they gave to UPDF.  

But it pains me, Mr Minister, that we the Members of Parliament and the civil authorities in the district, the Local Councils, who contributed massively to mobilize these people from parish to Gombololola level, and they look at us as the people who took them there and possibly abandoned them.  The little money they are getting, is it Ugshs 60,000 a month, is nothing compared to- the Government, six months, fails to pay these people.  

The welfare of these people in terms of food, Madam Speaker, I have been in Otuke as regularly as possibly, two weeks, one month, and I know what is going on.  Food situation for these soldiers is terrible.  

The uniform - I have taken some of their photographs on my video camera and on still cameras. I have them, Mr Minister, I can show them to you - it is terrible to find an Amuka boy is given a uniform once in about three or six months and is literally walking necked.

MR ANGIRO: The information I would like to give to hon. Omara Atubo is, when we went on the ground with hon. Omodi Okot, we found that a statement was issued directing all civilians to go to new IDP camps originating from the Amukas. They ordered people to go leaving behind their property, especially foodstuff, goats and chickens, so that they could feed on these chickens at night.  

At one Primary School where there was a night protection, these people were supposed to come and sleep round the Church, but in the morning they would go back to find their chickens were missing, foodstuff missing; and when they were complaining, these people told them that, how could we be fed without you leaving us food behind there?  

One Inspector Officer from Ale detach told us that, how do you expect me to survive?  I was last paid last year in October, so up to that time when we went there they had not been paid.  So the issue of food, salary and then other things - actually it had been because they were neglected and they could just go and trick the wanainchi to leave their foodstuff behind for them to take.  Thank you.

MR ATUBO: So, take this issue of the welfare of Amuka and Arrow boys very seriously, together, of course, with the welfare of the regular UPDF.

Madam Speaker, in order to realize peace and mobilize civilians, you remember the President constituted what we came to call District Defence and Security Committees.  

In the one of Lira it is chaired by the Minister, Mr Okot Ogong and Minister, Mr Jovino Akaki chairs the one of Apac and these Committees initially did wonderful work because it was meant to be a meeting point of the Military Commanders, political leaders, cultural leaders and religious leaders.  When things were hot, of course, they met more regularly.  

I am disappointed, Madam Speaker, that this Committee, which is very important in overseeing the security situation in the two districts - I do not know whether the one of Teso was also constituted, but in Lango we welcomed it. 

This Committee has literally died away. We find it very difficult even to – you know these Commanders, you are hon. Omara Atubo and you want to go to the barracks and speak to the area Commander and so forth, and you remember the opposition sometimes is not easily welcomed.  But when you go to the District Committee and the Division Commander is there, the Brigade Commander is there.  But when you decide to ring the Division Commander, you are ringing the Brigade Commander, you want report something, they say, “Okay, we shall report back”.  

So, I am making two important points here, please let these committees, which were put in place by the President himself as Commander-in-Chief work. 

Secondly, Mr Minister, you are a civilian Minister, I want you to tell your Commanders in the field that sometimes when a Member of Parliament wants to see you, or a Local Council III wants to see you, or he rings you and you are not available, please, he might have something very urgent.  

We have a lot to contribute because we also love peace in our area, and when you try to hide away and you think that, “Oh, these people, when I associate with them I will be seen to be anti-Government, they should not-” I think this type of attitude of local commanders on some of the Members of Parliament and leaders should not be there.

Let me conclude by reinforcing the issue of the Karimojong warriors, the cattle rustlers.  You know Otuke is strategically placed, the Eastern border is all in Kotido and Moroto, and now because the civilians are not there these guys just walk; they even disturb the people in the camp. This is a very serious matter.

Now, on Southern Sudan, Mr Minister, you have mentioned it here. We as Members of Parliament and the country at large, can you take the opportunity to inform the Minister of Foreign Affairs to address the country on this agreement and on its relevance and effect on Uganda.  

I know our President went there, he witnessed it, I know how he contributed to this realization of this agreement and so forth.  But this Parliament and the country have never been addressed by anybody on this important agreement of Southern Sudan, yet I think if there is anything it should be there. It is more important than going for re-burials and insulting people there, inciting who killed who; I think it is better sometimes for us to talk on positive things, how we are building for peace.  

Finally, Mr Minister, I want you and the Government to start looking at one important aspect of our life.  How are you going to reduce the Military tension and the Military build-up in the country?  

You look at your paragraphs four, five and six. The arms you are getting there, you are recovering from West Nile, this and this is happening in Karamoja, this is the situation - you know, it gives you a worrying Military tension and Military build-up; and there Kalangala Action Plan is beginning to train these people here. You are beginning to do this, you are building barracks here, and so much is being spent there.  

The only thing this country knows is about Military activities, Military expenditure, we are recovering these; and you are creating in the minds of the people of Uganda tension and fear.  

Please, Mr Minister, can the Government reduce this build-up of attitude statements as if Uganda is in such a Military crisis - Military expenditure, building up of this, what is going on and - you know people go as if without soldiers around, you cannot survive.  

Everywhere you go you see barracks here, and soldiers here, especially when there are big people, you even wonder. Some of us are going to start saying If so and so is going there, rather than going through this thorough screening and so forth, let me go and have my tea somewhere else.” 

So hon. Minister, this is a very important statement, very important that it is part of your responsibility to ensure that the military tension in the country is reduced.  Do not create in the minds of people in Uganda that everything is military.  Thank you.

5.29
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole county, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to seek clarification from the hon. Minister of Defence. 

 A few days ago, an influx of refugees in the north-western and south-western parts of the region was reported because of the conflict between the Hema and Lendu in the DRC.  In the past, when such conflict did exist, it had a bearing on the Ugandan Security situation.  I want to find out from the hon. Minister, what is the situation now.

Secondly, this issue of the PRA, I wanted to seek clarification. How real is this threat of PRA?  Madam Speaker, why I raise this issue, a couple of days ago, one Maj. Gen. Taban Amin, came up with very serious statements.  I did not know whether they were outrageous.  

One, he is qualified to give those statements because he operates from that sub-region, where he said that, there had been people trading in arms for money under a programme that had been deliberately promoted by the Chief tenancy of Military Intelligence.  

I suspect this is part of the arms that the hon. Minister is reporting, that some of these arms that actually the people were legitimately trading in them.  When the operation fell short of money, and these people kept these arms in custody, waiting for further cash, they turned against them to say, these are PRA collaborators and they have been arrested.  

I want to seek clarification, Madam Speaker, is PRA a real insecurity risk to the people of Uganda and is it about to strike?  Has it struck anywhere?  How can we take precautions as people of Uganda against this one?

Finally, about PRA still, there was a collaborator who was arrested sometime called Gakyaro from the CAA, and he was charged in the courts of law.  

Unfortunately, when I read the press reports, when he came out, the impression was that he had a social conflict with somebody within the status quo and the only way the status quo could be sorted out, was to have him arrested and arranged as the PRA collaborators.  No wonder he has since been acquitted by the courts of law.  

So, Madam Speaker, can the Minister help us to understand what precautions we could take to protect ourselves against this eminent threat from the PRA?  I thank you.

5.31
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I thank the Minister for the report and the statement.  

Before I make my formal points, I want to assist the honourable Colleague, Omara Atubo, on the question of UPDF being here and there.  They are not there because they want to be there. They are there, like point seven of the concluding remark of the statement, I mean to protect us!  As long as they are disciplined, as long as they pro-people, I do not see really any harm for the good of this country.  

The other day we were at Umar Lule’s wedding in Kalungu, we spent the night with these soldiers and there was no harm and you could not even notice that there were soldiers around.  So, hon. Omara Atubo, these are your sons and brothers.

Now on peace talks, unless I am assured by the Minister, I want to support a one-time line by hon. Lukyamuzi of having peace talks outside Uganda, because page 3 reads that continued military pressure will put sense in these rebels to talk with Government”.  

I am at loss combining operation and peace talks in the same area, because you may mistake some one who wants to report, who wants converge in that assembly, whatever the way they call it.   

So I want to support hon. Lukyamuzi for the first time whether we could have these peace talks outside Uganda so that the Army can really do its work uninterrupted.

The other one is, armed recovered. Uganda is signatory to the Nairobi Declaration on Small Arms and Light Weapons. I want to commend the Government and the UPDF and our Police for the work they are doing.  

But I do not know, Mr Minister, whether you could assist us on what one could call, Arms Tracing and Marking.  Whose guns are these?  When you look at Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa, the arms in wrong hands, illegal arms, almost double or triple the number of arms even in Government hands.  So whose guns are these?  Who manufactures these guns?  Where do they come from?  Do we have the means and mechanism to trace them up to source?  You find a gun fought in World War I, World War II and is still being used in Somalia, in Baghdad, in Congo.  So do we have the means to verify whose arms are these?

The other one is about relations with Rwanda.  I am humbled and I am glad because this is a sister country and I want to testify that really what the Minister has said here is true because some time in December last year, I happened to have gone with some colleague for an introduction ceremony in Rwanda, but you could really see how we are cleared, first of all, at the Embassy, cleared at the border post, the Liaison Office, the way we were ushered in, the speeches at the function, you could really see a sign of relief, the movement, the business around.  

Most of these people around Kakitumba and Mutamba, they come to our market in Ntungamo to shop goods for their market on Saturday.  Ours is on Friday, theirs is Saturday, but you could really see new mood, new life, and the excitement.  So I want to commend this.  We really need each other and we must really use and explore all avenues to consolidate this relationship.

Mr Minister and Madam Speaker, about UPDF recruitment.  Of recent the ministry has run some advert and indicated areas where they intend to get some of our colleagues.  But they have put the entry requirement too high, A level. 

 I happen to come from Rakai; you know what happened to Rakai in 1982, we were the few survivors there.  I am worried, because I have been looked at the results of P.7, the results of Senior 4, I do not know whether we have sleeping sickness. 

In a sub-county you may fail even to get grade one in PLE.  So I do not know whether Rakai is going to participate in this UPDF recruitments.  I do not know whether you could put it lower, may be emphasize like at Cadet, that is when you can heighten up the requirement.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.36
MRS BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I come from Koboko, so anything in Koboko affects me as a person and also affects my people.  

When people of Koboko heard and found those guns for the first time, I think early last year, that some guns were being hidden in Ludara, everybody was shaken because people of Koboko are tired of war.  

We lived in exile from 1979 to 1989 and we lost a lot of development.  Then when this rebel activity returned in 1994 to 1996, people of Koboko never moved away, they said, “We better be killed here, we suffered enough in exile” and they worked very hard to ensure that some of the rebels, some who happened to be people of Koboko, convinced them and they left the rebel activity.  That is why peace returned in Koboko.  

Now today when we hear that more guns have been discovered in Alurujo, that is part of Koboko, Lobule Sub-county, it shocks us the more.  From that time since last year up to today, what has the UPDF done to prevent this constant infiltration of guns to Koboko?  What relationship do we have with Congo Government to ensure that these PRA do not come again to disturb people of Koboko?  Can the Minister explain how we can stop them before they appear there and start disturbing us again?  I would like to get some clarification from –(Interruption)

MR OKUTI:  Thank you, my Sister, hon. Baba Diri, for giving way.  The information I want to give you is that, the little cooperation that we had with some elements in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) has even collapsed, that is the FAPC of Maj. Gen. Zaromi.  

The man has gone to Kinshasa, his forces are disintegrating; they are deserting and a number of them are coming to Koboko; others are in Arua and in Nebbi, and they are already becoming a source of insecurity.  

Recently, I think there was also some internal disagreement amongst the Local Commanders.  So, any time there will be war in Aru, Ariwara and Magi, which will affect us definitely.  Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you for that information.  You can see the danger people of Koboko are in.  

Madam Speaker, another clarification, which I got from the ground from Koboko and I would like Minister to explain. 

I have learnt that the beginning of collection of guns begins with our Armed Forces, that is, they would like to buy away some guns, which could be lingering around in Koboko from rebels, those people who have surrendered.  The aim is actually to rid arms away from Koboko. 

But as the business started lightly, you know that more rebels were in Congo, others in Sudan, so a flood of guns started flowing to Koboko.  So, now we from Koboko are getting confused, has the Ministry of Defence stopped buying guns so that we know that those, which are coming are really coming from rebels?  So, can I have that because we are really perturbed and we are worried?  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.40
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to start by thanking the Government for accepting peace talks. I also want to especially thank Mrs Betty Bigombe for accepting to mediate and coordinate the peace talks. I also want to thank members of the peace team, both Government and Members from Parliament that constituted the peace team that have risked their lives to ensure that they engage in the negotiation, which we really think hopefully can contribute into ending the war in Northern Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to welcome the development in Sudan.  I hope that the positive development in Sudan will somehow play a role in dealing with the root cause of the problem because if Sudan was not a factor in harbouring LRA, probably by now we would not be in this problem.  

So, I want to urge Government to use this positive development in Sudan to ensure that it plays a contributively role in bringing this issue to its logical conclusion.  

I want also to note that the people in Northern Uganda are hopeful.  At this moment everybody feels that it is time that the peace is at the corner. I want to ask Government to do all that it can to ensure that really this time peace returns to northern Uganda permanently.  

People have started re-focusing their mind into how they are going to rebuild themselves, how they are going to rehabilitate their status, and how they are going to get out of the camps.  This is now what is going; people are having so much high hope, I hope their hope will not be destroyed.  

Hon. Minister, I hope that you take this message to the Executive that the people in northern Uganda have too much hope, that this time their hope should not be destroyed. 

I want to r-emphasize the marginalisation of Apac District.  Just as early as yesterday I received messages of attacks in Apac District, the whole of last week there has been attacks in sub-counties of Ngayi, Otwal and part of Icheme. 

You know, the problem in Apac in the bordering sub-counties has been there for the last 19 years.  Apac District, Minakulu sub-county, Icheme sub-county, Ngayi sub-county, Otwal Sub-county, the famous Aboke - that is where the girls were abducted from – Analito sub-county, these are bordering sub-counties, more than six sub-counties that have persistently got problems for the last 19 years.  But it is so disheartening that every time a statement comes, Apac district is hardly included, even in the planning.  

I was on Saturday in the Prime Minister’s Office, they are developing a document called RAD, which is a Rehabilitation Programme for Northern Uganda, which is to follow NUSAF may be for the next five or ten years.  In that document, Apac district was missing.  

Now I am starting to wonder whether it is a design in all sectors.  I am starting to wonder because, that document actually now included Sironko and Kapchorwa and there was a mention that they wanted Kasese to be part of the rehabilitation of northern Uganda after the war.  Yes, yes, I can see my colleague already clapping but unfortunately we have rejected it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, order, hon. Members.

MS AMONGI: So, this is really to emphasize the point that I want Apac district to be attended to.  I have many times laid on table data on IDP situation in Apac district and data on security situation in Apac district, but it is disheartening that it continuously keeps on missing and I hope that next time it will not be the case.

Lastly, there is a security threat now in northern Uganda and this is associated actually with the massive recruitment of Amuka Boys and the LDUs.  

People have already talked about this problem of giving orders that everybody should go to camps.  There was a big crisis when we were in recess that everybody was told to go to the camps and then we did not know where the command came from that has already been alluded to.  

The issue I want us to tackle is how are we going to demobilize, disarm and get all these guns from these people? So many of them have already committed crimes within the districts.  

In Akalo sub-county where I am, there was an incident of Amuka Boys killing people, so we need to deal with this security threat.  We need to design a strategy of how Amuka Boys should be commanded structurally.  

The commander has told us that they were supposed to have left the guns when they are going back home to visit or to do something, but they go back with guns.  So, we need to find a way how this can be reinforced so that our people, of course not all of them, these few elements that are trying to destabilize people are dealt with and we design a policy for disarmament when peace returns.  I thank you, Madam speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I know we have not debated security since November, but I would appreciate if you really be brief so that more members can contribute.  

5.49
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  When hon. Angiro Gutumoi was giving information to a member who was on the Floor, he used a point which to me did not present the situation there and then.  

I was with him on the 30th last month and we went to a place called Ogur IDP camp.  The IO put us almost straight on the eye with a gun.  He said, “You, honourable Members of Parliament tell me now, from October last year up to today we have not got our salary.  If it were you, how can you stop me from getting people to give me a living?”  

Madam Speaker, that was serious.  Nervous as we are civilians, it was difficult for us to give him response.  This shows the extent to which things are worsening and indeed it does not require reaction, it needs a proper on-going plan, which will answer for time to come.

Madam Speaker, in the report the minister is saying- that is paragraph 2 of page 2.  The Minister is saying Kony and some of his commanders are still in concealment in Southern Sudan.  Reading this kind of statement worries me.  In concealment from who and where, because if Sudan is in agreement with the UPDF, what role is Sudan doing to expose the area of concealment?  

This brings us to asking the question about the content of the agreement.  What does the agreement specify that if this happens what happens, if this does not come, what goes on?  So, I think there are series of questions to ask about the agreement itself.  

Now the LRA stay in Sudan is being challenged but the agreement must speak honestly out, because right now it has been renewed as many as about six more times or so.  Now, what do we intend to achieve at the end of it all?  When do we intend to succeed and will Sudan not get fade up with us and say I am not prepared to renew the agreement?

Madam Speaker, the Minister presented to us what is happening between LRA, both in Uganda and Sudan.  I have got a very pertinent question.  

There are widows in this country who are asking for their husbands who have been away for years and years.  There are no statements to point whether these people are live or dead.  If they are dead, I am a Lango by tribe and my culture insists on entertaining a dead person making sure that he or she is buried and buried decently.  If you help me to bury my relative decently, I will be very happy with you.  But for you to conceal from me the death of my relative and make me continue believing he is still alive, I pray that God treats you in the same manner.  

So, there is a need for the Government to have a standing policy of giving us information about the soldiers who are not with us in this country.  If they are dead, how do we retrieve the dead bodies?  There must be a standing policy on this.  

Madam Speaker, I thank the approach and the attempt the Government is putting in place of attracting many soldiers to surrender, and I get impressed when top military men of the LRA team give up fighting and come back to Uganda.  

But I have a question, how should we be treating these people really?  For sure, Madam Speaker, it is our intention to get them back as humanly as possible so that we can use them to attract those who are still not sure whether to surrender or not.  

But, Madam Speaker, I find it a little bit difficult if a man like the son of Late Idi Amin, who surrendered recently - that was very good - but to get him all of a sudden being given a VIP treatment.  

Well, unless you are explaining that to mean that you are trying to attract those who are still not sure to surrender, that if they ever do they will also be accorded VIP treatment.  But if not, I want the Minister to assure this House what his policy in this is because to promise a former rebel, who can still be active tomorrow, a post on leading a musical group -(Interruption)

MR AWONGO: Madam Speaker, is the Member in order to say that Taban Amin should not be given the kind of respect, which he is receiving now, when he has voluntarily decided to come home and join the rest of Ugandans to build this country?  Is the Member, therefore, in order to say that this man should not be given this respect and support?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the hon. Member is wondering whether we have a uniform policy for treating people who have come back, because in his view he thinks he has got some special status, so he wants the Minister to tell us what his policy is on returning rebels.  But, hon. Omodi Okot, please conclude.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  My brother joined the House late; he may still have to learn the culture of this House- (Laughter)- It is important that we put a policy that will guide our actions and activities so that we are not misconstrued in whatever we do.  

I was wondering, and I want to end up wondering, as to why it is possible for us to believe the son of Late Amin could be the leader of a musical group.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Member, you have already made that point, do not belabour it.  Thank you.

MR OMODI OKOT:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.58
MRS ROSE LOCHIAM (Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I take this opportunity to thank the Karamoja leadership, Karamoja NGOs and UPDF for the work they are doing in the disarmament process.  

The UPDF are guiding the roads and they are also pursuing the cattle rustlers within Karamoja, and at least in Moroto District I have seen some incidences where they have returned the cattle from the cattle thieves to the owners. This has happened of recent, but in the past it was not happening.  So, at least I feel that indicator is good for the disarmament process.  

The leadership and also the NGOs, are mobilizing and they are sensitising the people, though they are not well facilitated.  In my observation, I feel the Government is not fulfilling some of the concerns or the measures, which would help in the disarmament process, to bring the insecurity to an end in Karamu.  

I feel the Government is slow in the bits it is trying to do, and also some aspects it has not touched completely, and I feel that is slowing the disarmament process.  

In the areas of, for example, security roads, the Government has not yet put the security roads in position so that the UPDF would be faster in pursuing the cattle rustlers.  

Then the water for the Army is not yet in place, water for production, drugs for the Army, food for the communities; law and order institutions are not strengthened yet.  

I also feel that the facilitation for the Members of Parliament and district Leaders should be strengthened in mobilization and sensitisation offered.  This also would help to bring to an end the complicated cattle rustling because it is in three folds. 

It is there internally within Karamoja, which is almost wiping us out and hindering us from development; then it is also affecting the neighbouring districts; and it is also in the neighbouring countries.  So I feel, if the Government does not put these measures into place, the disarmament process will be complicated.

As we are speaking now, the Army is not deployed at the external border, and this makes the whole process complicated.  As long as the Army is within Karamoja only, I feel disarmament will not succeed and will not be faster.  

So, I urge the Government to come in quickly to facilitate the process and fulfil the part it is supposed to do.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.01
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Kapelebyong County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, allow me thank hon. Amama Mbabazi for, first, the effort he has put to organize the Military forces to fight off insecurity; and secondly, for this good statement.  

Hon. Minister, Madam Speaker, my people in Kapelebyong must be very happy to listen to this programme because they have been very anxious to hear about the security situation.  I think they are now imagining when you will come to Kapelebyong and they give you their views directly.  

Many times they have told us to tell you certain things and we have some time constraint here, and we are not able to give you all the details of what they would wish.  So, I would like to extend this invitation to you to come to Kapelebyong so that you get more ideas from my constituents directly.

I would like to confirm here, Madam Speaker, the statement by the Minister on page two, that at the moment there are no LRA rebels in the Soroti area.  

I am assuming that the Soroti area covers Kapelebyong, Katakwi, Kaberamaido, where we had the LRA incursion.  However, our soldiers have remained vigilant and would like to send a message to the LRA, that please take advantage of this dialogue.  

We had a similar experience and this Government is good.  They must be listening to this programme wherever they are, and when we had the UPA war, our people surrendered and those of the UPA fighters who surrendered are well placed in this Government.  

Look at the list of the Resident District Commissioners coming from Teso, you will find that most of them were rebels in the UPA, but they are working very hard with this Government and we think the Lord Resistance Army can also benefit from these peace talks.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my hon. colleague. I would like to inform my hon. colleague that not only the former Resident District Commissioners but even the Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces was once a rebel.

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague-

MR ERESU: I would like to inform my hon. member on the Floor and Members of this House that even the member representing the people of Samia-Bugwe North was a rebel commander.

MR MALINGA: I think that should be very good message to the Lord’s Resistance Army wherever they are.  

The people of Northern Uganda have had a long time of suffering and they should come and join the rest of the Ugandans in Parliament, being Resident District Commissioners, they can become Permanent Secretaries if they have gone to school.  

Madam Speaker, despite the calm we have received, we still have a problem, the major problem we now have is that because our people were put out of production, we have a lot of famine amongst our people.  

We would like to appeal through you that the Minister of Disaster Preparedness comes in time to save our people.  We have no food, our people are very desperate and to supplement the efforts of the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and the Ministry of Agriculture should come in to support us by giving food, by providing seed and also by providing agricultural production equipment.

Madam Speaker, Betty Bigombe has done a wonderful job.  I do not know how much support he is getting from the Government of Uganda, but I would like to pray that God adds to her more life and the Government of Uganda gives her more resources and that the Lords Resistance Army will listen to her voice and come out of the bush and give Ugandans peace.

When you turn to page 4 of this statement, the Minister has highlighted the achievements of the Uganda People’s Defence operations, but I would like to appeal to the Minister that part 4(C) of where you have said that you have eliminated 2,077 rebels out of action, I do not think this is what we should be very proud of.  

Many of these people did not join the Lords Resistance Army willingly, they were abducted and we pray that when you are giving your report of achievements may be next time you just delete that area.  We should not be proud of the fellow Ugandans that have been killed because, they were forced to be there.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much my Brother hon. Malinga.  The information I would like to give hon. Malinga, Madam Speaker, is that these 2,077 Lords Resistance Army eliminated actually qualified to be abductees, and when you look at the number of abductees, the 3,064 just within one year, now I do not know when the hon. Minister will tell us the total number of abductees so far which have been rescued and then the total number of the Lords Resistance Army who have fallen because, otherwise, from this figure, under the UPDF operation can still the Government stand to tell the whole world that Kony was weak as they used to say; was he really weak?  I think that was a misinformation, thank you.

MR MALINGA JOHNSON: Thank you for the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, conclude.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA:  I am coming to the last point, Madam Speaker. To conclude the other point, I would not like any Ugandan to be proud of the Ugandans that have been killed and count it as an achievement.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, when you turn to page 6, the Minister has pointed out the operation in Karamoja is yielding results and unfortunately, the lowest response is coming from Nakapiripirit.  

You are aware, Madam Speaker, that the hon. Minister who comes from Karamoja in this Government comes from Nakapiripirit.  We are very surprised to learn that where the Minister comes from, is where Government is getting the least results.  Does this imply that the hon. Minister is part and parcel of this process?  

Finally, I would like to advise that the issue of disarmament must be taken very seriously otherwise, it might become very difficult for the National Political Commissar and his team, those of us who support you, to go and tell the people that you are going to disarm tomorrow. 

Let us get this question of the Karamoja out and help the people of Karamoja. You need a concerted effort; you need a multi-sectoral approach so that the economy of Karamoja is looked at alongside the disarmament process. I thank you, Madam speaker.

6.11
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would also wish to thank the Minister for his statement. 

Madam Speaker, I wanted to be clarified on page 3 (b) when the Minister talked about military pressure being used to compel the Lords Resistance Army terrorist to talk and while at the same time, he says that Government is supporting and encouraging Betty Bigombe’s mediation efforts.  

How are these two being done concurrently because, if there is military pressure, I would imagine that these negotiations might be hampered because, these LRA people might be running away or hiding from where Bigombe would have wished to meet and negotiate with them.  So, this is where I wanted to get this clarification, the type of pressure the military group is putting on these LRA.

On page 4, we have been informed about the results or the position in the North from the UPDF operations and we have been told of 2,077 rebels being eliminated.  

I would have wished to see how many of our officers have also been eliminated by the other group because this means – (Interjection) –if we could be given the position of the UPDF, because if we are having them being eliminated almost at the same rate, this would be having a lot of impact on our Budget and the forces we have because this would mean re-training or training more people time and again.  So I would like to know whether as these people are being eliminated, are we not affected in the similar way in UPDF?

MR MULENGANI: Thank you very much, hon. Balemezi, for giving way.  All Members have spoken on this Floor but none has thanked the leadership of the southern part of this country, the western part of this country and south eastern part for one reason; the effects of war usually do not affect the war zone alone.  

In Busoga today as we talk, it is called a United Nations area, reason being there are a lot of people moving from Karamoja, a lot of people moving from Sebei, a lot of people moving from the north and they are all in Busoga.  

Now, what does this mean or in any other part of the country that is peaceful?  It has a lot of impact, therefore, economically for these areas.  This is why you see issues of land fragmentation, population increases in this area, which eventually impact on the health of the people in region as well.  

So, I think we also need to appreciate that the southern, eastern and western parts of Uganda that have been peaceful, having allowed people to come and settle, also having allowed the budget to be cut economically - you know, development has been deterred in this country and other parts of the country that are really peaceful that eventually people have accepted to ensure that the north becomes peaceful.  So, if somebody stands up in this House and then eventually starts saying that, “You see, we people in the North are not peaceful…” 

So, the information I wanted to give my Colleague here is that the impact of the war is not only in the areas where the war occurs, but it also impacts on the people who are in peaceful areas; and more so, in the same country, not in foreign countries.  Thank you very much.

MRS BALEMEZI: I would like to thank my Colleague for the information, but I think he wanted to make his contribution because there is no way it was related to what I was talking.  

I want to talk about the Karamoja area.  The last time I was there with the Members of the Committee on Local Governments, this was around September/October. We got a chance of talking to a number of Karimojong and we were informed that they were willing to surrender their guns.  But as they surrender the guns people from neighbouring areas come and attack them and find them unarmed, and Government has not made any provision to ensure the security of these people and their animals as they take away the guns. 

So, I wanted the Minister to inform us and let me know whether this has been worked on because –(Interruption)

MR MALINGA:  Madam Speaker, the presenter on the Floor has made a very fundamental statement, that when they remove the guns from the Karimojong, people from the neighbouring areas go and rustle their cattle and the Government does not put measures.  

Kapelebyong is one of the areas neighbouring Karamoja, could I know from the speaker which specific areas she is referring to because I wanted to go on record that the people of Teso who border Karamoja in one area have never gone to raid in Karamoja? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, you know that the Pokot and the Turkana are in the neighbourhood.

MRS BALEMEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I talked about Karimojong, we visited Karamoja area and the information we got was that the neighbours - so may be my colleague, the hon. Member’s group - I really do not know, they never talked about Teso area, they just told us about people from neighbouring areas.  So, I think this would be put to the Minister to inform us. 

In fact you are putting this to the Minister to inform us as to whether as they take away the guns from the Karimojong, they provide security to them and their animals so that they do not raid Teso.  

Madam Speaker, in fact we narrowly survived an ambush by these Karimojong because I think they thought that we were the people who had gone to disarm them.  But, fortunately, God was on our side.  

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I understand Mrs Betty Bigombe is on the external wing that is trying to talk peace with LRA.  But I just wanted to know from the Minister, as Mrs Betty Bigombe does this work, is she attached to UPDF, to Ministry of Finance, to President’s Office, where does she fall within Uganda set-up?  I thank you.

6.20
MRS CECILIA ATIM OGWAL (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me opportunity to air out a few views.  I would like to thank the Minister for bringing this statement and also for being very tactful to give us a lot more about Lira, which was not in the statement; otherwise we would raised a lot of issues.  

It is true that there have been attacks in Lira District of which he mentioned Aromo, there was also an attack in Apala Sub-county, Barr Sub-county, to mention a few.  All this happened between the 15th to the end of the month in January.  

I would like to bring to your attention that there are some people who cause insecurity, and these people have not been mentioned here.  Some of them are Government functionaries, one of them being the Deputy Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Lira, Mr Lochap –(Interjection)- yes, I have to mention this.  

During the time when I was out there in the field together with Members of Parliament, this one person has been asking people to go back to their homes yet it is true that some of these places are not yet reachable.  

These people who heard this information over radio were so disturbed.  I met a group, and that is Members of the Council of Olilim Sub-county, who reside in Lira and held their meeting in Lira Town where they have an office.  They said that it is the RDC who is revealing to those rebels that they have gone back home.  

So, I am advising Government to beware of how it operates and how it sends it out its information because everyone listens to that radio.  There are five FM Stations in Lira, and the way you decide to use it, know that you are also giving information to the rebels that people are back at home.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the havoc that is raked on the people of Lira currently is being done so because of the manner in which these people are being aided.  The humanitarian assistance that is being offered to these people is very untimely.  

I visited most of these camps, to mention there are 54 camps in Lira District. I would like to put the record straight, many of these camps, it is true that the food that is being offered to these people is supposed to last for two months, but this food hardly stays for two weeks, and these people are forced to go out to their fields where they left cassava about two years ago so that they can harvest and eat something. So, it would be very important if Government would have a coordination of activities.  Some people were of the view that most of the food they see going through their land goes to neighbouring districts. There is really a big outcry from certain sections of the people along that road because they have suffered without seeing any food at all.

Madam Speaker, it is true that the people who are there to help, and that is in the name of Amuka, live under very hard conditions. My colleagues have already echoed it but I would also like to repeat it because I saw this myself. These people hardly have any uniform on; the few I saw with clean uniform they told me that they borrowed them from their relatives who are in the UPDF. I have to tell you this so that you know it. 

It is also true that last month, when I was in the field, these people had not received their salaries for four months. So, if it has not yet happened in my absence, it means it is now five months since they last received their salaries. So, there is loss of morale, it is stated here that the LRA are running out of morale but it is true that the UPDF and the Amuka and whatever, are also running out of morale.  So you see the situation we are in.

When I went to Apara sub county, I was informed by the people that - this is Abia camp. I asked them how they were at the moment and they told me that the previous night, there were lots of gunshots from Okwang side and then, I went on to find out the cause for such an occurrence and they told me - and this information I got from informants who are down in the field - that there were lots of gunshots in Okwang sub county that neighbours Apara because some UPDF have not got their salaries. Those are the people who missed out, others had got, and then others missed out. So, I wonder how salary is set out to the UPDF people who are on the ground and that raises a lot of concern.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, try to wind up.

MRS OGWAL: Lastly, Madam Speaker, on Monday 21st February it will be one year since we had that massacre in Balonyo and there is going to be a memorial service on the ground. So, I would like to invite you and Members of Parliament to come and join us in that ceremony. I thank you very much.

6.27
MR AHMED AWONGO  (Koboko County, Arua):  Madam speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to say a few things about what the honourable Minister has presented. In the same vein, I would like to thank the honourable Minister for giving this wonderful statement to this august House and I want also to thank the UPDF and the Government for a job well done. I think without their efforts, these achievements and many others, which the minister has not mentioned in my view, would not have been possible.  

But, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that following the arrest of PRA agents in West Nile, we the leadership of West Nile, Arua and Koboko in particular decided to go on a very serious mobilisation exercise and during this exercise, our people resolved two things:  

Number one, to ensure that there is total peace in West Nile, total peace in Arua and total peace in Koboko. The second resolution was to go on a voluntary disarmament programme. When the minister gave you figures of arms that have been recovered, especially in Koboko, this was as a result of this voluntary disarmament programme. 

The people on their own decided to search for these guns which were brought from Sudan by the agents of the PRA and from October last year up-to-date, a total of over 134 guns have been recovered and this was as a result of the efforts of the people. Without the peoples’ support, the UPDF would not have been in position to get these guns.  

My appeal, especially to Government and particularly to UPDF is that, when these volunteers show you where these guns are kept, I think it would be important to look at these people as allies. Many times some of these people have been tortured because they revealed where these guns have been kept, and they have not been looked at as allies for better achievements. I would like to encourage especially, the security officers to work together with these people who have volunteered to show where these guns are.

Now about this statement, which somebody mentioned here that the people of Koboko have been trading in arms, that they have been getting arms, that they would keep these arms to wait for better markets, I think this is very outrageous. It is, in my view, intended to blackmail the people of Koboko. We know how much we have suffered as the people of Koboko, and for us we were able to come back to Uganda in 1988 that is from 1979 when our people were displaced. We embraced this Government, it is this Government that brought us from exile and we cannot in any way fight it. We want peace and only peace.  We shall do everything possible to ensure that this peace, which is already here in this country is sustained. 

Another issue, which I want to raise here, is the issue of ex-service men. Madam Speaker, you will remember in West Nile alone, there are over 17000 ex- service men and these people have never been officially retired neither have they been paid their retirement package and these people have been so humble, they have been so supportive. 

I think it will be very important if these people are also paid their packages so that they can settle down and develop themselves like any other Ugandan. It is also not true for anybody to think that these things which are happening there are with the involvement of these X-service men.  These are not ex-service men, these are people who have come from elsewhere and it is our responsibility as Government to ensure that they are stopped and especially when the people themselves are in support of the Government.  

I want to end by saying that in Arua and in Koboko we shall never ever allow any sort of insurgency in that part of the country. I thank you very much.

6.32
MR SAMUEL ANYOLO (Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the report. However, I want to restrict myself to page 2 of the report paragraph two. The minister applauds Arrow boys, Amuka boys and UPDF. Truly long live Arrow, Amuka and UPDF! But, however, these people do the same job, they face the same conditions but different welfare. 

For example, in the course of that operation we lost a few of these boys, they left behind children, women and nothing is being done. I am aware of recent, UPDF is establishing some secondary schools. Can the minister assure me that he is going to incorporate these children, who have fallen out of school, because they lost their fathers because of this?

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, hon. Anyolo, for giving way. You are talking about the war victims of I think last year. But we were attacked by ADF in 1997, I think, in this war of Kibaale, and these war victims have not been catered for. So, I am wondering whether yours will be catered for this time because ours have never been catered for, the property that was lost, nothing was done. 

Even as we talk today, people talk about compensation, our people have not been compensated; rehabilitation, no rehabilitation programme for Kibaale. So, I do not know. You only have my prayers, but the way I see things, it seems when it is wartime - even the people called the home guards were not paid. So, it is only my prayers when I see you saying, “When will these people go to school” because ours, the orphans are there languishing.

MR ARAALI: Thank you very much for giving way, my colleague. I would like to inform this House that when ADF was operating in Kibaale, I was there as Resident District Commissioner (RDC). They burnt some health units, killed so many people, captured young people and those have not been helped at all.  

On another note, that Kabarole also was affected very much and, therefore, when you are talking about Kasese, which I approve really, they suffered a lot, we should talk about Kabarole, Kibaale as well so that they are also under a special programme for being assisted as people who suffered under ADF. Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Thank you very much. I would like to inform my honourable colleagues, who have been on the Floor, that you just have to wait for another 18 months before things can improve.  (Laughter)

MR ANYOLO: Thank you. I think, honourable Minister, that information is not very good for you, neither is it good for the Government because what it means is that you normally use people in times of need and then whatever happens after that, you neglect them. So, I beg that you take this information seriously. These children are languishing at home, they are no longer at school, and yet their fallen fathers did a good job for this country.

Two, on paragraph (b), Government encourages dialogue. LRA has a known leader, Kony. I do not know whether Government knows the leader of PRA such that they could enter into dialogue as early as possible because the danger I foresee is, we are only removing ‘L’ and replacing it with ‘P’. We might end up with another war, changing a name. So, better think about that, honourable Minister.

Then on page 6, disarmament: The first phase results were not good, second phase is still shaky, the third one by the law of averages will fail because if the first one failed, the second one is already becoming a failure and yet in Teso this is a big question. LRA attacked, we were in camps for about one year and we went home, but we are permanently in camps because of Karimojong and cattle rustling. If this issue of disarmament is not handled, then the people may have very little hope for the future, and they may even question the Government of the day. Take this in good faith.  

During my consultations on White Paper, what I was consulting on was regarded as secondary, but the major thing I was being asked is their security as regarding Karamoja. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.38
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the minister for his statement, but I would like to say that I am a bit disappointed when the minister talks about relative peace in the country except some parts of Northern Uganda and he only mentions Gulu, Kitgum and Pader, yet we also have a problem in Adjumani and in the Lango sub-region.  

Madam Speaker, I say this because many areas of my district are infested by the LRA people, especially the area in Zoka, in Riyani, Arinyapi, Elegu parish, Lewa, Pagirinya and so forth. All these areas do not have people because LRA operates around those areas. People are scattered in the rest of the district and in Moyo District, we do not have camps in Adjumani. 

But I am also disappointed that many times we are not considered when issues of this LRA are being focused on, and even this very august House formed a select committee to go and verify what is happening in the North and Adjumani was not even considered. Even as a Member of the committee when I was pleading to have the issues of Adjumani in the report of the committee, it was sidelined until I had to bring my own report here on the Floor.  So, Mr Minister, I hope that you are not –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I chaired the select committee. The select committee was appropriately named by the Chair to look at issues of security and the humanitarian situation in Lango, Teso, and Acholi sub-region and the Chair did give us very specific terms of reference, and hon. Jessica Eriyo was a member of that select committee.  She did not come up, in the course of our business, even to say that she was presenting a minority report, if she felt we were out of order in the way we conducted business. 

When she made her petition to the committee she said, “If there is room for any other thing, say something about Adjumani, in terms of any other matters of concern to the committee,” and we captured that in the report. Any other issues, we captured Bugisu, the landslides and Adjumani. Is she, therefore, in order to now come to this Floor and disown her very report, which she signed? She signed it, it is on the records of this House, it was debated and it was passed. Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think in addition to her signing the report, I gave her opportunity to say something about Adjumani. So, you cannot really accuse the House of sidelining issues of Adjumani.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank you for giving me that opportunity. I am only saying that even today the minister is still forgetting Adjumani the way it was forgotten in the beginning, and I hope next time when we talk about the LRA issues, nobody will forget about it.  Precisely –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jessica Eriyo, when we set terms of reference they have got boundaries. If the Members had gone out of them, we would say, “You see, you went out of terms of reference.” Maybe you need to bring up something separate on Adjumani.  But if we say you are going to do a, b, c, d, they cannot go to f and g because the terms are set.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I have poured out what has been burning in my heart.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I just want to add to hon. Eriyo Jessica’s appeal, because it is a common practice. If it is not a common practice, then people do not know where Adjumani is geographically. If they do then deliberately they do not want to talk about Adjumani. Actually Adjumani has suffered and for the information of us here, Adjumani has 150 kilometres border with Gulu right from Sudan all along to a point facing Rhino camp. 

So, there are so many incursions. In fact, from February last year to about September we have counted over 46 incursions. But if you hear the reports, people are talking about report of insecurity our Adjumani problem is overshadowed.  Possibly if you are in hospital sick and somebody had internal haemorrhage, probably the doctors attend to him/her faster and leave you with a broken leg who is still talking. This is how we consider ourselves to be always regarded. We are neighbours of Gulu, which is having the biggest camps, but our problem is being belittled nobody pays attention. But I think we have problems –(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member holding the Floor is the Minister of Disaster preparedness, First Deputy Prime Minister and all these other titles and he is talking about his place being marginalized when he is on the front bench. Is the honourable Minister in order when he is the man who is nearer to the cake and who is on the dividing table – (Laughter) - to tell this House that his place is marginalized? Is he in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Deputy Prime Minister sometimes actually heads Cabinet.  He chairs the Cabinet meetings, so he should be knowledgeable about marginalisation and other things.   

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: No, Madam Speaker, I am not actually talking about food –(Laughter)- and I will not talk about food, indeed I know they will blame me for that. I am talking about security problems. People have been displaced in places she has counted and I am saying, because Adjumani is nearer to the biggest problems, people tend to forget in reporting probably this is what happened in the minister’s report. Even if I chair the Cabinet I do not know how the minister writes the report, and I only see them when they have written omitting Adjumani as he has done. (Laughter) So, I appeal to people concerned with reporting insecurity not to forget about Adjumani. Adjumani is suffering like anybody else. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think let us proceed this way. Shall we say that in future we expect the report on security to include Apac because Apac has been complaining on several occasions that they are left out and to include Adjumani? Is there any other area, which has not been – Masindi –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Madam Speaker, I am of the view that the statement to Parliament regarding security situation in the country should contain the whole country because if you go on dividing the country like that, does the country mean Adjumani, Apac and Gulu? You have to include -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we started this reporting, we were specifically looking at the situation in the North, that we should have time to review regularly what is happening. But if we are going to include the whole country, the North will disappear; even the sleeping sickness will disappear.

MR NSUBUGA: Then, Madam Speaker, let him amend the title.

MS ERIYO: Well, thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me continue with my contribution on this. I am really concerned because even towards the end of last year, about four incursions happened in one month in Adjumani and on 30th November an old man whose four cattle were taken away was killed in Alinya Pii. I am sure the UPDF is even aware of that and I am even worried that my colleague, hon. Angiro Charles, can have his home surrounded and looted by LRA. So, I am really wondering whether we are safe in some parts of Northern Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to what my colleagues have said about motivation of the Amuka, Arrow, the Vigilantees, the home guards etc. These people are really suffering. I normally see them especially the ones who are supporting the UPDF on the convoys they go hungry. Sometimes when we travel on the convoy we give them little money to buy sugarcanes or something on the way, because their salaries delay and everyday they have to be on the road. So really, they must be looked after properly. 

I want to applaud the dialogue between Sudan and SPLA/SPLM and I want to thank the Government for supporting that effort. I want to appeal that the Government continues to support that effort until the refugees all return to Southern Sudan; so that we, and the people of Southern Sudan can continue to have the usual development that we used to have; that LRA is removed from Southern Sudan because that is an opportunity for us to wipe LRA in their hiding places in Southern Sudan. 

I want to congratulate some of these LRA officials who have surrendered the Achelams, the Kamudulus, Brig. Banya and so forth. I really want to thank Government, Madam Speaker, for absorbing some of these people into UPDF. I am saying I want to thank Government for this because some of these people can now not fit in their homes, in their societies.  They are actually a source of insecurity within their homes. So, people are happy when they are absorbed the way UNLF too was absorbed in the Army and they are scattered all over the country to serve properly.  

I am worried about the disarmament process. The press is saying that UPDF has given order that the Karimajong who are seen with guns should be shot on site. I do not know if that is true, I want the honourable Minister to comment about that and whether that is really the best way to go about it.  

PRA, Madam Speaker, is real. My colleagues are asking whether it is true or not, I want to testify that it is true. In fact, even my colleague, hon. Awongo, was RDC in Adjumani and together we were able to capture people who were being picked. PRA had a strategy of picking one person per parish and take them for training and return them under their “Train and Return” (TR) strategy. So, they were picking people one by one, train them, return them, pick another round, go train them, return them and then arm them. That is why we are now collecting guns from these people in West Nile. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.52
MR JOSEPH KULE MURANGA (Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the minister for this wonderful statement. However, I have the following to comment on:  

On page 5, the honourable Minister talked about security in western Uganda and referred to ADF as being calm but threatening. It is true that some remnant rebels of ADF are still in the Congo and PRA also has come to reinforce the former ADF. So, this threat is still there. 

But one problem still lingers. When ADF came in 1996, we trained our sons and daughters to help UPDF and they did a very good job. But surprisingly, most of these people were not paid. Up to now they are not paid, and I do not know how we shall mobilize them again. Should such an occurrence happen, how shall we mobilize them to fight ADF or PRA whenever we are attacked when we have never paid them? 

Whenever I move around, these people ask me, because for a long time I was on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and they knew because I was mobilizing them, they said, “Why are we not paid? At least give us something as a token, certainly we did a good job.” So, I hope the minister will clear my conscience and he answers those people through me so that I go and tell them how they are going to be treated. It is terrible actually, someone does a good job and he is not even given a token to thank him –(Interruption)

MR ARAALI: I am seeking clarification. When you speak about your sons and daughters, you mean the sons and daughters of which place because we have got Rwenzori region, which was affected anyway and our sons and daughters are saying the same? So, I think you better clarify that, honourable colleague.

MR MURANGA: Thank you very much.  When I talk about sons and daughters, I talk about sons and daughters of Rwenzori region. You see, there are six districts, which were affected; we have Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kasese, Kyenjojo, Kamwenge and part of Bushenyi and even Kibaale by the way. So, all these people were grouped together and trained and they did a very good job. So, they would like to be told when they would be realized as having done a good job.

Another point is about Rwanda. Rwanda has been coming up every time. To the best of my recollection, people of Rwanda, who came here in 1959, were given sanctuary in my constituency in Ibuga. Even the late Rwigyema was there, he had his primary seven in my place, and we thought we were helping people who are very useful to us. 

So, when Rwanda turns against us, I wonder how somebody who was your friend, you gave him food, you gave everything, turns against you to such an extent.  Can we not use the tactics we used so that we can have them as friends? I remember these people were friends, I do not see why they should become enemies to such extent. I think Government should do something about it. I do not see why Rwanda should be mentioned every time as people having ill motives against Uganda. I get disorganized.

Number three on these points is disarmament of Karamoja. We have been with this problem of Karamoja in all governments after independence, and yet to the best of my knowledge these are not the only people with cattle. We have the Bahima in western Uganda, they have even better cattle than those ones in the east, but they do not rustle.  Why can Government not have a deliberate policy of sensitising these people so that they behave the way the Bahima behave? Which culture warrants that type of action of taking people’s animals? I do not see why we should – because however much we do by force, it will not work. These people need –(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: The best way of educating people who have not gone to school is by living with them.  Are you trying to propose that Karimojong could be moved to the Bahima so that they stay with them and learn not to rustle cattle because a Karimojong who has not gone to school believes in rustling? Are you proposing that since the best way of changing culture is by indoctrinating these people through the Bahima culture, should they be moved from Karamoja to the Bahima land?

MS LOCHIAM: For your information, I do not think cattle rustling is done by all Karimojong, even if they have not gone to school. It is done by few people who are like vehicle thieves here in Kampala or thieves elsewhere. So, taking it as a culture will make it difficult for the strategies to be got. So, if we isolate the thieves and handle them and give them the right strategies, that will help because it is not that every Karimojong is a cattle rustler. Thank you.

MR MURANGA: Thank you very much, for all that information. Madam Speaker, I get perturbed because all along we have been talking about the Karamoja rustling and I believe if some of these warriors were captured and taken to Ankole to see how people can settle down with their cattle, maybe they would come back with a good picture of how people can live. Secondly, if some of these people were married there, they would also maybe absorb a good culture other than that of rustling because it is too much.

MR AWORI: I happen to have a very large Karimojong community in my constituency and the neighbouring districts, Bugiri and Iganga. In my own district, the Karimojong, leave alone cattle rustling, now monopolize foreign exchange; they are the money dealers in Busia. So, people are capable of changing from cattle rustling to money changing.

MR ATUBO: Thank you very much. You see, Madam Speaker, the attitude on my brothers from Karamoja, whom I am pleased to share a border with, is like the attitude we have had on the war in the North. There was a time when people would see you from Acholi or from Lango and, because the rebel activity is there, they would just lump you that you are part of the problem and I am not surprised that this is going on with Karamoja. There are a lot of good people in Karamoja; you see them in the House here. The issue is, the way we are trying to fight rebel activity in Acholi, and then the good ones emerge even in Lango. 

So, the challenge really is on the Government to go and ensure that disarmament or any other means is implemented to ensure that cattle rustling stops in Karamoja and you will see the good results. Before this cattle rustling intensified after Amin, 1979/ 1980, how many people studied in Morulem, in Moroto High School all in Karamoja, you know and so on. So, the challenge really is on the Government to ensure that cattle rustling stops in Karamoja, the few people who are causing this problem are completely stopped or eliminated. Thank you.

MR MURANGA: Thank you very much, for that information. Madam Speaker, I remember we had even suggested that we should make feeder roads to curb those people who come from Kenya to disturb the Karimojong. I thought those ones would help. I think it will still help when those feeder roads are made in that area.

Then lastly, Madam Speaker, it is about the recruitment. I am happy that UPDF is going to recruit. But what has in most cases happened in my constituency and in Kasese in particular, some people are not recruited even when they have the qualifications. Some officers come with their people from other areas and they are recruited from Kasese. I pray that this time let people who are born in Kasese be recruited in Kasese. So, thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me time.

7.04
DR YEKKO ARAPKISSA (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for his statement. I want to react to the minister’s statement on page 6 on cattle rustling.  Point number (c), which reads partly that, “…though necessary measures to end cattle rustling and armed thuggery are already in place within Karamoja and the districts neighbouring Karamoja plus Uganda’s international borders.” Well, I agree with the minister that his statement is true as far as the Karimojong ethnic group is concerned, that is the group, which speaks the Akaramojong. But it is not true among the Pokot ethnic group.  

I am saying this because in the last one and a half months, beginning around December up-to-date, there is a big influx of Pokot who are heavily armed and they are in thousands who have entered into Uganda, they are now camping on the lower side of Kongasis County of hon. Dr Kapkwomu and in Kongasis on the lower side of Chesawe sub county, and in my constituency of Kween on the lower side of Kwania and then on the other side is Nakapiripirit District. So, these people are in more or less a no man’s land. Of course people used to stay here, but there are no people now because they have been displaced by the insecurity. So, over one and a half months, every armed Pokot has been infiltrating and increasing in number camping there. 

They usually do that every dry season on the pretext that they are looking for green pastures for their animals. But while they are there, they have caused a lot of havoc to the neighbouring areas. These are of course Pokot mixed with those of Uganda and the Pokot of Kenya. You know these Pokot of Uganda and Pokot of Kenya are just one people and for them they observe no international boundary. When there is a lot of pressure or hardship on Ugandan side, they shift to Kenya side, if there are hardships on Kenya side all shift to Ugandan side. So, these who are now in Uganda include Pokot from Kenya.  

Why I have said that they have caused a lot of havoc is that, in the last one and a half months when they have been there, they have caused a lot of injury to the neighbouring areas. For example, during the whole of this dry season there have been a lot of cattle rustling entering into Kongasis County, into Kween County and also into the other part of Nakapiripirit District especially counties like Chekwi and Bian. 

In addition to cattle rustlings, people have been killed. The most recent are in the last eight days where two soldiers were killed in my county; they were doing patrol in Ngege sub county, plus one civilian. Then just over this weekend, one civilian, the other night, was killed in Chepsey sub county of hon. Dr Kapkwomu and then another civilian died in my constituency.  

Another problem these people have caused is that because of the insecurity they cross around the road between Chasubunya and Kiriki. The district has been trying to do it and we even got assistance from Uganda Wild Life Authority where they gave us some money to construct that bridge called Gere Bridge. But up to now, that bridge has not been possible to be done because of the increased insecurity caused by these Pokot. Actually, the two soldiers who were killed eight days ago were killed near that bridge which was to be constructed. 

I was even informed by the LC V of Kapchorwa District this afternoon that Uganda Wild Life Authority was trying to put up a road within Pian-Upe Wild life sanctuary connecting Morukajore and Karita side within Nakapiripirit District. I hear these Pokot have attacked that grader and the Bulldozer or the grader is now standing on flat tyres. Well, the Minister in charge of Tourism is here, maybe he is aware of it and if not, he better consult whether that is true.

So, there is a lot of tension within the area now.  In fact, the biggest problem now within Kapchorwa District is caused by the Pokot and not the Karimojong themselves. We have made peace with the Karimojong, but the Pokot from Uganda and the Pokot from Kenya have caused a lot of problems as I have enumerated what has been happening within the last say one month. So, we are praying to the minister that he does all things possible to flush these people out of that area either by using helicopter gunship or any other military operation you can do so that we can get peace in the area. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE & ANTIQUITIES (Mr Jovino Ayumu Akaki): I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable Minister of Defence for the security update.  

Madam Speaker, at the height of insurgency in Northern Uganda, some district security and defence committees which I chaired and which I still chair. were formed and one of them was formed in Apac. This was made reference to by one of the speakers this afternoon. 

This committee was actually commendable in terms of participating in the recruitment of Amuka, in the humanitarian intervention, and in sensitising the population. But I would like to allay the fears of the Member who raised this issue. The committee is not disbanded yet, that committee is still alive.  I am on daily contact with people in the field and on any single day if you ask me what is happening, say in Apac as far as security is concerned, I will let you know. We have even scheduled already another meeting the end of this month to go and visit the people in the camps, to go and hold this meeting because we still think this is an important committee.  

Madam Speaker, another issue that was raised on the Floor of the House this afternoon has to do with incidences of insecurity that keep occurring once in a while. I say, yes, this happens and it is also captured in the report of the honourable Minister.  But there is divergence of views in that region as to what to do in view of the fact that we still have insurgency lingering on. There are people who are pressing for outright disbanding of camps and people returning back to their homes. 

My view is that, we should actually move a bit cautiously on this because if tomorrow we were to say, “Let everybody go back to their homes” and this insurgency continues and these people are attacked because they are exposed more to danger, I think it will be difficult to try to convince them to come back to the camps again.  

It is true that once in a while camps are attacked, but we believe that there is more protection in the camps at the moment than in individual homes. So, my advice really has remained that the people who are still living in the camps should be allowed to continue living in the camps without trying to force them to move back to their homes under whatever condition for the time being.

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the Floor of this House again, somebody commented on the low response in incidences of attack when the Uganda People’s Defence Forces does not seem to be moving fast enough. I think we should give credit where it is due. Over a period of time, there has been great improvement in the way the Uganda People’s Defence Forces has responded to rebel attacks in the camps and everywhere else. This is true and this is something we must commend. 

I know that at one point it was difficult; you could not move the Uganda People’s Defence Forces to go and follow up, but now it is happening and things have improved. I thought I should just put the record right that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces is now doing much more than perhaps it used to do in the past, and I think that is what they deserve. Madam Speaker, I thank you and I thank the House.

DR KAPKWOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether the honourable Minister of Defence is aware that there is a big threat by the Kenyan Pokot, whether they have actually crossed over Mt Elgon National Park, which is under the charge of hon. Ayumu Akaki. 

Following what you have said earlier on that even mosquitoes, tsetse flies are supposed to be guarded, shall the UPDF be given permission to go and flush out these Pokot from your national park, because once they come out of that national park and move downwards, the whole of my constituency, even hon. Dr Yekko Arapkissa’s will be finished at the cost of Mt Elgon National Park hiding them and they are not supposed to be touched. Shall you give us permission?

MR AKAKI: Madam Speaker, it was only last week that I met the Members of Parliament from Kapchorwa and we discussed a wide range of things in my office, including security and how to give some more land.  In matters of security, the Ministry of Defence has got the mandate on every inch of this country to ensure that they address security problems. 

So, if a national park has got some insecurity element in it, which calls for an intervention of the Army, I really do not think they will have to ask for my permission. Their experience has been that we have had some insurgency in national parks, and we only have the people called rangers who are supposed to handle poachers, they do not handle insurgency, they do not handle outright battles and wars and things like that. 

So, we are constantly in touch with the Army.  Right now, we are continuing with some joint operations between the Army, the security organs and Uganda Wildlife Authority so that the national parks, as well as other parts of Uganda, are secure. I think you should not worry so much about the Army going to flush those people out; yes, the Army can do that definitely.  

But this issue of tsetse flies should not be quoted out of context. Somebody mentioned a contribution of tsetse flies, I am responding to something already mentioned by my colleague there. It should not be quoted out of context. All I am saying and I will continue repeating is that, in the protection and conservation, Uganda has not come out with a policy to say this country will only conserve –(Interruption)

DR KAPKWOMU: Madam Speaker, I got the answer.

MR AKAKI: You got the answer, please. We have not come out with a policy to say that Uganda will only conserve good animals and not troublesome ones and in so far that has not been done, I will continue conserving all of them.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I know the minister is part of Government, and one of the responsibilities of Government is to develop policy, and he is also lamenting here that Uganda has not come out with a policy, yet we need a policy to guide this. Where does he expect this policy to originate if he himself, as a responsible minister, has not made a policy guideline on how it should come up?

MR AKAKI: Madam Speaker, I am actually trying to say that, as far as conservation goes, nowhere in the world do you have a policy differentiating and saying we shall only protect peaceful animals and Uganda happens to be part of the world, and we are not about to come out with a policy saying all dangerous animals should not be protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, I am sorry you have taken us back to tsetse flies but our question was, you are conserving those animals we agree, there are tsetse flies in the national park, how do you plan for the civilians who pass there several times a day to be protected? That is what we are asking you; we know about conservation, how do you protect these tourists?

MR AKAKI: Madam Speaker, in the past incidents all the areas outside national parks where people stay – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, we have heard many a time in the past what the honourable Minister is trying to tell us, tsetse fly protection and so forth, is it within your powers to invoke Rule 59? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I will not invoke it but let me request the minister to liase with the Minister for Health, when he comes back in one week we shall want an answer on how civilians are protected when passing through the national parks, because they are sleeping there because they are insecure, so it is involuntary, we want to know how they can be protected.

MR AKAKI: I oblige, Madam Speaker. I will come out with a full report on how we are protecting people passing through national parks. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And lorries, even the pedestrians.

MR AKAKI: I will do that.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to assist the honourable Minister. There is no game park in the world where there are no tsetse flies. There are certain animals and tsetse flies that are inseparable, unless you get rid of those animals, which we are not going to do, then we must be prepared to put up with tsetse flies, the two must go together.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, that debate is postponed to Tuesday, no tsetse flies anymore.

7.18
MR JACOB OULANYAH (OMORO COUNTY, GULU): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity and I thank the honourable Minister of Defence for the statement. I want to specifically talk on the issue of dialogue with the LRA. It should be remembered that for 47 days closing last year, the President issued a unilateral ceasefire to facilitate the process of this dialogue and in that period many things happened. Many meetings were held under the courtesy of the President, and I thought I should just put it on record that our people appreciate the effort that the President put in place and we thank him very much.

Madam Speaker, we met the President several times after that and you could see from the tone of his speech that he wants this thing to end, and we are all committed to the process and we should all work hard to make this thing come to an end. I want to thank the President again for the 18 days he has extended for this process. Without this extension, Madam Speaker, there would have been absolutely no process of confidence building, but it has facilitated the confidence building and it has helped in helping us reach where we are as of today.  

Madam Betty Bigombe is in there, moving up and down because the President said so, and I think we should thank him for this, really. I also want to thank the men and women who smell the gunpowder everyday. They have done a good job in protecting our people in the camps, they have made the camps secure, they have made the roads, as of now, a bit secure. 

Even when sometimes things are difficult our people when you go and talk to them, they say they are grateful to what the sons and daughters of Uganda are doing especially, the commanders who have their mothers and sisters sleeping in peaceful places crying day and night when they are there not knowing how the day will break. When we meet them, we tell them that we are really grateful that they can make these sacrifices. We know it is a call of duty, but it is a personal commitment and a personal risk in their families to come over here and stay with our people facing danger.  

I thought I should put it on record as a Member of Parliament coming from that area that we are grateful and we support the work of the UPDF, their efforts and they have our prayers and support and that they should do their work and have God’s protection on them. 

We thank the President, the ministers who have been greatly involved in these processes and we would like the whole Parliament to encourage Madam Betty Bigombe, in what she is doing. Madam Speaker, this thing should come to an end, I just thought I should thank the President, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you would also thank hon. Betty Bigombe for abandoning her air-conditioned home in Washington and coming to - Why do you not record it also in the Hansard?

MR OULANYAH: Madam Speaker, I appreciate, we were with the hon. Betty Bigombe - if I can use that title. I have been to the World Bank offices in Washington, I know what they look like and I was also with her in the bushes of Paluda in Kitgum District, and I know how rough they are. To make this sacrifice is certainly a magnificent size of heart on our part, to leave the Washington offices and come and sit in the forests in Kitgum, Gulu and Pader to try and find peace for us. For that, we are completely indebted to her.  Thank you.

7.23
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report and very briefly I am seeking clarification on the following: One, we in Buganda, for example, we have tested the bitterness of war with reference to what took place in Luweero. Let it go on record that, noting that much as we have peace in Buganda region, we are totally insecure for as long as our brothers and sisters continue suffering in the North. So, we would like to pray as much as possible that war comes to the end.  

Madam Speaker, I would like clarification from the minister on page 3 and page 1. In the fight against the LRA, the minister said, “We are certain of victory.” What assurance can you give us that you are certain of victory if for the last 19 years you have been fighting LRA without a total end?  

Madam Speaker, the Minister should know it is one thing for one to apply the mechanics of fighting to end war, but war will not morally end if the people involved in war have no settlement about war. What I am talking about is not philosophical, I am saying it is not enough to use arms to disperse the enemies; you could disperse them and they go but war may not end. So, it is important for us to address the phenomenon of dialogue.

I would like to compliment what, hon. Capt. Matovu, said about me; that I am still concerned about the need to talk peace in a dialogue. I would like to challenge the minister. In the year 2002, it is on record that I moved a motion requesting and urging the Government of Uganda to talk to the rebels outside Uganda and the motion was passed. What have you done, as Government, to initiate a peace talks programme outside Uganda? 

You cannot be equated to Kony; you are far beyond Kony. So, the international community expects you to have the capacity to initiate a programme of peace talks, which programme could also be internationally fundable. You have never brought such a programme and you fail to get the funds, they can come for as long as you demonstrate.  

Now, my worry, Madam Speaker, while I praise hon. Betty Bigombe, the talks have failed to vividly take off and to produce results because they lack some international standards of peace talks identified all over the world.  When you -(Interruption)

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank my honourable colleague, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. The clarification I want to seek from honourable Ken Lukyamuzi is whether it is possible for Kony to accept to go to another country because he has fears, many of these abductees and other rebels who have come out have actually said it, because the international criminal court is also looking for him. Is it possible to have the peace talks outside Uganda and Kony accepts to go there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Lukyamuzi, I think what you have said is not really correct. The fact that there has been a possibility for hon. Bigombe actually meeting those people, I have seen her together with hon. Oulanyah and other honourable members, you do not have to complete the process, but the fact that there is a breakthrough is a success. So, when you say they have failed, you are not being fair.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am being fair, I have given some credit -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I have given some credit to the President for having endeavoured to promote the yardstick of dialogue.  However, I am saying that internationally, when you address the phenomenon of dialogue there are some standards you have to meet. For example, who is the convener of these talks, who is the mediator, where are the observers those are the issues. It is not enough to address dialogue without meeting the dynamics of dialogue.

MR OULANYAH: Madam Speaker, let me take this chance to inform the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi and the House that the process that is going on in Northern Uganda is not what he is imagining. There are teams of observers, there are colonels of foreign armies who are involved, and we have helicopters hired by the United Nations flying all over the place. So, it is not as if it is some secret thing being done. 

Madam Betty Bigombe is the chief negotiator appointed by Government, recognized by the LRA. What they are doing at the moment is to try and negotiate cessation of hostilities or a ceasefire agreement. That is the first stage. When the second stage comes, that is when you are going raise issues of where these talks should be conducted. But in our opinion, we think that the matter of where the negotiations should take place should be a matter between the parties in course of the negotiation. It cannot be suggested by myself or hon. John Ken Lukyamuzi who are not parties to this situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, hon. Lukyamuzi, last time we discussed security and one of the Members asked when you were last in the North, maybe you would like to be an observer. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: I was there in 2003, and it is not very far away. Madam Speaker, I think what hon. Eriyo has addressed is also important. Knowing that Kony has internationally been declared a terrorist, what should we do? Does that mean we should give up talks because we cannot participate in those talks?  That would be very weak reasoning in my view.  

MR MALINGA: Madam Speaker, when our honourable colleagues were in the bush talking to Brigadier Sam Kolo, our hearts were not in their normal positions. We were so scared that if some mad rebel now comes in between the area of peace talks and the area where these people have left their cars, how will Kony control these mad people?  So, it left me thinking that probably it would be good to talk outside here. You remember when we had a problem between the Government of Uganda and NRA, when we were going for peace talks they never took place in Uganda but in Nairobi. 

So, I would appeal, if it were possible, that these peace talks could be carried out in a neighbouring country. For instance, now that Southern Sudan is relatively more peaceful, would it not be more reasonable for us to find a location there where we are sure that when our minister goes there, he cannot be abducted? And maybe that would also drive away fears from Kony that when our people go and talk to him here, he can be abducted or he can be caught.  Thank you.      

MR ATUBO: I think I would really urge my good friend, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, not to belabour this point too far. One, I think what is taking place in the North now in the peace process should be allowed to take its natural course because even Kony is the one who sent Brigadier Kolo, and it was also their wish, they accepted the venue, they accepted Mrs Betty Bigombe. The international community by the way are very heavily involved; the churches, the British soldiers are there. So, I would compare it to the one of FRELIMO in Mozambique and the international standards you are talking of really will eventually come in the sense of finalizing possibly, if need be.  

But the type of war, which is being fought in the North, the type of the combatants on the other side and so on are the ones that affect the choice of the methodology, and I do believe that the message should not come from Parliament here too strongly, that at this stage please we want you to go outside. It may be misinterpreted, and I think at the moment let us allow things to take their natural course like we are allowing Valentine’s Day to take its natural course today. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would have been persuaded by what hon. Omara Atubo has said, if the minister had not said on page 3 that, “Military pressure is being used to compel the LRA terrorists to talk.” You know, when you are talking about dialogue you are talking about peace.  Let us avoid the scenario where you are seen to compel, to force; talk to them so that they understand what it means to talk. What I am saying is so important that since I last moved the motion, Madam Speaker, on the Floor of the House -(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Madam Speaker, I was very hesitant to rise up on a point of order to hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, but you have really guided this House, and after hon. Omara Atubo’s address, any Member of Parliament who wishes this country really prosperity and the efforts that are being put in place to solve the problems in the North, would not continue insisting on the very points that we have been really properly guided on by our colleague, hon. Omara Atubo. 

Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Lukyamuzi to continue insisting on the very issues that we have been guided on by you, Madam Speaker, for the good of the North? Is he in order really to continue mentioning the very points about the North, trying to insinuate bad motives within Government? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, we have the benefit of Members who are really on daily basis following what is happening in this very delicate process, and the hon. Omara has appealed to you not to discuss this matter in the abstract, but take into account what they have advised us. So, please, you leave that point alone about the negotiations outside. The Members are following what is happening, we are going to continue receiving the reports. So, please, do not send wrong signals to those people.  

Now, honourable Minister, we have been here for about five hours, can we defer your answer to tomorrow, because so much has been raised that you shall need two hours for you to respond?  

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I know there are a lot of things that have been raised and several colleagues had already raised that question, whether it would not be better to answer tomorrow. Actually, some of the issues that have been raised, I am not able to answer even tomorrow. 

So in light of, Madam Speaker, what I had told you earlier, I had hopped that I would be given something like ten to 15 minutes - and I hope hon. Aggrey Awori in his advanced age will learn good manners - so that I can answer the things I can answer. Then I undertake to answer, for example, the questions which are coming about; behaviour of soldiers and things like that. I would not be able to answer them tomorrow because I need to find out what happened. So, I wanted to say that I will come back and answer some of the issues in greater detail.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, you know the question of Defence, each time you come to the Floor, Members get ready to ask you questions. So, why do you not answer them comprehensively when you are back? You get all those answers and come back, because the moment the Members see you, everybody wants to ask you questions. So, I would ask you to please answer comprehensively, I think Members have understood that a lot has been raised and a lot needs to be answered.

MR MBABAZI: I agree. Thank you.

MR ATUBO: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your guidance on this and for the minister accepting to respond later. To me, the issue of cattle rustling in Karamoja has been very comprehensively dealt with by the minister in half a page, yet I believe it is a huge security situation in that area.  However, I believe, Mr Minister, that at a subsequent date, a week or two from now, would you like to come with a special statement on the Karamoja situation including cattle rustling - a separate statement - because you covered it in a brief way in this statement covering a very broad topic of security situation, but the one of Karamoja demands a statement of its own and I would be glad if you do not mind to come with another statement on Karamoja. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But of course you have noted that the Pokot are in Mt Elgon, that one I think hon. Kapkwomu raised, I am sure you attended to it in your written work as the minister. Now, honourable members, I would like us to end and adjourn to tomorrow. Today I understand is Valentine’s Day.  May I request the Members of this House, both male and female, to give Valentine presents to their partners – (Laughter) - as I conclude this evening. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

