Tuesday, 17 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the weekend but I must note with a lot of regret the sad news of the death of 42 of our people in a tragic accident in Mabira Forest along Kampala–Jinja Road. I believe you have heard about it. The Parliament has heard about it and I think it is something we have to mention and say something on how to stop the carnage, which we are now experiencing over a very short time. 

Again, I forgot to tell you last week that hon. Minister Obbo has been in Mulago Hospital for quite some time. He is in Ward 6A; you may find time to go and see him.  

Following the demise of our colleague, hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, the Committee on Government Assurances, which she was chairing, has set up new leadership. Hon. Tom Kayongo, Member for Lubaga Division North, is the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson is hon. Moses Lubowa. I congratulate you and wish you a successful mandate.  

The Women’s Day on the 8th of next month will be celebrated in Kamuli District and, therefore, you should make arrangements to attend that important day’s celebrations.  

The Order Paper has to be adjusted to include two statements: one by the hon. Member for Lubaga Division South – it is an urgent matter according to him - and the hon. Member for Bulambuli. But in view of the sad news I have mentioned at the beginning, I propose that we observe a minute of silence for the departed. 

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

2.37
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to talk. I am particularly going to talk about the deaths that occurred in Mabira Forest. The truck of those who died was heading to Mbale and many of the people who died were from Mbale District. I went to the scene but I was not able to identify who had died. The problem I noticed was that while we take a lot of interest in enforcing third parties insurance for vehicles, we do not particularly take interest in knowing the people travelling in those vehicles. It is my humble request to the Ministry of Works that, with immediate effect if possible, all these taxis that plough between major cities of Uganda should introduce a passenger manifest. 

I was in Mbale and many people still believe that some of their relatives who went to Kampala are still in Kampala. And yet you never know, they could have died somewhere in Mabira! It is for the safety and for the information of the citizens of this country that a passenger manifest should be introduced and enforced.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the trailer, which came from Mombasa or wherever, disengaged from the head of the main trailer and this showed there was mechanical failure. Obviously, in this hot season, for a lorry, which comes with a trailer swinging up and down under high temperatures, there is wear and tear. It is my humble request again to the Minister of Works that they put a mechanical engineer at the ports of entry to check on these trailers. Supposing this trailer had exploded somewhere in Kampala here, imagine the damage that it would have caused! Forty-two people have died, it is a big regret, but many more would have perished in this manner and this list would help even to claim – you know, third party insurance affects other people on top of the owners of the vehicles. So, we would know who has died and we would be able to follow this matter up. I so beg, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

2.40
MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This was a nasty accident. These 42 people have followed others who have died in road accidents here in Uganda. A month can hardly pass without someone hearing of so many people who have been involved in road accidents. 

These road accidents are likely to continue as long as we have some drunkards in Uganda who drive recklessly; so long as we have careless drivers; so long as we have some mad people in the country; and so long as we have politicians who drive when they are thinking too much and so on and so forth. So, these accidents are likely to continue. 

But there is a problem. When an accident occurs, there is no care at all that is given to the people involved. Some good Samaritans come, but those are very few. So, I would like to urge the Government to put in place a task force of doctors, nurses as well as security personnel to cater for people who get involved in accidents. Because, Mr Speaker, we know that most of these accidents take place on highways and we have very few highways. So, some of these areas could have the combined effort to care for accident victims  

We know very well that the Government has made some efforts to have hospitals along those roads where accidents take place to cater for the victims, but these people are not provided with transport to go to the scenes of accidents. So what happens when people get accidents? Some queer people come, some thieves come, and instead of caring for the victims, they start robbing them. 

I have seen so many of our people, big and small, dying on the roads because the care is very minimal. From the scene of the accident to the hospital, there is hardly any care. The accident victims are left at the mercy of those people who are kind enough to take them to hospitals. 

Mr Speaker, I urge the Government, not the Ministry of Transport and Communications because this is a combined effort, to see to it that the people involved in accidents are cared for. All of us in this House are vulnerable to accidents. So, we have to make sure that we care for those people. I thank you. 

2.43
MR ISAIAH IMUMET (Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About the same accident in Mabira, I note with concern the conduct of the trailer drivers. I do not know whether the Government, specifically the Minister of Transport, could revive the policy of trailers not travelling after 6.00 p.m.? If you travel along that road at night, it is really terrible. Some of them have only one light; at times they do not even maintain their lanes! They are just wobbling as they travel, so it is very dangerous. 

I know there can be complications in implementing that policy because the international community will get concerned, but if there were a way, we could revive that policy. It worked in the ’70s and I think we can –(Interjections)- in Idi Amin’s time. 

Mr Speaker, if we revisited the idea it would save us at night. We are not against trailer men, but the way they conduct themselves, especially at night, is not very convincing to me. When I leave Katakwi and reach Jinja past 6.00 O’clock, I sleep over for fear of losing my life. Thank you, Mr Speaker.      

2.44
MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA (Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to join my colleagues who have talked about the accident in Mabira. There is a lot that we need to do as passengers, as overseers and as Government. We need to sensitise our people who travel in taxis and other vehicles, because I have seen drivers cruising around without caring whether they are carrying people or not. Those taxis go at such a high speed and overtake at any time and in sharp bends; they do not mind. They are rushing to reach wherever they want to reach and eventually sometimes those people do not reach their destinations, but they leave them in Mabira just like those people whom we could not even recognize were left in Mabira. 

Could we make a programme that people who are travelling in public vehicles are sensitised so that they can make noise when a driver –(Interjections)- yes, make noise and say, “If you are not reducing speed, we stop here”. Maybe that could save us. The drivers will have nobody to take if passengers made an alarm and said, “We are not travelling in this speeding vehicle”.  

Secondly, I remember last year we were talking about heavy vehicles and I suggested that they should stop moving after 6.00 p.m. They should park wherever they want, maybe in towns or sub-towns, as long as they do not obscure the road. I think some minister said they should stop moving at 10.00 O’clock. I did not agree with him and I think many of us did not. I do not know where that kind of idea got lost from, because I have seen these heavy trucks moving 24 hours. What happened to that idea, which had been borne, brought here and we said okay to it? 

If 10.00 O’clock, fine, but it is not so fine because 10.00 O’clock is already night and these heavy lorries sometimes do not care about the small vehicles. I suggest - it is expensive but it works in other countries; I saw it in Canada and other people have seen it elsewhere. We could have pictorial billboards at very sharp corners or areas where accidents easily occur so that we have a picture on a billboard, say, that of bodies. It may sound stupid but, Mr Speaker and honourable members, it can work. When they are approaching a sharp bend, a billboard showing people in an accident appears and the driver will get scared or be warned. Even the passengers will say, “You see what happened to that vehicle, all those people perished; do you want us to perish too?” I put it to Ministry of Works: if they can buy it, let them buy it in the cheapest way, because where it is used elsewhere, it is shown live. But I think since we do not have money, we could make still billboards -(Interruption)

MR SITENDA SEBALU: Mr Speaker, I would like to give information to the honourable member holding the Floor that some of these trailer drivers, because of the biting poverty in Uganda, end up selling all the fuel after which they have to look for an explanation to their bosses and they always look for these accidents. I thank you.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague on the Floor that the suggestion of asking the trailers to stop at 6.00 p.m. in the evening will eventually cause a lot of congestion on the road during the day. I think the economy should run 24 hours. We should just insist on drivers being disciplined and following the standard Highway Code, which is well prescribed in the whole world. 

Particularly, our road gauge is very narrow. I wish the road from Jinja to Kampala were dual carriage. At the moment it is single. Therefore, it is difficult to say that we squeeze all these vehicles into travelling from 6.00 O’clock to 6.00 O’clock; you will increase the traffic and therefore you will have more traffic jams We could even increase the rate of accidents. Until we have revisited the size of the road we should have between Kampala and Jinja, it is very important for these trucks to run 24 hours. We should not forget that Lugazi was asked to move its heavy vehicles during the night. So, the congestion of the sugarcane trailers between Kampala and Lugazi will even increase if we force them to also work only during the day. I thank you.

MRS MAGOOLA: Thank you for your information. Mr Speaker, I still had one more point. People are over-speeding and there is almost no way of checking them. I suggest that government, and the Police put up something, which would make people drive normally and not as mad people or as people who have taken marijuana. They do not care about life. I have witnessed two accidents around Namagunga. In one of them a big truck ran down a whole house killing all the occupants, during the day! So, speed has also got to be controlled. If we do not control speed then we shall not run away from people dying anytime, anywhere. 

In addition to speed, can we give comprehensive insurance cover for the vehicles so that relatives of the people who perish may get compensated? But as per now, someone dies, the problem is with the relatives and nobody gets compensated. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.52
MS ERON NANTUME (Buikwe County West, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues who have expressed their concern about the accident that happened in Mabira. The accident is one of those that keep occurring in that area, which is actually part of my constituency. 

I must say that I am a bit unfortunate that most of the accidents, which happen on the Jinja highway, actually take place in my constituency. On 11th, that is, Thursday last week, another driver lost control of a fuel tanker right in Lugazi, around the mosque in Kitega, and it ran over a house. We lost a seven-day old child, whose mother is still in Kawolo Hospital. The owner of that house also died as we rushed him to hospital and another child also died in that accident. But there are other, four victims who are still lying in Kawolo Hospital. 

As if that were not enough, on Saturday again we got this accident, which we are all concerned about! That site is really bad.  

I would not like to repeat what the rest of the colleagues have said because they are in line with what I wanted to say. I will only add that I have been actually – sometime I even appeared before a committee and expressed concern that Kawolo Hospital is doing a lot as far as accidents on the Jinja highway are concerned. Unfortunately, when you look at the facilities in that hospital, it is not yet even a referral hospital; you really cry. On the day of that accident you would sympathize with us. We were using black polythene bags to handle the remains of the accident victims There were no gloves in the hospital. What happens is that most of the time the facilities meant to handle patients in that hospital, which is a 100-bed hospital, run out within a week just because no week passes without handling people involved in accidents.  

Over the years the Ministry of Health has been promising to make this hospital a trauma center, where such victims of accidents would be given first aid and treatment, but up to now we are still waiting. Each budget that comes - I remember even trying to put a bit of emphasis on this to show the concern, but nothing has been happening as far as Kawolo Hospital is concerned. We have an ambulance, which when such accidents happen - unfortunately that time most of the victims were burnt, and they died. But there are times when about 14 victims are rushed to that hospital yet the ambulance can only rush two patients at a time, in crisis, to Mulago Hospital. Otherwise it would be handling only one. But imagine you have 14 victims who are ferried in and we have to save lives. So, that is the situation we have in Kawolo Hospital.  

I have been trying a lot - when the relatives of the people in that minibus and the other vehicles were coming to Kawolo Hospital to try and identify their relatives, I tried to ask them. Actually there was a certain child of three years who survived but the mother died, but the only thing he kept on telling us was only his name. He knew only his name as Peter Oniari. He said he was with his mother, and they were coming from Kampala from visiting a certain auntie Rose. He said they come from Mbale, but he could not even say which village he was from. Actually the situation there was so pathetic that you would find all the people a bit confused; they were all streaming in but the site was terrible.  

When you go to the mortuary - today I have just asked the authorities of the Town Council, because we are not seeing any people from Government coming in to assist us in such a situation - they wanted to bury the dead. We are going to have a mass burial tomorrow. I asked them to postpone burial till tomorrow because I needed to come and express how serious the issue was. So, it very difficult for me to attend the burial today and at the same time be here to inform you of the situation. 

There are about 22 bodies, which were burnt beyond recognition and some two recognizable ones, but people are failing to come to identify them as their relatives. What has really surprised me is that there are some two army officers, you all read in the newspapers, you heard on radio, even their numbers were announced, but they have not been claimed. So, I was advising the authorities not to bury them along with the other bodies, which cannot be identified - because they could be identified. So, that is another concern, which I felt I should tell you, honourable members.  

Mr Speaker, let me take this chance to also say that many of these accidents occur in my constituency, but most of the victims are not from that area. Most of the victims are from Jinja, Mbale and other places. So, what I wanted is for us to join hands and with one voice cry out for assistance as far as the hospital and the road are concerned, especially the one I told you of before, at Kitega. When it rains, that part of the road always has an accident. 

When it shines, because of the technical faults made when they were making that portion of the road - it is only a one-kilometre portion, which I have been crying about, and which other colleagues from Mukono have been mentioning. It needs re-doing because the stones were not properly mixed with tar. So, when it shines, the tar slips, so again you are bound to get accidents. When it rains the road is slippery. This is a responsibility of government and it is not new. I have been mentioning it and we even wrote memorandums to the Ministry concerned.  

Let me take this opportunity, honourable members, to inform you that as a town council we have made arrangements to have a mass burial just because the mortuary cannot keep the remains for more than – in fact, we have exceeded the days - it should have been three days. But we are giving a chance to people who can come and identify their relatives who could have died in this accident. But the mortuary is starting to smell so badly and it is becoming very unhygienic to keep these bodies. This is a newly built mortuary but there are no coolers. So, you can imagine the situation in Kawolo Hospital.  

I would like to appeal to government - imagine you have a patient in the hospital and they bring in these accident victims! You know, you can imagine the feelings of the people in the hospital because we do not have a different ward to handle victims of accidents. I really appeal to the Government that it is high time - maybe this has happened to show how both the Ministry concerned with Transport and that of Health must handle this issue seriously. Please, let us try to save the lives of Ugandans and also to help the Lugazi community, which is continuously looking at such sights.  Virtually every week we get a fatal accident. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.02
MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank and praise you for your love for us. The Minister responsible for the Executive did not find it appropriate or necessary to come up with a ministerial statement on this subject, a very serious matter. But as our representative and as our true Speaker, you found it appropriate to raise this subject under the communication from the Chair. (Applause). I sincerely thank you and we hope that my friends in the Executive will understand the gravity of this situation. 
Mr Speaker, this tragedy in Mabira is not the first and it will not be the last, but this is not to say that we give up. Parliament represents the people and we have an obligation to ensure that their interests are protected. That is why in my submission I said it should have been observed. 
Let me say that I am disappointed that the Executive did not come up with a statement on this subject. My friends have already mentioned certain areas that need improvement but my main worry is about implementation. We have people who are charged with a very difficult task as well as heavy responsibility of ensuring that traffic laws and regulations are adhered to and implemented. But these people are the poorest in our country; they are living in very horrific conditions; they are the ones who go out to look for vehicles in dangerous mechanical condition (DMCs), they are the people who go out to identify which vehicle has caused accidents, they are the people who go out to work to seek for daily bread. 
Some of us have been here long enough; we have travelled on our roads long enough to know that our traffic Police is unable to enforce the rules and regulations we are now talking about, because it is extremely bribed. It is very natural for any human being. You must try to survive; we cannot blame our Police for not living up to our expectations. We have to blame ourselves as government; we have to blame ourselves as Members of Parliament. Today we are talking about 42 people dying; it is Parliament to ensure that –(Interruption)

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague hon. Ndeezi for giving way. I would like to inform my colleague that even during Amin’s regime, a regime that has been despised for quite some time, heavy trucks were not allowed to ply routes past 6.00 p.m. I, therefore, would like to inform you that it is true it is a matter of negligence on the part of the Executive to implement an existing law. 

Even in the past when there was an accident here in Kampala, the railway crossing checkpoints were only implemented for one week thereafter. Even as I talk now there is no checkpoint at the railway crossing. So, you are quite right that it is the Executive failing us.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you for this information, but the problem we have is that we Africans have a bad habit. We talk too much, after which we fail to honour our word. I am, therefore, appealing to this august House: we will soon be considering the budget for these people who protect our lives, the policemen who are supposed to enforce regulations and policies we make here. I, therefore, appeal to Parliament and the Executive to ensure the Police is facilitated. Also, Parliament must ensure that the Executive does its work of ensuring that our people do not keep on dying needlessly. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have spent 35 minutes on this subject. It is a very important subject affecting the lives of our people but we cannot exhaust it. Definitely, keen interest has been shown that this is a very important issue that we should somehow tackle immediately so that we find a solution. The Minister has not made a statement; maybe he is going to make one. What I propose is that we should give about three people a chance, then the Prime Minister. It seems he is interested in contributing on the matter so that we end it here and leave it to the Committee on Transport to sit with the Minister and seriously deal with it. Otherwise, we are going to take the whole day because so many of you are interested in making statements. 

Let me do this. We have the Member for Mukono District. That is where the accident happened; I think she should be given a chance. Let us give this some more time because it is an important subject. Hon. Balemeezi, then I go to Apac, then Kawempe and Masaka -(Interruptions)- No, I will try to accommodate you, honourable members. But since this matter is going to be handled by the committee, be brief. Just make one or two points, and then we see how to proceed.

3.10
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono):  I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I would like to add my voice to my colleagues’ have talked about this sad incident that happened in the district. 

Time and again, I have been calling upon government to provide an alternative route for these vehicles. There was an old Jinja Road; in fact it is still there because some of us still use it. This is a road, which passes through a number of villages and homesteads and would be serving a very good purpose of increasing the commuters and the delivery of products to the different towns. 

In addition to this, one of the roads could be committed to heavy vehicles and the other to the other small cars. So, Mr Speaker, I wish to request that this Parliament recommends an alternative road from Kampala to Jinja via Buikwe, Nyenga, Lugazi, Bukaya, up to Njeru Town Council.

Much as I appreciate the work of our police personnel, many times people drive under the influence of some stimulants. I really do not know what happens with such people because I have seen a number of police personnel on the roads and sometimes I try to call them to inform them of speeding cars and those overtaking at dangerous corners. But within no time I find myself arriving at whatever destination either in Kampala or Jinja with these very cars, which have dangerous drivers in them. So, I do not know what mechanism we can use. 

I have heard time and again over the radio the Police informing the public of how they have brought in gadgets, which can detect these stimulants among drivers. I do not know when it will be implemented because, Mr Speaker, this is mass killing. Almost everyday there is a road accident along that road and it is very difficult to go through a by-election. Some of us who commute on this road, if we are to lose Members of Parliament, government will go through a very expensive exercise to cause a by-election. This is what I am requesting the Government to look into.

Finally, Kawolo Hospital is the immediate hospital, which comes to our rescue but it is very inadequately facilitated. Many times people die not because they have not reached the hospital, but because there are no facilities within the hospital, especially in the surgery rooms and the theatres. I call upon Government and my colleagues here to support me to see that we reinforce these places. We should especially work on the other old Jinja Road so that we at least make traffic light on both roads. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.13
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I get a bit disturbed every the time we discuss the issues of road safety in this country, especially after a number of people have died. It is just a week since the notorious Kony killed over 40 people; within another week we have lost another 40 people on the roads, which we would have controlled; I think there is a problem somewhere. Someone is not doing his work in the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

I travel by that road most of the time but when you look at the drivers, the trucks and the vehicles that move on that road - I can give an example of the tractors from Lugazi. Every time I meet these tractors at night loaded with sugarcane, there are no lights, there are no reflectors and yet you find the Police on three or four roadblocks along Mabira. What are they doing on those roadblocks? They cannot even stop these vehicles. Someone is not doing his work and I think it is time we came up strongly - the two ministries that are responsible - we should stop lamenting all the time –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that as my colleague has ably put it, the number of people dying on our roads everyday supersedes the number of people dying of AIDS! We have put a lot of emphasis on AIDS and we have been recognised internationally, which is good. So, it is my humble request that as you had earlier suggested, the Committee of Works could be mandated to carry out thorough investigations and interface with various organisations, make a report and present it to Parliament so that we can debate and have a way forward conclusively.
 
MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we have raised issues. We are recommending the committee to do the work, but it may take time before the report comes to this House. Yet, we are at risk of losing our lives on that road as a result of accidents based on reckless driving, poor mechanical conditions of the vehicles, bad roads, narrow roads et cetera. It is the Minister of Internal Affairs to help us reduce or eliminate the problems on our roads and reduce on the number of accidents on these roads as we wait for the committee to come up with a report that we shall discuss and possibly come up with concrete solutions to this problem. Thank you.

3.17
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to also add my voice to those of the rest of the members. The problem of road accidents should be looked at in two ways, both the proactive approach and the reactive approach. 

In the proactive approach we should be asking ourselves: why and what are the root causes of the road accidents that are escalating? If you look through the towns you ask yourself: how do people obtain driving licenses? That is the first step. How do we obtain driving licenses in this country? How do we train in this country? You find that the turn boys learn how to drive from looking at how the drivers do it, then after one week they are also drivers. That is true! In most cases people learn how to drive in their own ways, but not through a structured way of learning how to drive. So, that is one of the major problems that are causing accidents. 

I was actually in Jinja and on Sunday. I was coming back to Kampala and the story we heard about that accident was that there was a Coaster approaching the truck, and then there was a Starlet trying to overtake the Coaster. So, this heavy vehicle tried to dodge the Starlet. That is when it knocked the Starlet and also knocked the taxi –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I thank you and the member holding the Floor for allowing me to give this information. As regards the many so-called driving schools, which we have in this country, information available is that most of these driving schools are just haddock driving schools. They do not have qualified people to train people to drive; neither do they have the facilities for training the would-be drivers. The vehicles they use are themselves DMCs, and the trainers lack the proper aptitude to teach driving. I thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, honourable member. That reinforces my point. We need a proactive approach in dealing with the root cause of this problem. 

Second is the issue of law enforcement. Mr Speaker, you find in many cases, like many honourable members have indicated, that the laws are not enforced. Sometimes the policemen are there and they know the problem, they stop vehicles and find the drivers do not have driving permits, they do not have driving license, the cars themselves are in poor mechanical condition, but they are tipped and they leave these drivers to continue. So, we need to put in place mechanisms for law enforcement. 

Perhaps the other thing is to increase the pay of the Police because the reality is that the Police are always bribed and that is the cause of many accidents. Yes, because people sometimes do not want to mention these things.

The reactive issue that we need to engage in, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MRS TUMA: Thank you very much, honourable member. May I suggest that in line with what she is talking about we ask the Police have Wembley Operation Traffic so that we can handle this? That is because they did well with the robberies.

MS AMONGI: Lastly, Mr Speaker, I want to talk about the issue of rapid rescue response. That accident took place at about 6 O’clock but it took almost twelve hours for both the Fire Brigade and the Police to arrive at the scene. I ask and appeal that rapid rescue response should be strengthened. We should strengthen our Fire Brigade to ensure that they are in all districts, because most times accidents happen and they have to run from Kampala to go to these accident scenes outside Kampala. 

The Police do not sometimes have the capacity to rapidly respond to accidents. So, we need to also strengthen the rapid rescue processes. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We need to conclude, honourable members, because we have now used up about 50 minutes. It is high time we concluded this but since I had identified some people, hon. Mawiya, then hon. Sebuliba on this side, use just three minutes each and then the Prime Minister will make a statement on the matter.

3.23
MR UMAR MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As we mourn those who perished on the 11th along Jinja Road, we recall that last month 14 people perished along Kampala-Masaka Road as you approach Lukaya road toll - that is in my constituency. So, could we also observe a moment of silence for the deaths of these people –(Interruption)- Yes, it is a request to you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is a request. Let us oblige.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

MR MAWIYA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to my colleagues’ who have spoken before me. The issue we are trying to address is very crucial. However, among the many reasons that have been put forward, one has been left out. That is the lack of consideration especially by the bus drivers towards other road users. The accident I have just talked about that happened in Lukaya, though a lot of factors were at play, the bus driver had no consideration for other roads users that perished on this road. 

I would like to refresh the minds of the honourable members that it is not long ago that we spared time, actually valuable time, to express our deepest sorrow about the many accidents that occur on our roads. I remember we debated the accident that occurred at Rutoto-Bunyaruguru in Bushenyi, in Karuma and many others. So, it is not two, three times, but many times we have tried to address the issue of road accidents.  

After the accident at Rutoto-Bunyaruguru, the Minister came out and gave a ministerial statement. I remember it was hon. Andruale Awuzu. Members here gave very many recommendations. So, I would like to ask through you that the Minister should not only come here to give a statement about what transpired in this recent accident, but should also tell us how far he has gone in implementing whatever was contained in the many reports that government has received on this Floor. Otherwise, we shall continue to debate this, time and again, without anything being implemented. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Sebuliba, please, use a few minutes then the Prime Minister and we – (Interruption)

3.27
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I will be precise and brief, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to those of the Members of Parliament and the rest of the public who have decried what befell our country last weekend. There are other issues apart from those, which have been raised by the honourable members on the Floor. 

There is this aspect of courtesy on the roads, which is lacking in all Ugandans. At this juncture let me give the President credit because his motorcade has been observing speed limits, and the Speaker too. But the rest, if it is not a siren everybody seems to be missing a plane in Uganda. We do not have courtesy on the road and when the taxi drivers add onto the lot, it becomes total carnage on our roads.

Mr Speaker, the other aspect is the greed of the owners of these vehicles. They are looking for money and these poor taxi drivers and conductors have to ply many routes to fulfil the obligations that their bosses expect of them. That is why if you look at the carnage that happened along Masaka Road, the Peugeot 544s ply these roads all day without even resting. These vehicles are machines, they overheat, the reams and the rest tear and wear; and you end up getting punctures. So, if you do not check the greed of the owners of the vehicles, the carnage will continue.

Then, Mr Speaker, quite often in the evening, from 7.00 p.m. onwards, you notice one thing. Most of these heavy vehicles carrying charcoal, bananas, cattle, they are all overloaded. Whatever is contained in the cabins for carrying things is dangling out a meter or two beyond the vehicle. They are also dangerously in bad shape. I do not know! Much as I agree that we should increase the pay package of the policemen, they should also come out to look at this because it is getting out of hand. 

The vehicles emit a lot of exhaust fumes, they are polluting the environment, they are dangerously in bad shape and they are overloaded such that even overtaking them is a problem. Therefore, as I end - Mr Speaker, I see you looking at the wall clock - these are some of the issues I have to raise: 

First, there should be a review on the time for the travel of fuel tankers. The committee concerned should review this. Let us see the best time for their travel. As you are going to Nakawa there is a lot of traffic jam and these tankers are like a scud missile. Somebody can cause commotion and the thing can explode when you are in a traffic jam. These vehicles should not travel at such a time when we have got too much traffic jam.

Two; about the alternative route they talked about of Kayunga, I do not know what happened. The Northern Bypass is of course coming but before it is effected we should look at that alternative route.

Three, plans for the pipeline. We would like the Parliament to be informed about when the pipeline plan is being implemented here. Our road gauge is so narrow that we can do with some of these vehicles off our roads to stem the carnage. The railway is another thing we should look at.

Last but not least, they have got so many good roads where the reconditioned vehicles are coming from. Here they are being imported and apart from being old, our roads are narrow. These are the roads that John Speke and Grant left here. Even if they resurrect they cannot get lost in Kampala. These are the same roads we have today. Let us look into the period boundary in which we should import these vehicles. If it is two years old now, these are the kind of vehicles we should import otherwise even the vehicles are very old. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.33
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government wishes to convey its condolences to the relatives of the bereaved. The Minister of Works is not here and I was going to request him to make a statement but since you have proposed that the Committee on Works should handle this matter, I have no hesitation in asking the Ministers of Works and of Internal Affairs and of Health, to interface with the Sessional Committee of Works so that we have durable solutions to this problem.   

May I, however, state that it is not proper to compare our government with Amin’s Government because Amin’s Government specialised in killing Ugandans and we specialise in saving life? I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Another issue that came up in the contributions of the members is about the hospitals along the main roads. They had singled out Kawolo, but it could be Iganga - you have to look into all these. The Ministry of Health has to deal with the situation. 

Thank you very much, honourable members, for the contributions on this subject. I think that ends the matter but it will be followed up by the sessional committee with the Ministers concerned.

3.36
MR SIMON PETER WANANZOFU (Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is an emergency and it needs immediate attention from the Government. 

A few weeks ago our neighbours from Nakapiripit forcefully occupied the northern corridor of Bulambuli County, Sironko District. They were heavily armed and when we contacted the security agencies, we visited the site and they were estimated to be having 250 guns of different types.

The wanainchi are scared, they are occupying areas for cultivation of cotton and rice. Many people have run away from those areas and as I talk now, they are still there under the cover of looking for natural resources, that is, water and pasture. I can assure you Members of Parliament that if you visit islands that are between Kumi and Nakapiripit, they have more fresh, green grass than the grass that we have in Katakwi region. 

We are wondering, our counterparts from Nakapiripit particularly hon. Lokeris, State Minister in Charge of Karamoja, has not bothered to talk to these 700 Karimojong who are based in Bulambuli County. People are starving and you know a hungry man is an angry man. Last Monday they had moved to the nearest market, disturbing the businessmen and those who had gone to the market. They are even dropping human waste anywhere they go in areas, which they have occupied. 

Our counterparts cannot condemn these barbaric acts that are done by our brothers and sisters. They have not taken any initiative maybe to request those concerned like the Human Rights Commission to bring educators and probably educate them about peace and human rights in Nakapiripit. It is really very sad. We are wondering whether the Government has stopped the disarmament programme. 

I have been sent by our people to inquire how government is re-designing the plan of disarmament in Karamoja. Have the laws about the guns changed in Uganda? Because once somebody in Sironko is spotted with a gun or a mere whisper about a gun, he is straight away taken to prison. Yet now we are just looking at fellows roaming in Bulambuli with guns. 

The division commander is aware. We went with him, we saw the guys and he just said, “No. We need help from the national level.” What national level again? Have we stopped the disarmament programme?  The 250 guns are there! The Anti Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) has tried its level best to block the entrances but more groups are coming in. We already have three, heavy groups that came three weeks ago but there is less manpower for ASTU. 

We now have non-governmental organizations that had come to embark on serious cultivation of cotton, that is, Indians and some Canadians. Those ones who had come with equipment like tractors cannot risk taking them to those areas now. Mr Speaker, that is the situation we have. Kumi is completely sealed off, Kapchorwa is completely sealed off, Katakwi is sealed off, they look at Sironko as a soft spot for them to come and carry out their barbaric acts. 

We are requesting that government immediately arms our LDUs and that a barracks is established in Kata region. This has been promised for years by His Excellency the President of Uganda. It will help both Kapchorwa and Kumi, together with Sironko. Bulambuli is also ready to raise a force equivalent to Arrow Boys or Amuka Boys –(Interruption)

MR IMUMET: Thank you, my honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform him that when he rose up on that issue I was writing a note to pass to the hon. Minister of State for Defence because I see her here. Katakwi is not sealed off at the moment, and this afternoon I was delivering a letter to the Speaker’s Office seeking permission to be out of the House. I have to travel to Katakwi. The Karimojong have come to Magoro sub-county. They are armed and there is an allegation that the Army is backing the arrival of those people in Katakwi. So, Katakwi is not really sealed off my honourable colleague. Thank you.

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: Mr Speaker, I was one of those people who yesterday, with my colleague Simon Wananzofu, attended a security meeting in Sironko District with the Division Commander, Afande Kayemba and a number of security officials. The security officials concerned have responded, at least we appreciate that. They have responded and they have sent some reinforcements for us as of now to temporarily stop more Karimojong coming in.   

As my colleague said, the security officials told us that they are thin on the ground. They have other national duties they are attending to. So, we requested for Basaani group – Basaani means knife boys. The boys who are circumcised, they are capable the Inyembe.  Inyembe means a sharp knife. We have requested for the recruitment of Inyembe boys or Inyembe group whether boys or girls but they will be Inyembe. We have been allowed to move, we are ready and we shall start this evening. We are not going to tolerate this rubbish – (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean Inyembe are to fight with guns?

MR WAMBI: Mr Speaker, the Inyembe know what to do. (Laughter). First of all, before we move as a group, I have one fear that the country is going to be militarised on tribal grounds; and this is not what we call national integration. If the Inyembe boys are formed, Amuka boys are formed and the Arrow boys are formed, we know Banabakintu will also come up, Nkobazambogo will come up, and so many other groups. 

What I want to suggest is that despite all this, these are emergency cases and we are trying to solve a problem as it appears. I would like the national authorities, people concerned with keeping law and order to also come in to assist us so that we do not fragment a country along tribal militia. These are going to destroy us in the future. They may be a temporary solution –(Interjection)- at the same time I can contribute because I am concerned, part of my area is also occupied.

I would like us, in unison as Parliament, to condemn the activities of the Karimojong as we condemn the activities of Kony. For instance, our friends from Karamoja have at no time stood here on the Floor and openly condemned the activities of their voters –(Mr Aachilla rose_) (Laughter)

MR AACHILLA: Mr Speaker, I have listened with a lot of concern and really I am sympathetic to what is happening to the neighbours. We have spoken of the issues of Karamoja as matters that must attract the attention of the whole country. Karamoja was not made by hon. Members of the Seventh Parliament. This Parliament has come and found Karamoja there; we have talked every now and then over the radio, and even in this House, to condemn all acts of indiscipline. 

The Hansard of Parliament is there, my honourable friend, hon. Wambi should be able to refer to the Hansard of Parliament and find out that members have been condemning all acts of indiscipline. Is it, therefore, in order for a member to insinuate that Members of Parliament who are seated here do condone activities of indiscipline, and all acts of violence and arrogance of the indisciplined, few Karimojong? Does he insinuate that the Karimojong are a totally bad tribe that must be eliminated in Uganda? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: What I can say is that members are provided with copies of the Hansard. It is out of order for a member not to read what is in the Hansard.

MR WAMBI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Good enough the Speaker has not said it is I but any member is out of order; because I know I have read it. 

Lastly, I would like to inform the House that the 700 Karimojong with the 200 guns are encircled. We have encircled them at a place called Mabaale. But we are saying we would like our friends from Karamoja and especially neighbouring areas of Nakapiripit and Upe, to go with immediate effect and address their people. (Applause)  Tell them about the use of latrines; tell them of the civilised ways of approaching people when one is looking for help. 

For now they have stampeded markets with guns; people are running away. But for us on humanitarian grounds we are saying, “Let the leaders of Karamoja go and address these people jointly with us who are ready”. If there is a way for us to help them, we shall help them only if their people can go and address their leaders. The Members of Parliament can go and address these people and tell them what is required. 

If not, we know what Nyembe Boys are going to do because we have already recruited 500; they only need to go into action. It is not a secret because the military there said, “Bring them for training.” And we are taking them next Monday - those in Tororo, and others are going to remain on the ground. We ask government to facilitate the leaders of Sironko also, as they facilitated the Karamoja Members of Parliament, to go and pacify their areas especially areas of –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much, honourable member on the Floor. I would like to inform this House that I have been to Moroto and I met the leaders of Moroto District, Nakapiripirit and Kotido, quite a sizeable number. There were only two Members of Parliament, including the Minister in charge of Karamoja. Along with me was hon. Grace Akello and we had a very interesting exchange of ideas with the leaders. I think we started a process with the leaders who are actually frightened themselves because the LCV Chairpersons cannot move without escorts; and you can imagine a person who is popularly elected but cannot move unless he is protected with guns! So, the concern is very real, but we more or less started the process whereby all the leaders including Members of Parliament must move seriously to network and be able to reach every village, every Manyata, and make sure that everybody is aware that cattle stealing can no longer be sustained in the 21st Century.

This idea of calling it rustling is a misnomer. It must be seen and must be known that you cannot have private property in the 21st century when somebody can just come and take away your cows and declare them his by sheer –(Interjection)- I am giving information if you could let me. It is beginning to be clear to the religious leaders who were present, who also were reminded that perhaps they have also failed. They have not told these people that stealing cows is a sin and they cannot go to heaven and yet they have Holy Communion on Sundays and they go to Mosques to pray. So, there is a concerted effort if everybody, the Members of Parliament, the councillors, the religious leaders, all elders and so on, rather than wait for gunships and the Mambas, that we could move together to reduce cattle rustling, which is actually cattle thieving.

THE SPEAKER:  But, honourable members, as you see, this was a report from the member for Bulambuli about what has happened in his constituency. He was reporting and trying to find out what government is going to do about this. Do you not think we should get a response from the minister and then leave that issue to him to solve?  

MR WANANZOFU: Mr Speaker, let me finish. They gave me information –(Interruption)

MRS KULANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to support hon. Wananzofu over these armed Karimojong in his region. It is only two weeks ago that Karimojong raiders attacked three women who had gone to carry out charcoal burning and they were killed. So, the question of saying that Kapchorwa is sealed off is not true. We have only got 100 guns yet we had asked for 1,000. 

Not only that, I think it is proper that when Karimojong go to their neighbours they should not be armed. We do not refuse neighbours, but when they come with guns it gives the wrong signal that they want to intimidate, or they want to kill. So, it is upon the Government to see that the Karimojong who have come to graze come without guns. That is what we are saying. I support the honourable member. 

MR WANANZOFU: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, in conclusion we would request government to establish a barracks in Kitale region. We also want our counterparts, especially hon. Minister Lokeris, to talk to his people and write an apology to the people of Sironko. 

We also want our LDUs to be armed and be supervised by the UPDF. Thank you.  

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable member for raising this important observation. I talked to the member a few days ago, and hon. Beatrice Wabudeya also talked to my colleague, hon. Mbabazi, about the same issue. And as I speak now we have already instructed the UPDF to go and handle the situation.  

Mr Speaker, the member wanted to know whether the disarmament exercise is still on. The disarmament exercise is still on. Sensitisation was done and everybody in that region is aware that possession of unauthorised guns is illegal. We have been arresting them; we have been punishing them. So, that one is clear. The sensitisation was done; the exercise -(Interruption)

MR ABURA PIRIR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament. I feel very lucky to add information to the contribution by the honourable minister as arising from the issue of disarmament. 

The disarmament, as we designed the programme, is not going ahead in the way we made it here. The current type of disarmament we have is forceful disarmament. On the 3rd of this month troops, either UPDF or the Arrow Group, attacked the village of Kangole trading centre. People were killed; teachers were rounded up and were taken to the barracks. What we saw in the New Vision was a malicious report by an editor called Etengu. Etengu said these were warriors who had been smoked out of the houses, but these were teachers, traders and school children that were –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, I have heard the member on the Floor stating that the Arrow group and the UPDF attacked innocent people in Karamoja and some place he has just mentioned, Kangole. He went further to say these were people who were innocent and doing their own things without giving adequate information to this House, like the number of the Arrow Boys and under whose command they are. 

Is he in order, therefore, to give the wrong impression about the Arrow Group? In fact the Arrow Group have never moved an inch out of Teso; that is why the Karimojong for the first time have never entered Teso recklessly. For example, they came to Kumi and asked for permission and we gave them three conditions to be fulfilled before they entered Teso but they failed. Is he in order, therefore, to allege so maliciously without substantiating?

THE SPEAKER: Well, this would require me to investigate the facts, but I think you have been challenged that what you are saying, you cannot substantiate. Can you?

MR ABURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Although the member was trying to raise a point of order, I had not developed exactly what happened. The issue was that the Arrow Group last week received their salaries in Moroto. It was on the 5th of this month when the Arrow Group, near the seminary of Nabike, made the second attack. Three people were killed and 15 were hospitalised in Moroto. They were heard talking in their language that, “You used to disturb our people now it is our turn to do to you the same”. 

The paymaster, a captain, took the salary to Moroto to pay the Arrow Group. Two days later they were being brought to Tororo for recruitment in two trailers. So, I would like to say that what has happened in Sironko, hon. Speaker, and honourable members, I do condemn that act. (Applause)

But I also appeal to the Government that –(Mr Ogwel Loote rose_) I am saying in a humble heart, I appeal to the Government to fulfil the promise of water. The Karimojong should not by this time be moving to the neighbouring districts. For the few Karimojong who have moved near the border of Teso, it is due to lack of water.  

Then on the issue of disarmament, I think the most effective method was a peaceful one. When we went out to sensitise the people about disarmament, we collected 10,000 guns without firing a single bullet. But now the method has come to rounding up villages and shooting people, and they can hardly get a gun. In other words the protection, which the Government had promised that, “The Karimojong shall be disarmed and we shall give every county 146 LDU,” has not been fulfilled. The neighbouring district of Teso, as somebody said, has not been – the Karimojong raided even when the Kony programme was there. They came to Teso and they killed 21 people. But when we went to the ground the elders -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Point of clarification.

MR ABURA: Could I please -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Just clarification. Thank you, honourable member. The clarification I want to seek from you is about the issue of the Arrow Group. To the best of our knowledge the Arrow Group are not in Karamoja and when you talk of them being paid on the 5th, Arrow Boys were not paid on the 5th. Since the beginning of this month the Arrow Boys have not been paid any money. So, when you talk of them being paid yet they have been disturbing us, we are so concerned. Could you tell us who this paymaster is and these Arrow Boys are in Karamoja, because we do not have Arrow Boys in Karamoja.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, my concern is that you are expanding the debate. The debate was limited but now you are bringing in the Arrow Group, which is another region.

MR ABURA: Mr Speaker, I do not want to duplicate myself on this issue –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: We have now gone beyond the 30 minutes given for this.

MR ABURA: I have enough evidence that the Arrow Group was paid in Moroto and when they did the operation they were talking the language we understood. However, I was saying that as long as we are now changing the method from a peaceful one to a forceful one, we might not succeed. As soon as this programme started of rounding up villages at night, most of these warriors who had personal guns ran to neighbouring districts. Others have crossed the border to Kenya. 

So, the other programme of peaceful means of disarming was really proportional and was the fastest way of disarming these people. Now they are like wounded buffalos because any time they are seen on the road they are shot at. So, there is a danger that travelling on the road in Karamoja, whether you are a woman or a child, armed or not armed, so long as you meet the Government or the Army, they will shoot at you. It is like something that happened in 1962 when they said, “When you see a Karimojong whether they are two or three, they are planning to raid or they are returning from a raid”. So, this programme of Bataringaya has come back indirectly. The Karimojong are not all that hostile but it is the Government, which is making them to be hostile.  

Mr Speaker, I thank you but I regret whatever has happened, and I condemn - in the strongest terms - those raids. Otherwise, those who lost lives in the camp were compensated with 2,000 cows; these are people of Teso.  

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I want to thank the honourable member for that piece of information, but I still maintain that this disarmament is till going on. The form of the disarmament is forceful disarmament and we agreed on it because the peaceful disarmament was given a period, which elapsed. Hon. Peter Lokeris, the Minister of State for that area requested the President in a special cabinet meeting and the peaceful disarmament period was extended. When it elapsed everybody knew what was going to follow. The Government remained with no choice but to forcefully engage these stubborn, notorious warriors. 

I would like to inform the House that not every Karimojong is a warrior or a cattle rustler. We have notorious karachunas who have made this exercise an economic one. They are dangerous; they are killers. We have to confront them in the same way and we shall continue to do that - (Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you, honourable minister for giving way. Holding a firearm is illegal, that is what I am saying. If you are found with a firearm without a license you go to court. The clarification I am seeking is after that period has elapsed are you taking these people to court or you are just shooting them? Because it is in the interest of this House that we get appraised on the steps you are taking in the new form of disarmament. Are you just shooting at them as the member has alleged that when they see Karimojong on the road they shoot them like in 1962, or are you taking them to court? And can you even give us evidence and references of these cases so that people can understand that we are doing it in the right way?

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, we get worried when the Karimojong are being played with in this style. We have received information from Members of Parliament from Karamoja that now the area is actually endangered in that the Somalis are coming in and they are throwing in arms I think there are other groups from Sudan and Kenya. Can you assure this House or clarify to me whether the issue of the other players who are also actually targeting Karamoja as an area of kavuyo - whether you have already made sure that the people who are coming from Sudan and Ethiopia and Somali and Kenya have been told not to become a problem so that we can assure the Karimojong that there is no problem?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, we are working with the Judiciary. The Minister in charge of the Judiciary was tasked with getting enough magistrates to the ground to handle the culprits. I must tell you, Sir, that we do not have enough of them but there are arrangements to make sure that when the Army gets these culprits, they are handed over to the judiciary.  

Regarding what hon. Eng. Gagawala has raised, of course, you know what is happening in Somalia, and there is almost no control there and in Kenya on that side. Although there is a government in Kenya, those brothers of ours on that side are almost uncontrollable. So, what the Government is doing through the Ministry of Internal Affairs is to talk at ministerial level to see how we can handle the disarmament together with our neighbours. Uganda has really tried but we are facing problems because the neighbours are not doing the same. 

I do not want to waste time talking about what is in southern Sudan. So together with the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs we are talking to our counterparts across to see how we can handle the whole exercise together.

Mr Speaker, before I was interrupted, I was telling the House that we were forced to do forceful disarmament because of some factors that arose. Although the peaceful disarmament yielded the biggest number of guns, time came when there was almost a stand still because the President left the place. Some people brought the guns because they wanted the President to see them as they were handing over the guns. They were motivated by the presence of the President, the Minister of state for Defence and other people. The area Members of Parliament motivated the people who possessed these guns to bring them too, although some of them had three according to the information from their spouses. They had three guns, handed in one and they were recorded as having done the disarmament. We got this information. 

When we ask where the guns are coming from, that is also a source. Some people had six, they handed in one and we are following them up. So, we are carrying out forceful disarmament because the peaceful one had almost come to a halt. 

Another factor was that when the President left - in fact the day before he left, those notorious warriors tried to ambush his Presidential Guard Unit. 

MR BIKWASIZEHI: there is a rumour that it is only the rusty guns and those that were not functioning that were handed in but the better ones remained behind. What have you got to say about that?

MS NANKABIRWA: Yes, that is a rumour because some of the guns we received were rusty. I do not know whether it was intended for those who possessed more than one to hand in a rusty one and remain with the one that is efficient, or not. So, it is still just an allegation. Until we get these guns, that is when we can ascertain the truth.

I accept that we had certain obligations, which we did not fulfil as government. As I speak now we have not yet managed to establish the two companies per sub-county especially at the border. That one we have not done it but we are trying to make sure that we re-establish these companies.  

Mr Speaker, let me point out something on Kata barracks. It is true the people of Sironko; I met them at the end of last year, I met the entire leadership of Sironko District in Kampala with the Members of Parliament from that District. They reminded me of the commitment to establish a barracks at Kata. The problem I am facing is water. The place where they want the barracks to be established must have water for our troops but I am handling this with my colleague, the Minister in charge of Water to make sure that at least we have a borehole in that place. Putting the troops in a place where there is no water is not good. So, it is only water that is making it impossible for the Government to establish the barracks there.

I want to end by saying that the problem of the Karimojong warrior is not –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS NANKABIRWA: I am winding up, Sir – this is not a problem for Karamoja alone. The Members of Parliament from that area have got – even the leaders as hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere indicated, are in a dilemma. I stayed with them for almost 30 days. They get morale when there is a presence of Members of Parliament from other areas but to say that these other Members of Parliament will go from one kraal to another telling their people to hand over the gun, that one will not help us. 

These are elected leaders. They are part and parcel of the communities that elected them. They sit with them but this issue of disarmament is really sensitive. I would like to request that some of us from other areas should see how we can make a programme and move to Karamoja region. The Army and the Police will make sure that there is security so that we help the leaders from this region to sensitise the people further. Otherwise, to leave it to the leaders –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I wish to affirm that the Army has gone down to Sironko and put down clear guidelines to the Karimojong who think that they will go with guns to look for water. We have penalties for each case. If you kill or stampede peoples’ gardens there are penalties for all that and they are aware of them. So, whoever will be netted will have to face that. I am assuring you, honourable members, that at this particular time we can revert to the peaceful disarmament. Thank you very much for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had said that we may have to adjust the Order Paper to accommodate two statements but we have, since we started, been on this business and we have not touched the business on the Order Paper. I think hon. Ken Lukyamuzi will make his statement tomorrow, I guarantee that, so that we handle the business that was earmarked for today. Please, bear with me.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
4.14
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the National Meat Policy, maybe, with your indulgence I would like to make one remark. 

This is in effort of putting in place policies and regulatory framework to enable us to undertake enforcement of laws, regulations and standards to enable us capture markets in the livestock sector and also sustainably supply in future those markets we shall have accessed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, let the appropriate committee scrutinize the paper and give us a report.

MOTION
SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL

4.17
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion seeking leave of this House under rule 71(1) of our Rules of Procedure to introduce a Private Member’s Bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. Proceed to justify it.

MR KATUNTU: Whereas Article 41(1) of the Constitution gives every citizen a right of access to information in the possession of the State or any other organ or agency of the State, except were the release is likely to prejudice the security or sovereignty of the State, or is likely to interfere with the right to privacy of any other person; 

And whereas Article 41(2) requires Parliament to enact laws prescribing the classes of information that are exceptional to the general rule provided for under clause (1);  

And whereas the right of access to information is a fundamental human right under the Constitution; 

Aware that no legislation has been brought to regulate access to Government information and thereby eliminate the secretive and unresponsive culture existing on Government information and records; 

And further aware that the absence of such legislation has led to increased abuse of power, human rights violation and corruption by concealing important information that would have exposed activities of Government officials to the public;  

Knowing that there is need to promote good governance and to improve and strengthen the culture of transparency and accountability in the public sector and add to the dimension of constitutional democracy, equity and the rule of law;  

Now therefore this motion is moved that this House accepts the introduction of a Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled, “The Access to Information Act, 2004” attached herewith and laid on the Table; 

And do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but do you want to limit yourself to what you have read or you want to expound on the matter?

MR KANTUTU: Mr Speaker, I have made necessary consultation with the Minister of information and I have provided him with a copy of the Bill. I have also sent one to the Attorney General for their study and input and they can decide either way. 

As you realize, this law is long overdue and the Government has been promising to bring it here. We have pressure from the civil society and indeed the public to operationalise this particular Article of the Constitution. It is our duty as Parliament, especially when our colleagues at the front bench are too busy and we still have some time to assist them in doing some of these things, to take this up. So, in the spirit of working together as Parliament and the Executive, I thought it necessary, together with my colleagues, who have seconded this motion, to come up with this Bill. We are indeed assisting the relevant ministry and the Executive to come up and operationalise that particular provision of the Constitution.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Mr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, last month I presented to Cabinet a paper on the right of access to information. Cabinet discussed the same and made recommendations, which I thereafter did incorporate in the paper and the same was on its way to the Attorney General for a draft Bill to be prepared.  

This matter is long overdue. I regret this fact and government does recognize that the law depends on this paper. And as you may recall, Sir, the Supreme Court did make great reference to it and so the Government is very keen to get on with ensuring that the relevant law on this subject is in place as soon as possible. 

Sir, I want to assure honourable members that the concern they have rightly expressed is one that we have too. Again I wish to regret the delay we have had over the years but we are now on the right course.  

Having said this, apart from appreciating members’ concerns, I want to put on record my appreciation of hon. Katuntu’s commendable job. It is true he has given me, among others, a copy of the draft Bill he has spent time on. I am quite sure that the Office of the Attorney General will benefit immensely from the work done by hon. Katuntu.

To the best of my knowledge, Sir, there are a handful of African countries with a law on access to information and we are determined to ensure that Uganda joins that small team that recognizes the importance of such a law. To demonstrate our resolve, Mr Speaker, I want to assure honourable members that before long I will be here with a Bill for consideration.

Again, I regret that delays have not been in our interest as government, but I also appeal to our colleagues that this is a subject, which transcends political overtones that we have heard from various corners in our land. It is a subject that we are all interested in and when the Bill comes before the House soon, I appeal to my colleagues to give it full support. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr speaker, I do not know whether the Minister was opposing the motion or supporting it. He has sent me a note expressing his gratitude and his opinion about the draft Bill being excellent. In my opinion, we are seeking leave of this House to present this Bill. The Minister has got an option too. Since he is not ready, he could study this Bill, he can even take it over, if he so wishes, he can amend it; but we must move forward. We cannot wait for his proposed Bill. I really did not want to say this on the Floor, but I have also made consultations with the department responsible for drafting Government Bills and they did not have those instructions as of this morning.

We are ready with the Bill and it is my view, Mr Speaker, for us as a House to proceed. The Minister has a copy of this Bill; it will go before the relevant committee of Parliament where he can move the amendments. In fact, I do not mind even if he takes it over so long as he does not dillydally. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, as we speak, the Office of the Attorney General is in possession of correspondence on this subject. But it is true that we can work together, and we should work together. I will be requesting the Office of the Attorney General to make use of the contribution that hon. Katuntu has put in place. I suggest that since we have already started and the matter is in motion, we should continue with the subject until we bring the matter before the House.

4.25
MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I would like to support the motion moved by hon. Katuntu on the law of access to information. You recall at the close of last year an oral question was put by hon. Fred Badda to the Minister in regard to this law, and the Minister promised that by March this law would be in place. 

At YPA level, because we are interested in this law, we have written to the Minister to come and we discuss it with the other Members of Parliament. He indicated that he would not be in the country for the following week. But we expected to also be promised as to when this law would come. This law is long overdue. I want to assure you, Mr Speaker, that members of the public really look forward to this law. During the anti-corruption week of last year, about 46 districts under the Anti-Corruption Coalition of Uganda raised the issue of access to information.  

I would also like to borrow from one of the great American Presidents, Madison, who in 1822 said that governance without information is a mockery. It is very important in the Movement politics, where we believe that people’s participation even in the Government programme of PEAP is important. Under good governance, the issue of public information has been highlighted and the Government would like the people to participate in what goes on in government. It is not possible when this law is being postponed all this time. 

You remember that when we passed the Leadership Code, one of the areas was to show that assets and property declared should be public information. But it became a problem during the week the IGG published the riches of some ministers. Therefore, it is very important that the motion moved by hon. Katuntu should be given the support of this Parliament. I thank you.

4.30
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion by the hon. Abdu Katuntu. This matter, as we all know, has been outstanding for a long time. The Minister had time - since 1995 - to bring a Bill to this House and implement a provision in the Constitution with regard to the right to information. It will not be fair to this House for the Minister to come today and say he has now given instructions to the drafts people to begin drafting a Bill, which he could have drafted in 1996 or 1997 or 1998; and now in 2004 he begins to talk about drafting the Bill! 

This would be a way of frustrating an honourable member who has rightly, using all the procedures we have in the House, introduced a motion to come up with a Private Members’ Bill. Therefore, I would like to support the motion and also call upon my colleagues to support this motion so that the process can move and people in this country can have access to information as and when they need it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.32
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand up to support the motion raised by hon. Katuntu. Whereas it is a generally accepted principle that one of the ways Parliament can discuss Bills is through Private Members’ Bills, this Parliament has not had so many opportunities of receiving Private Members’ Bills. On the contrary, it is the Government Bills that have actually occupied Parliament most of the time. I look at this as a very golden opportunity for government to show its magnanimity of working together with private members to promote a common cause. 

Given that the Minister is not opposed to the spirit of the proposed Bill and the principles contained therein; they are using the same drafts people that are available to both Parliament and the Government, and they will be using the same Committee of Parliament; I see, therefore, no major reason why the Minister should find that objectionable in any way. Indeed, Parliament should realize that since the ruling of the Supreme Court, there is every need to have this law in place to avoid further embarrassment both to Parliament and to the Executive. 

I would, therefore, urge Parliament to support this motion so that a Private Member’s Bill can be committed to this House, debated by the relevant committee and we pronounce ourselves with a view to having a law in place. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.33
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I will be very brief indeed. I thank hon. Katuntu for giving an impetus to this very important provision. Access to information is a fundamental right. I also thank the Minister for waking up because I think without hon. Katuntu’s motion, the Minister would not have woken up.  

It should not linger in our minds anymore, because what may be lingering in our minds by the non-controversial contribution of the Minister on this motion is whether it should be the Government to move the Bill for enactment into law, or a private member. To me the fundamental point we have reached is that this Article 41 is going to be operationalised. I fully agree with hon. Mwandha that the Government had all the time, since 1995 when the Constitution was enacted, to have these provisions of the Constitution operationalised. Now that an individual, a backbencher, has taken the initiative, the Government should let him have the responsibility and if need be, the colour to have it introduced. In any case, something to do with access to information normally has a lot to do with access to information in the possession of the state. Therefore, for purposes of independence and bringing out balanced legislation, I would say that we leave this to –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry for interrupting my senior brother here, but I would like to be clarified. If this House this afternoon or evening adopts this motion, know that the Minister, listening to what he was saying, was not very clear on it. And wherever this Bill goes, it will have financial implications. If the Minister is on the other side resisting, how shall we proceed to make sure we adopt this report? If he is resisting the issue, will the financial implications be forced on the Minister when we have to adopt this Bill? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not see the imputation of an improper motive on the Minister. I do not see a problem because what we are doing today is just to give leave, and when leave is given, we do not know how long it is going to take hon. Katuntu to have the Bill printed. Although I see a copy here, these are just ideas. Somebody will have to assist him to print, gazette, and then seek the financial implications. He has a longer procedure than the Minister himself. So, if we give leave, he can start on the journey, but the Minister himself can print his Bill tomorrow and have it here. Once it is here there will be no need for the other one to bring in his. 

From what I have learnt from the Minister, he is actually welcoming this. And he said he has started on the journey. So, whoever will come here first, we shall deal with that person. That is how I see it. I do not know whether that is not the position, honourable minister?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Can I finalise, Mr Speaker? Can I conclude by saying that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, there was a clarification, which I want the Minister to assist me with. Is what I have said the position?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Let me conclude by saying that I see no contradiction between the Minister and hon. Katuntu. You have put it right; whoever comes first will win the beautiful lady. So, we are in waiting. Let us give hon. Katuntu a chance, if he comes first, he takes the lady; if the Minister comes first, he reaches the altar as well.  So, there is no contradiction. Let us give leave to hon. Katuntu to proceed. Thank you very much.

4.38
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no cause for alarm. The position of the Government, which I must state very clearly, is that we are not opposed to the request by hon. Katuntu. This Bill has many legs: there is the sovereignty, there is the security of the state, the individual, the private and the financial implications. Obviously Government will have to work with him because it has financial implications. 

And according to Article 93 of the Constitution, “Any motion or resolution, which makes a charge on the consolidated or any other public fund, must be moved by Government,” hence the necessity for the front bench and the back bench to work harmoniously. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I have said, the Minister had given his instructions to the Attorney General; hopefully it is being drafted. The other one says he did not know, he has brought his motion for leave of the House. So, do we really have to debate further? 

I want to put the question to the motion by hon. Katuntu that he be given leave to bring a Private Member’s Bill to operationalise Article 41 of our Constitution.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON SPECIFIC SECTORS OF THE MINISTRY

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, before the Chairperson presents the report, I am standing here on a point of procedure. There are a number of occasions when the front bench ambushes us on matters of great importance in the state of Uganda. In light of the lack of clarity in regard to the presentation of the report on No.5 on matters related to Vegetable Oil Development Project in Kalangala, I would like to be advised whether in terms of procedure on how we should move forward. 

It is one thing for one to talk about the promotion of vegetable oil through the growth of vegetables and also through the growth of palm oil, because the two factors can produce vegetable oil. In a situation where we have had some agony related to the notorious BIDCO –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the procedural point you are trying to raise?

MR LUKYAMUZI: The procedural point I am raising is whether the presentation of the report here does not concern the notorious BIDCO project we have heard about so that my fears are allayed, as a representative of the people.

THE SPEAKER: Well, in the first place, I cannot say I know a notorious BIDCO, as you call it. 

Secondly, before a report is presented I do not know what is there. You should wait for the presentation of a report and if what you are saying is part of that report then we shall address it. I do not know the contents now, what am I going to answer? Allow the chairperson to present his report then we shall see how we proceed.

MR LUKYAMUZI: With due obedience, Mr Speaker, there are already highlights over the issues to be advanced in No.5, so I am not wrong to express concern.

THE SPEAKER: Let us first have it on record then you will be able to raise whatever you want to raise. But as of now, I do not know whether the report is one page or one sentence. Wait!

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

4.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, this is a monitoring report from the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and in the interest of time I may skip some parts, which I consider unnecessary details, or which honourable members will go and read in their free time.

Mr Speaker, in pursuance of Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and rule 154 of the Rules of Procedure, the Committee on Agricultural, Animal Industry and Fisheries went out to the field to monitor and evaluate the activities carried out by the Ministry and its autonomous bodies, for about two to three months.

The committee feels that whereas it is a status assessment report, it is also necessary to report to Parliament in greater detail two matters that have a significant bearing on the sector, namely the implications of the recent attempt to lift the ban on catching immature fish and the debate on GMOs in respect to Uganda.

Methodology:   

Mr Speaker, following the conclusion of the Budget debate in the House, the committee took time to reflect on sector issues that emerged from Parliament and on the recommendations passed by Parliament in the financial years 2002/2003 and 2003/2004. Salient issues were considered and relevant documents were also analysed.

As a follow up, the committee visited some strategic private and public sector projects as follows: 

• PMA and NAADS implementing districts including Tororo, Soroti, Kabale and Mbarara;

• Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) strategic intervention in the districts of Masaka, Bushenyi, Mukono, Tororo and Mbale;

• Vegetable Oil Development Project (VODP) - as it is known to the committee - in Kalangala District; and 

• NARO activities in the various research institutes as indicated.

The committee also had an opportunity to attend special workshops especially on Uganda Coffee Development Authority, which were addressed by a consultant from FAO headquarters in Rome, because the consumers in Europe wanted to draw the attention of Uganda producers of coffee to this very serious mould called OTA, which is actually a danger to the health of those who consume this coffee that is infected by this mould bacteria.

The committee also participated in workshops on NARS Policy Review and World Food Programme participation in Luwero District, and also accessed information on GMOs.

Mr Speaker, these are our findings:

Under the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA), the committee was aware that the public was not conversant with PMA and Parliament approved the committee’s recommendation that government provides a lot more information on PMA to the public. It demanded a White Paper on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to be presented as soon as possible. 

It also recommended that an immediate action, a sector status report, be presented in the House by 31 October 2003.

Mr Speaker, this is the progress arising from this recommendation. Since the adoption of the recommendation, the committee wishes to report with pleasure positive government response. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries organised a one-day workshop on Tuesday, 9 September 2003 for Members of Parliament at the International Conference Center in an effort to explain further what is meant by PMA.

The line ministries involved in the implementation of PMA led by their own sector ministers presented their reports and this includes the Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry; the Minister of Works; the Minister of Minerals, Water of Lands and Environment; the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. These are the Ministers who presented reports concerning their sectors to the workshop. The issues that arose from the workshop are on page 5.

The Concept and Design of PMA:

Participants of the workshop wondered whether PMA should have been called a plan when it is actually a framework. A number of questions as reflected on the report were raised, but key among them is question No.3. If the Ministry of Animal Industry and Fisheries is not the primary driver since there are so many other sector ministries and the programme is multi-sectoral, then which ministry has the overall responsibility for accounting to Parliament? There should, therefore, be a proper home for PMA if it is not under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Slow pace of moving from conceptualization to implementation:

There was an expectation that the Minister’s policy statement for this financial year would dwell on actual progress activities on the ground rather than on policies, strategies and plans that have always been reinstated before.

Demonstration of impact/value for money:  

The majority of Members of Parliament have been wondering whether really PMA was on the ground, and so they demanded for impact in respect of money spent on this framework.

High costs of seemingly peripheral activities:

Mr Speaker, the Members were particularly concerned that the nature of the participatory process being employed was diverting resources from implementation of interventions. Endless and expensive workshops and sensitisation activities disappointed the participants.

Narrowing of the mandate of MAAIF:

Participants expressed concern over the narrowing of the mandate of MAAIF, for example, taking away its responsibilities for agro-processing, agricultural produce marketing, agricultural education, micro-finance, much of which is to target the rural poor and input distribution; which will not only make it ineffective but also lead to doubts as to whether its continued existence was justified.

How to ensure inclusiveness:

Participants noted with reservations the focus of PMA on working with the poor as a way of achieving modernisation. They wanted PMA to ensure that while the focus is maintained on the rural poor, the interests of others particularly the progressive and peri-urban farmers, and others who may fall in that category, should not be ignored.

Technologies and inputs for farmers:

Concern was raised on the privatisation of supply of inputs particularly agro-chemicals, vaccines, drugs, seeds and electricity, which might limit the ability of farmers to access them. There was a view that some interim arrangements needed to be put in place to ensure that that flow of inputs is not impeded during the process of agricultural transformation.

Zoning:

The workshop observed that in order to increase the efficiency in which the support services for agriculture are developed and utilised, it was desirable to zone the agricultural commodity production, as was the case in the past.

Modernization – mechanization and irrigation:

The Members of Parliament at the workshop felt strongly that mechanisation and irrigation were essential for modernisation, but that PMA was not paying enough attention to them.

Funding of the PMA within the MTEF ceiling:

Participants were very concerned that MAAIF is not getting enough funding because PMA resources are diverted to other sectors. It was strongly felt that PMA funding should be executed by MAAIF in totality.

Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs):

The workshop expressed concern about the potential dangers in introducing GMOs in the process of agricultural modernisation. Especially, our low level of scientific development makes it difficult to fully appreciate the full implications of GMOs.

Human resource management: 

This issue is clear.

War  ravaged areas: 

Members of Parliament were of the strong view that the areas of the country that had been affected by war should receive special consideration in the implementation of PMA. This will enable them to redress the negative impacts of conflicts suffered and kick start the development process.

National Coverage/Regional Equity:

The participants in the workshop considered that the current national coverage of the PMA was unsatisfactory. There were also cases in which communities were making plans that were ultimately not funded. It was emphasized that coverage be speeded up while factoring in regional equity and funding of community initiated plans.

Marketing:

This attracted a long discussion but the core issues that emerged were:

• The lack of knowledge of available quantities for marketing and, therefore, there was no objective basis for development strategies on markets.  

• Developing strategies on markets was also identified as one area of concern.

• Markets were not adequately characterised.
  
• Essential prerequisites such as storage and rail transport are not being attended to.

Access to financial resources:

The workshop expressed concern about the lack of financial programmes appropriate for rural agricultural development. Government was urged to learn from the Indian case where the Government established a rural development bank specifically to make funds available for the agricultural sector’s development.

Non-Settled Conditional Grants (NSCG) and Strategic Intervention:

Much concern was raised about the way in which NSCG and strategic intervention funds were being utilised.  

Mr Speaker, arising from these issues, these were the recommendations from the workshop: 

• Government should pay more attention to the emerging issues on the implementation of PMA.

• A sector white paper should be prepared on agriculture following a wider consultation of stakeholders in this country. This will elaborate the priority areas to be considered in the investment plan.

Agricultural sector in general:

• The workshop demanded an investment plan, which should be urgently produced, which reflects aspirations of the people of Uganda on how the sector should be steered from subsistence to commercial agriculture, targeting poverty reduction by the year 2017 from the current 35 percent down to ten percent.

• Through the investment plan, therefore, PMA should be operationalised within the agriculture sector, which should guarantee the realisation of the overall development objective of the sector.  

• The investment plan should also provide national policy makers and planners with a basis on which to evaluate the annual request being made for funding the agricultural sector through MTEF. This will be particularly important in the year 2004/05 budget cycle since all funds committed to the sector either by government or development partners will for the first time be included within the MTEF and fully integrated within the sector.  

Mr Speaker, on page 10 the committee would like to draw the attention of the House to the coffee sub-sector. Since 2001, the Government of Uganda has supported the coffee sub-sector by putting in place the intervention programme aimed at boosting production and improving the quality and marketing of coffee. One such intervention is the re-planting programme, through the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF). 

Other initiatives include PMA, which we have already referred to, and then the National Agricultural Advisory Development Services (NAADS) and Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP), Local Government Development Programme (LGDP) and others.  

In the specific case for coffee, the Parliamentary Committee visited central, western and eastern Uganda - the coffee growing areas - in order to assess the impact of the coffee replanting at grassroots level. In particular this was for efforts aimed at improving coffee quality through wet coffee processing, curtailing the effects of coffee wilt diseases on Robusta, and pests and diseases on Arabic coffee at farm level.

The committee split into two groups:  one went to cover part of the Central and Western region, and the other covered parts of the Central and Eastern region. In particular, the committee visited Buwama sub-county in Mpigi; Kabonera, Kyazanga and Kibinge sub-counties in Masaka; Kyangyenyi and Kitagata sub-counties in Bushenyi; Ntenjeru sub-county in Mukono; Bulesa sub-county in Bugiri; Dabani sub-county in Busia; Bungokho sub-county in Mbale; Buwalasi sub-county in Sironko and Sironko Bubongi sub-county; and then the District Agricultural Training and Information Centre (DATIC), which is formerly the DFI in Tororo.  

Some members of the committee also participated in the workshop organised by UCDA and the Coffee Processors and Exporters Association on the control of mould growth known as OTA, which we have already talked about.

General observations and findings:

During their tour the committee held discussions with a number of leaders from LCI to LCV and also small-scale and large-scale coffee producers:

(a) Generally large-scale coffee farms are better planned, serviced and use more appropriate agronomy practices and have better productivity and output. Large-scale farmers are more responsive to new technology and have better control of the wilt disease. They also have more access to government services and to financial resources.

(b) The small-scale farmers generally have farms, which are not well looked after, have less access to financial resources and government services and are more unwilling and less enthusiastic in removing the diseased coffee trees and, therefore, contributing to more spread of the coffee wilt disease.  

(c) In spite of the poor price for coffee and presence of coffee wilt disease; farmers are still willing to grow more of it.
 
(d) Management of coffee wilt needs to be reviewed and effective interventions designed, especially for the small-scale farmers, particularly the older ones.

Mr Speaker, the responses to government interventions are as follows:

1. Local leaders and farmers appreciate government interventions through PAF, PMA, PEAP and LGDP, which have enabled some farmers to re-plant their coffee farms and fight the coffee wilt disease.

2. Farmers request that distribution of coffee through the coffee village arrangement should continue. Government should increase allocation for purchase of coffee seedlings for farmers since many people continue to demand for seedlings, but more significantly, allocation, purchase and distribution of coffee seedlings should be carried out timely, for farmers to utilise rains maximally. 

3. Farmers also asked for increased financial support through PAF to enable each homestead receive more than the current 200 seedlings per homestead offered by UCDA to increase on acreage if peasants are to be assisted to get out of poverty. The local government at district levels has been urged to support the re-planting programme by including coffee in their district budgets.  

Common constraints of coffee production:

• The common constraint of coffee, as usual, has been the coffee wilt disease and it was reported that over 40 percent of the coffee in the traditional Robusta growing areas, has been wiped out and UCDA has supported uprooting of the diseased coffee, but only a small number of affected trees have been up-rooted.

• The control of pests and diseases particularly in Arabica growing districts is almost impossible without government intervention in respect to Arabica coffee. Pests and diseases, particularly coffee berry borer and leaf rust, have remained a big problem and need serious intervention from government since farmers lacked capacity to implement a comprehensive pest and disease control regime.

• Many farmers in Robusta coffee growing areas expressed enthusiasm in growing lowland Arabica coffee since it is still resistant to coffee wilt disease, and this was a demand particular in the West.

• The inadequate preparation of farmers prior to planting in terms of mobilisation, organisation and training, especially in new coffee districts, was an area of concern. This is attributed to inefficient facilitation to and/or commitment and competence of grassroots extension workers, who make infrequent visits to farmers.

• Coffee allocations are usually received late, leading to late planting and high mortality rate as noted above.

• The field visits revealed that there are large quantities of coffee seedlings in some nurseries, some of which have overgrown because of lack of funds to purchase them. This is resulting into financial losses to nursery operators, loss of morale to care for the plantlets in the nurseries and to raise new seedlings. This is compounded by late payment for delivered seedlings.

• There should be increased allocations and timely payments for coffee seedlings distributed. Procurement of plantlets on credit be authorised by government to enable ready plantlets be procured and delivered.

• There is clearly under-funding, which is reflected in the lack of procurement of inputs; inability to procure sufficient coffee plantlets, removal of diseased and old coffee trees and inadequate land preparation, poor storage and marketing strategy.  

Mr Speaker, the recommendations arising from these findings are that:

• Government establishes an agricultural bank where farmers can access production credit at affordable rates since commercial banks are inaccessible to them.

• The timely allocation and distribution of coffee seedlings should be effected very aggressively.

• There should be timely payment for coffee seedlings distributed.

• Procurement of coffee seedlings on credit should be authorised to enable ready plants to be procured and delivered by government.

• Government supports the establishment of a credit input supply system to enable farmers to access production inputs and improve coffee productivity and quality. And that the Government should also closely monitor the system to check unscrupulous private operators who adulterate and overprice agricultural inputs. 

The other area of interest from the workshop is that participants learnt that OTA is a strain of bacteria, which causes cancer in human beings when you consume the coffee affected by the bacteria. The mould can develop from poor handling of coffee right from planting, harvesting, processing, storage and packaging. The big consumers are aware of this situation and this calls for more attention on coffee quality in our country.  

THE PALM OIL PROJECT

The committee presents an overview: 

• As mentioned earlier in this report, the Parliamentary Committee on MAAIF visited Kalangala District between August and September 2003, to assess the status of the palm oil project. 

• The committee visited some of the palm oil pilot projects in the district and inspected land, which had been secured by government for the project.  

• The committee held discussions with Vegetable Oil Development Project (VODP) officials who accompanied it to the district, and the district local leaders.

The findings from the field:

• Indeed, Mr Speaker, the district has ideal conditions for palm oil production. 

• The farmers and district leaders are enthusiastic about the project.

• BIDCO, a Kenya company, concluded an agreement with government to implement the project. 

But the committee also had reservations: 

• Apprehension was raised about the benefits of local farmers and communities and what they will get from the project. This, especially if BIDCO establishes its own plantation of palm oil and becomes self-sufficient. There seem to be no sufficient guarantee for market for local farmers thereafter.

• It is not clear whether the agreement will not be used for BIDCO merely to import oil products into the Uganda market.

• Copies of the agreement were not circulated to the committee until Saturday 14 February 2004, which was just last weekend. But the Committee on Finance is fully engaged in scrutinising the agreement in detail and, therefore, our committee has no clear position that can be stated at this stage until the Committee on Finance completes its report and presents it to this House.  

NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION (NARO)

Mr Speaker, the committee also had opportunity to visit some of NARO’s activities but of interest is the issue on fisheries resources. Following the decision of government to lift the ban on catching immature fish and the committee being aware of the strategic importance of fish to our economy, visited our fisheries programme and below is a scientific report from NARO, which honourable members can be able to read in detail at their leisure.  

But the findings under section 4.1, fisheries research in Uganda, are worth mentioning. One of the major national assets in Uganda are the aquatic resources, which cover up to 18 percent of the country. These include five major lakes, Victoria, Kyoga, Albert, Edward, George; about 160 small lakes and a network of rivers and wetlands. These assets are estimated to have the capacity to produce at least 300,000 metric tonnes of fish annually.  

Mr Speaker, arising from our interaction with the Fisheries Research Institute, the committee was able to make some recommendations, which can be found on page 16. Of special interest is that the genetically similar species should, therefore, be separated and researchers are urged to do their best to address this concern. 

And the water hyacinth growth hot spots were found to be in areas of high nutrient enrichment and replenishment. Control of the water hyacinth, therefore, requires reduction of excessive nutrient input into the lake.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, management of the Nile Perch is of special interest. Nile Perch is currently the most important commercial species of fish in Lake Victoria and the basis of an export market worth US $100 million annually, to Uganda. The Nile Perch was introduced in the lake during the early 1960s from Lake Albert amidst fears that it would eat up all other fish, including its own kind, after which fisheries industry would collapse. The establishment of the Nile Perch resulted in the increase in fish catches on lakes Victoria and Kyoga by five to eight times. But from the late 1980s catches in both lakes started to decline, creating fears that the Nile Perch may not be sustainable.  

These are the observations by the committee:

• The deterioration in the competition factor of the Nile Perch is indicative of the reduction in food supply. A reduction in the proportion of females indicates that the Nile Perch has fewer females and, therefore, less capacity to replenish its stock. 
 
• There is need to protect both immature Nile Perch and breeding females. Since males mature at a smaller size of between 50-59 centimetres and the females at a relatively larger size of 80-100 centimetres, immature Nile Perch and breeding females should be protected through size selection exploitation by restricting the harvesting of the Nile Perch within the range of 50-100 centimetres using gill nets of 127 millimetres. However, there is currently no law protecting Nile Perch prey. The Uganda Fisheries Act prohibits capture of Nile Perch of less than 45 centimetres, which still exposes some immature males to capture.  

• The recent presidential attempt to lift the ban on catching immature fish would have destroyed even the little protection we had, and the Minister responsible for the sector needs to explain to the House why he had advised the President to take such a decision. 

• The law does not set the upper size limit of the fish to be harvested and allows all mature females to be harvested. This law needs review so that the upper size limit of the catch is imposed.  

• The Council of Ministers of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organisation in June 2002 agreed on a slot size of 50-85 centimetres as the size of Nile Perch to be harvested and processed from Lake Victoria. This is a clear manifestation that all the member states of the Lake Victoria basin have the good will to protect immature fish by their fisher folks. There is, therefore, no cause for the Government of Uganda to have alleged that neighbouring countries were catching immature fish with impunity. What is necessary is for the member states to pursue the need to enforce the law in place.  
·	In any case Uganda stands to lose in the fiasco on Lake Victoria fisheries resources. The lake area is shared between Kenya (6 percent), Uganda (43 percent) and Tanzania (51 percent). Uganda is landlocked; Kenya and Tanzania have a wide span of coastal waters of the Indian Ocean besides Lake Victoria. While Uganda has no option besides Lake Victoria, the sister states have fallback positions. 
·	Whereas the Lake Victoria basin is one of the most densely populated in areas of East Africa supporting an estimated population of 30 million people, Uganda derives its second most important foreign earning from the lake itself. There are several urban centres along the Uganda lakeshore, the largest of which is the city of Kampala followed by Jinja, Entebbe and Masaka. The lake is a direct source of water for domestic and industrial use as well as a receptacle for municipal, industrial and domestic waste.

Uganda is, therefore, probably the major contributor to the lake degradation and leading dependant on Lake Victoria fisheries resources. It should, therefore, not be lacking in initiating programmes on sustainable use of all fisheries resources from this lake compared to the sister states. 

The committee, therefore, recommended that the ban on catching immature fish should never be lifted. There is also need to consider imposing a ban on the upper size limit of fish caught, to protect the female fish population.

The member states should be persuaded to incorporate a slot in the Fisheries Act where it has not been done. Lifting of the ban on catching immature fish will only worsen the situation and should be avoided. This is action, which should be urgently pursued by the Government of Uganda with sister states, and the East African Legislative Assembly.

Mr Speaker, attention was also drawn to the Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). GMO refers to organisms that have acquired novel genes from other organisms by laboratory “gene transfer” method.  

Transgenic means organism containing genes altered by insertion of DNA; taking genes from one species and inserting them into another species in order to get that desired trait expressed in the offspring. 

Biotechnology is the instrument they use for doing that. 

Mr Speaker, the position of the Uganda Government on the above can be found on page 19. The position of the Uganda Government is gradually becoming clearer on GMOs. His Excellency the President okayed the importation of GMOs as long as they are processed and ready for consumption. This position was reported at the inauguration of the Biotechnology Laboratory at Kawanda recently. 

The Minister of State for Agriculture in charge of Livestock admitted this in the House and that indeed GMOs has been in the country for sometime now. The Minister promised this august House a well-organized and planned workshop on GMOs, for the public to debate it and the country awaits the promised workshop.

On page 20, Mr Speaker, we will only refer to the legal and regulatory issue. One important component in ensuring food safety is the regulatory structure. Government should ensure the safety of all domestic and imported foods for human and animal consumption in the country. The exceptions of this are meat and poultry and certain egg products. Government must, however, regulate the safety of animal drug residues in meat and poultry. 

Pesticides, including those bio-engineered into a food crop, must also be regulated. The agricultural and environmental safety of planting and field-testing bio-engineered plants should be ensured.  

The recommendations from the committee are that there should be an urgent need for a law in place to ensure controls over field trials to address the potential of material from field trials getting into food or feed. 

The law should provide a condition to publish guidance for comments on procedure to address the possible intermittent, low-level presence in food and feed of new non-pesticide proteins from biotechnology-derived crops that are under development for food and feed use and have gone through the pre-market consultation process. Under this guidance, the law should encourage sponsors, domestic and foreign, to submit protein safety information when field testing to show whether non-pesticide proteins produced in the field- tested lands might be found in the food or feed. The focus should be on proteins, which are new to such plants because there is a belief that at the low levels expected from such materials, any food or feed safety concerns would be limited to the potential that are of new protein, which could cause an allergic reaction in some people or could be toxic.  

Lastly are the recent development relating to MTEF ceilings. In July 2003, the Government made a decision to allocate Shs 2.2 billion to establish and operationalise the Euro-GAP Compliant System. Euro-GAP means the European retailer produce working group for good agricultural practices. This decision involves MAAIF reallocating within her development budget to raise Shs 1.0 billion and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avail MAAIF a supplementary provision for the remaining Shs 1.2 billion.

Consequent to this decision, MAAIF made budgetary reallocations in its development budget from the under listed programme, which can be found as attached Appendix I. 

The Ministry submitted a formal request to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to authorize the budgetary reallocations accordingly and this authority is still being awaited.

The implications of the reallocations in the budget cut on funding for priority strategic areas:

These re-allocations imply that additional funding gaps have been generated in respect of funding under the development.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this report be considered and adopted. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I thank you, the chairperson and the committee for this report. I thank you members for listening to this report as it was presented. This report affects the majority of the people we represent and, therefore, you should take it seriously. And, I would say, attendance when this motion is being considered should be at about 90 percent. Because when we talk about poverty how do we fight it? 

We fight it by considering what is in this report because I want to give benefit to others who for one reason or another have not been able to attend the presentation of this report. I know they are concerned about the plight of their people and they want to uplift their standards. I think that it is fair that having received this report, we go and study it in detail and then the debate will start tomorrow when everybody is here. Therefore, we should be here to consider this report tomorrow. With this we come to the end –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, this is a very important report. May I also request that since mention has been made about Kalangala oil projects, the agreement that was signed between the Government and that proprietor of VODP is availed to us? Would we get the benefit as Members of this House to have the agreement availed to us by tomorrow before we debate this so that we can go hand in hand with the terms of the agreement and see how much this project will benefit our people?

THE SPEAKER: As I know, this was a matter before the Committee on Agriculture. I am looking at it from that perspective. But then there are other aspects, which are being considered by other committees. I think the committee is not handling it clandestinely but properly receiving it from the Minister. We should give it time because it would prejudice our debating their report when eventually they have to bring it here. 

I rather think that we should address ourselves to this report as far as agriculture is concerned, and then the committee will address the other aspect. We cannot combine the two committees’ reports when only one committee has presented this.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already summoned the Minister in regard to that agreement. The agreement and relevant documents have been submitted officially to the committee and we are analysing them from the point of view of the investment, the legality, tax wavers and the impact on the economy. We have received more documents also from the environment ministry and we shall be compiling a report at an appropriate time.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is fair that way. Let us separate the two reports. Let us consider this and when the other one is ready we shall consider it.

MR LUKYAMUZI: With due respect to you, Sir, the Chairman of the Committee of Finance has mentioned a very important component of the assignment they are undergoing, namely the environmental concerns. Nearly 60 percent of the issues, which must be tackled seriously, are environment based.  What advice do you give? Should the committee ignore those concerns as they also greatly impact on our –(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in order to continue chasing away investors by claiming that they have an environment impact? He advanced the same argument while chasing away the investors who had come to develop the – with this particular project he should come with facts other than just advancing environment impact. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: What I can really say is that we should not handle the matter prematurely. We do know what is in this issue. Please, give the committee time. And the committee is open to any member who wishes to attend, be it an environment or industrialist. So, hon. Lukyamuzi you go and see what is going on there, put up your case to them and they will definitely listen to you. When they report they will tell us what they got, but let us not prejudge what is in this particular project. We should leave it at that. Our concern will be this report.

MR OGOLA: Mr Speaker, I would like a little guidance here with regard to what you have just remarked. There are issues raised here especially about this oil development on the island. Suppose in our considerations we find that the project per say is good and yet the other committee considering the legal implications finds that the legal structure and finance are not proper? Then we might find ourselves at crossroads with the two committees. I wonder whether in the end we may have to consider the two reports together before we make a final decision on both?

THE SPEAKER: The committee has recommended that the issue of operation details is a good thing. Their reservation was that they see a problem with small farmers. This is what I have read from their report. When we are dealing with this one as far as this committee is concerned, we shall see how best to extract benefits from it and recommend accordingly. Since we are the same people, when the other one comes we shall be able to harmonize the position so that we move forward as we should. 

Let us officially get whatever concerns this report, rather than speculating. We have a committee; it has summoned the Minister. The Minister has to present to them rather than getting these anonymous things and then you start acting on them when you have the liberty to get it officially.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, it was reported in the papers locally, across the border in Kenya and internationally, that His Excellency the President, on his recent visit to Kenya, met the promoters of BIDCO and they raised the concern that has been expressed by Members of Parliament, especially the Committee of Finance. He assured them that there is no problem, he can take care of Parliament and he shall make sure that the project takes off. Are we wasting our time since we have the highest respect for the President?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately whereas we welcome and thank the papers for the work they do, but as Parliament - with the responsibility given to us by the Constitution - we can get answers from His Excellency the President. The Minister in Charge of the Presidency is here. Why should I now take my time to use what you have read in the papers when I can officially get answers on this issue? We should wait.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to you, it is on record that at one time Parliament in its own wisdom passed a resolution to advise that UCB should not be sold. Immediately after passing that resolution the President wrote a letter to the Governor of the Bank of Uganda sanctioning the sale. So, hon. Awori is quite correct to express concern in view of what happened.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I can say is that you are entitled to expressing your concern because we are now dealing with this issue. We shall also have time to deal with UCB and ask the Government why they did not obey. What I am saying is, let us get these things properly. The President can be asked about what he has said and we get an answer, then we react. We should not react to what you have seen in the newspapers, when it can actually be substantiated. 

What I think we should do - do not lose hope, you still have your mandate –(Laughter)- when the Minister comes here then you shall ask him about this. He will have to explain. Don’t you think so?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your advice. But when you hear or read a report to that effect and for a whole week there is no statement from government to deny it, and yet members of the front bench are also members of this august House, they follow our deliberations, they follow our concerns and to date there has been no statement from the Government denying it.  Maybe  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But the Supreme Court has said the press is free to publish whatever, even if it is false.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Finally, with due respect to you, this is a matter of serious –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are we now debating this? There is nothing to discuss. We have come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.36 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 February 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

