Tuesday, 18 February 2003

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just been informed that the districts of Busoga have agreed to corporate, as under Article 178(c). On Thursday, at a place that will be arranged later, the people of Busoga will be presenting their Charter to the Speaker, as provided for by the Constitution. That is what I wanted to inform you about.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, last week, I asked in this august House, whether certain statements emanating from ministers are the official view of Government. The matter was clarified. 

However, there was a new development last week. The commercial court ruled that this Government should pay up certain debts they owe. As a result, the matter was referred to the responsible ministry. However, I noted with great concern that in the newspapers, three pages were fully paid for at no less than Shs 3 million by the Office of the Attorney General, saying that notwithstanding the ruling, they feel that this matter could not have been lost in the court if the Ministry of Finance had given accurate information to the Attorney General before the hearing.  In other words, the Cabinet was really differing in public, and there was no co-ordination. 

As much as I appreciate transparency, I note with great concern that ministers in the same Government are now differing in public, and more so in the media. Mr Speaker, I would like to know the true status of the story, from the two ministers, that is the Minister of Finance and the Attorney General, who fortunately this afternoon are here. This matter is serious, in our opinion. 

This august House passed a budget for the purpose of proper use of such resources for the general public. If ministers throw away our money because they are not working properly, I deem it very serious. Mr Speaker, could the Minister of Finance and the Attorney General tell us the true story about this article? I will not go into details because the two ministers are here. They could tell us, with your permission, what is going on in the Cabinet.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gerald Ssendaula): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This matter is first of all under discussion between both the Attorney General and the Minister of Finance. So I think it does no harm if I just briefly make a short statement about it. 

This debt goes back to 1986 when the Government of Uganda then acquired 52 trucks from a Yugoslav company to the tune of US $1.5 million. For payment, we issued promissory notes. Some of the promissory notes were honoured in the late 1980s and some were honoured at the beginning of 1990. Subsequent to that, we did not honour the remaining promissory notes principally because we were in the process of negotiating with development partners who had different conditions. 

Some of them, as a matter of policy, were ordering that we buy back the debt at a discount, from the creditors. This was optional because some of the creditors would refuse or accept that arrangement. So, we continued thus until we got the official debt relief in 1998. 

Under the Debt Relief arrangement, we had signed that we would give equal treatment to all creditors, that is, we would get a debt relief total to the tune of 87.5 percent and then the balance would be paid over a period of 15 years.  

The idea of giving equal treatment was restricting us. We would not pay the creditors anymore. This Yugoslav company did not accept this position and went ahead to sue. When we were sued, our argument was that we were not in position to give special treatment to that company, which would of course jeopardise our position under the Debt Relief Arrangement. 

As you appreciate, we have had a total debt relief of approximately US $1.7 billion, of the total debt stock of US $3.8 billion. Of course, this is not fully reflected every other day when I represent the position of our indebtedness, because debt relief delivery is at the time when the debt matures in a net form.  

We owe the international community US $3.8 billion but of this about US $1.7 billion is debt relief. 

I could not jeopardise our position on that huge debt relief by acting contrary to the agreement already signed. So, we had to brief the Attorney General along those lines but then our court here made an award, and we are still discussing these matters with the Attorney General as to the way forward. I am sure the Attorney General does agree to this position. Thank you very much.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify the predicament of the Ministry of Finance as the Ministry responsible for managing our external debt, with regard to the HIPC arrangement. 

The HIPC arrangement is an arrangement where the creditors - who are development partners - agreed with the debtors, the poor countries, that for purposes of extending some debt relief to them, one of the conditions is that they should only pay 12 cents per dollar owed by the indebted country, by way of settling debts.  

This is an agreement between the creditor and the indebted country. When you introduce a third party and say, “No, according to arrangements under the HIPC programme, we are only going to pay you 12 cents for every dollar we owe you;” the other creditor, who was not party to the HIPC and the Paris arrangement, is obviously right in insisting that, “Look, I am not going to accept this kind of arrangement as a way of clearing my debt.” So, it is because of this that the courts have ruled that such creditors, including these companies that the minister has referred to, which were not a party to this agreement, are right in demanding for the full settlement of their debts.  

That is really the problem that the Ministry of Finance has found itself in.  That is why you have these companies insisting that their debts be settled fully, by going to the court, and the court has ruled in their favour.  But as the minister says, in spite of our not agreeing with that, the court ruled against us. So, there is nothing else we can do. However, it is a matter which we are trying to appeal over. We do not know whether we shall succeed, but that is the problem.  

Otherwise, in regard to the article that hon. Awori has made reference to, we are still reconciling the figures that were quoted in that article. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, my concern first of all, is a matter of the principle of collective responsibility for the Cabinet. 

My second concern is; when a minister says, “the Ministry of Finance did not inform the Attorney General’s chambers that they had made further payments to the plaint company in 1990/1991 totalling to US $900,000 leaving a balance of US $335,000”, to me it shows an information gap between the two Cabinet ministers. And this is such a serious matter. 

This is litigation. Why is it that the two ministries cannot work together as a team? The Attorney General, by the Constitution, is supposed to give legal advice to the Government. This is a legal matter. At the same time, Government as the client has to give the full picture to the Attorney General, who is going to appear in court. By inference, information was left out and it was crucial. Now it is going to cost this country US $5 million. Is this negligence, collusion or what?  

At the same time, I am glad the two ministers, the Attorney General and the Minister for Finance, are still reconciling the figures. Notwithstanding reconciliation, the principle of the matter still stands. That is why I was referring to last week’s concern about the Vice President making a public statement on a matter, which is going to be discussed in a Cabinet meeting before it comes to Parliament. 

I was asking, was it in her personal capacity or official capacity? Eventually, I learnt from the National Political Commissar that it was in her private capacity. Mr Speaker, I am just wondering, is the Cabinet tired?

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. All honourable members definitely heard me respond to the point raised by hon. Awori. I did not say that Her Excellency, the Vice President had spoken in her private capacity. I stated that there was a committee of Cabinet to reconcile our views on the Constitutional Review Commission, and that regarding the story in the paper, we are not yet sure that that is what she had said. I am sure the Hansard by now is out. I did not say on the Floor of the House that the views expressed at that time by Her Excellency the Vice President were personal. That is the record I want to put correct.

THE SPEAKER: You see; if that is not the answer, then the question still stands. The member wanted to know whether it was personal or official. Can we get the correct response?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the Vice President has subsequently corrected that statement and so it is clear according to her later statement that she was misquoted. Essentially, the forum was about the Busoga Charter under Article 178, and then someone smuggled in the issue of federalism.  But those two are not necessarily bedfellows. So, when she says that she was misquoted, it makes a lot of sense because the two are different. And as you have informed us, they have completed the charter and we are very proud of Busoga.  

Regarding collective responsibility, under Article 117 of our Constitution, it is a major matter because if we do not respect it, then we shall be weakened. But who can throw a stone at another? We also make mistakes, and we are trying our best to correct her mistakes. But who can throw a stone at us? We have tried our best and I am very proud of the front bench.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have about three points to raise on this subject. The Attorney General said they are consulting with a view to perhaps appeal. Noting that a lot of costs have already been involved in this case, is it prudent for them to incur more costs?

Secondly, in the newspaper, it is stated that some official in the ministry acknowledged the debt without concern for the limitation period of nine years and therefore updated the claim. Really, what sort of official is this? Could it not be considered that this official did it deliberately, for vested interests?

Mr Speaker, the third question is: I note that officials in the Attorney General’s Office and in the Ministry of Finance, whose chambers have been handling these cases, are very well placed in these institutions. This raises quite a lot of speculation and suspicion in the mind of the public. Is there is no insider activity, no collusion with the claimants? Can our mind be put to rest on these observations? Thank you.

MR MWONDHA: I am rather disturbed by the Minister of Finance. The HIPC arrangement must have been a matter well considered by the ministry, whose duty is to bring creditors on board as far as the arrangement is concerned. Unless we know whose duty it is to bring creditors on board, we could be having many other creditors in the pipeline!

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Speaker, I was not happy with the simplistic explanations given by hon. Ssendaula and hon. Ayume. Uganda being a beggar country, we cannot afford the luxuries of simply paying away colossal sums of money because of the negligence of a few officials in the ministry. I would have expected the Ministry of Finance to consult with the Attorney General before the minister breached the contract with the Yugoslavs. And what comes first: the egg or the omelette?  

Why then did the minister, in the first place, not consult with the Attorney General about this debt before they breached the contract on the grounds of the debt relief arrangement? I am glad hon. Ayume says they were never party to this agreement.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there has been a persistent loss of cases. I think the public is beginning to suspect that there is certainly some kind of collusion and racket in the Ministry of Finance and the Attorney General’s Office. Somehow, the case of Westmont is still fresh in our minds. This country continues to lose so much money but even when they know they are going to lose the case they continue chasing the wind. So why should you lose good money when in the first place you should have known that you have messed up your case and you continue to argue?  

So, the House should take serious note of this kind of thing. If it happens again, I do not see why we cannot invoke Article 118, for some of these ministers who make us lose money deliberately. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want the Minister of Finance to clarify to me whether in 1996 the Yugoslav Government was still a member of the Paris Club.

Two; was this a debt that was incurred as a bilateral arrangement between the Uganda Government and Yugoslavs?

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gerald Ssendaula): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start with the point initiated by hon. Aggrey Awori. When I explained in the general terms, I thought I was covering the whole issue fully, but it is becoming apparent that the matter was not fully covered.  

First of all, we at the Ministry of Finance have not yet raised any query as to the quantum of money that has been paid by the Attorney General’s Office. What we are trying to do is to ensure that we reconcile the money as per the court award, with the Attorney General. We want to see how the final award was made, what rate of interest was applied and from what date, and then finally we ascertain whether there has been an overpayment or not. The payments that were made were based on the court order as per judgement. So, it was agreed that we sit down together and get the rates as they were applied and ascertain the exact position.

Coming down to other issues that have been raised: “who should have brought the attention of the various creditors globally, to the HIPC or Debt Relief Arrangement?” The debtor countries spearheaded this arrangement initially by making representation to the Briton Wood Institutions, that is the World Bank and IMF.  

Then the World Bank and IMF approached the various creditors and this climaxed into accepting to provide debt relief. The two Briton Wood Institutions were then left with the duty of working out the format of how debt relief could be delivered. The setting up of the operations of the World Bank, and IMF are such that every member country is represented on the Board of the Bank.  

Naturally, when a decision is made in the Bank Board or in the Fund Board, it is the duty of the Representative Director to communicate decisions that have been made. So as it is, we were given responsibility, as the country owing money, to write out letters to the various creditors we knew. And we indeed did write to the Yugoslavs, because Uganda was the first country to benefit from the debt relief. 

The format of the letter that was sent out was uniform. It was in a circular form to all creditors stating: “This is to inform you that Uganda has been given debt relief and the terms are as follows…. This is in line with the Bank and the Fund Resolution of the Boards of Directors. Please deliver debt relief under that arrangement.”

As you can imagine, the private enterprises were not totally amused. Of course some were willing to deliver debt relief, while others were not. We have such cases, and to answer Dr Chebrot who was asking, “Was this a bilateral debt?” Indeed it was a bilateral arrangement between a Yugoslav company and Uganda.  

So, some of the known Paris Club countries did not accept to deliver debt relief. And we have continued to have representation to the World Bank. The whole estimate of debt relief we would get was based on everyone delivering debt relief of 100 percent. 

Some countries have not delivered but they have not resorted to court action. A case in point is India and Libya, who have not delivered. But the Yugoslavs decided to sue to recover their money. We are also being sued by Iraq because we have a debt due to them too, which dates back to 1975.  

I am glad to say to you today that as of last week, we got communication that Libya had accepted to participate in debt relief and that it will be providing us a total debt relief of US $160 million, which we owe to them. That is the principle plus interest. We are negotiating with India to see whether they can deliver debt relief. So, that is the position.  

As far as this matter is concerned, it is not a question of lack of cooperation between the various ministers. These issues are lengthy. In some cases, what you provide may be sufficient information but the other side may want a little more, and you provide that. So, we are reconciling with the Attorney General as far as the payments to Yugoslav companies is concerned. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR AYUME: Mr Speaker, Dr Okulo raised another striking point, which has been causing us problems when we are handling cases in the law courts. This is the matter of acknowledgement of debt. Under normal circumstances and under the law of limitation, debt recovery by any individual from Government should be done within a limited period. I think under the contract it is three years.  

But the courts upheld that even where the period of limitation has expired and the period within which an action is brought has expired, when the debtor, by way of acknowledgement or by way of writing to the creditor, acknowledges the debt or effects part payment, then period of limitation begins to run from that time of acknowledgement. This is what the courts have held. So even where ordinarily the period of limitation has expired, the moment a debt has been acknowledged then the period begins to run from that date.  

As to whether this acknowledgement can be regarded purely as a matter of negligence, I think I have some doubts on that. This is a legal point. Even to all lawyers, it is a matter that arose out of the rulings or judgements of the court. Therefore, it cannot be correct, in my opinion, to say that any person or official in the Ministry of Finance, who acknowledges or authorized part payment, may have done so negligently. It may have been because he or she was not aware of the legal position. 

All I can say is that in the future we should make the Ministry of Finance aware of this technicality. In the future, when they take a decision to respond to a creditor who has sent a demand note for his or her debt, it might be necessary to consult the Office of the Attorney General on how they should go about it. Thank you.  

MR AWORI:  Motion, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Why did you not make a notice of your motion?

MR AWORI: I wanted to make it an oral motion, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What is the urgency?

MR AWORI: Basically, Mr Speaker, I pray that this matter be referred to two relevant committees, that is the Committee of Finance and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. There is a lot more but we can hear from these two –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, which matter?

MR AWORI: The matter of reconciliation. First and foremost, Mr Speaker, the two honourable ministers have admitted that they see some outstanding matters here. 

Two; the matter of HIPC is not very clear to this House. Who can pay and who cannot pay, who is a member of HIPC and who is not? So, instead of just closing the matter, let us refer it to two committees, which can deal with this matter and report whether the two ministers adequately dealt with the affair. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the judgment? What we really have is a judgement. Are you saying that it should be studied by the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and we be given a report on the implications? Is that okay?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I will go by your advice.

THE SPEAKER: The Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is hereby directed to study the judgement and give us a good report on its implications.  

Honourable members, concerning Item 3 on the Order Paper, I have just received a note that the Rt hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister will be unable to present it today. Perhaps he will present it tomorrow.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Can I get a copy of that statement, as I do not have any?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, it is just in my personal notes, but I will give you a copy later.

THE SPEAKER: Normally you should also give me a copy before you read it, but you can proceed.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise on a point of clarification on a matter that arose in this House last week. This matter was raised by the hon. Maj. John Kazoora. He was reacting to a New Vision story, which quoted me referring to some of us as “potato growers”. The Monitor newspaper of yesterday repeated the same as “quote of the week”.

Mr Speaker, from the very beginning, I must state that I respect this institution and I have no reason whatsoever to demean it. However, my respect and indeed that of the whole public, is conditional. It is conditional in the manner in which we should conduct our business. I will turn to the point in question.  

The newspaper could have quoted me correctly but the circumstances under which I made this comment should be clarified, and that is what I rise to explain.  

The background, Mr Speaker, is that on the 6th day of May 2002, a debate kicked off in this House on the Political Organisations Bill 2001. As everybody knows and remembers very well, there has never been, in the history of the 7th Parliament, such a heated debate. There was heckling and interjections that sometimes almost led to lack of order in this House. Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine and hon. Oulanyah crowned it all.  

Mr Speaker, after that, a law was passed - the Political Organisations Act, 2002. What is not formally known to this House, Mr Speaker, is that since then Government has been dragged to court under two constitutional petitions. I have had the opportunity and privilege to read both petitions and both replies by the Attorney General. I am, therefore, well versed with the issues involved in both petitions. Being a trained law interpreter, I shall refrain from referring to the issues directly, as in doing so I would infringe on the rule of subjudice.  

Mr Speaker, it is during one of those sessions that I attended the constitutional court. There was an application by the petitioners to grant some interim relief –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you are now taking us to court, and we have not been there yet to see what was going on for ourselves. Why don’t you restrict yourself to the personal explanation? As I said, you know the practice. When you want to make a personal statement, you should give a copy to the Speaker before you read it. Now it seems you are generating some controversy. Once you begin referring to who has done this and who has not, then it becomes a problem. Why don’t you restrict yourself to the personal explanation about what was said?

MR KANTUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am trying my best to heed your advice. As I was leaving court that day, I was approached by a New Vision journalist - I have cut out the story of what transpired, Mr Speaker - who asked me that, “In light of the ruling that had just been given, what is your comment?” He did say that he knows there are very many good lawyers in this House: indeed one of them is the Speaker himself, and his Deputy. 

“How could we have passed such a law, which –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, you stop there. Can you resume your seat. Recast your personal statement and show it to me before you read it, because that is the practice. That is the end of it.
 
MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, it will be very difficult for me –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Resume your seat, please.

MR KANTUNTU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gerald Ssendaula): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the following requests for Government to secure funding. We want to secure a total of UA 23,740,000 from the African Development Fund in order to finance the National Livestock Productivity Improvement Project. 

We also want to secure from IDA SDR 3.6 million for financing the Transition Phase of Lake Victoria Environment Management Project-LVEMP. I beg to lay on Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, let the Committee on Economy handle these documents and make a report to us promptly.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER BY HON NABWISO ARISING FROM A DEBATE ON 4TH DECEMBER 2002

DR FRANK NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I think the Attorney General is willing now to answer the question, which I put to Parliament some time back.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to assure the honourable members that I have always been willing to answer the question, which was raised by the hon. Member for Kagoma. 

The issue first arose during the debate in this House on Wednesday 4th December 2002, when the Member for Kagoma, the hon. Dr Nabwiso, wanted to know the legal basis for the appointment of Presidential Advisors.  

Because I was not in the House at the time to clarify the matter, the Prime Minister gave an undertaking to this House that I will do so at an appropriate time.  

Mr Speaker, while it is true that there is no provision in the Constitution, or any other law, which expressly provides for the appointment of Presidential Advisors, it is equally correct –(Interruption)

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We kindly ask the Attorney General to refresh our minds with what the question was, because it has been quite a while since it was presented. Can you say it more clearly? I would appreciate this. 

MR AYUME: Mr Speaker, I will repeat that the issue of the legal basis for the appointment of Presidential Advisors first arose in this House in a debate on Wednesday, 4 December 2002, when the Member for Kagoma actually rose from the Floor to demand an explanation. I did say that because I was not in the House at that time, the Rt hon. Prime Minister gave an undertaking to this House that I would do so at an appropriate time. 

While it is true, Mr Speaker, that there is no provision in the Constitution, or any other law, which expressly provides for the appointment of Presidential Advisors, it is equally correct to say that their appointment is covered by the provisions of the Constitution.

Article 171 of the Constitution provides that the President may, after consultation with the appropriate Service Commission, establish offices in the public service of the Government of Uganda. The offices of existing Presidential Advisors were therefore established after consultation with the Public Service Commission, in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution.

The offices of Presidential Advisors are of a unique category in the Public Service. The Presidency, and in particular the President himself, plays a pivotal role in the formulation of Government policies for the management of the public affairs of Uganda, and in monitoring their implementation. Many of these policies have a strategic nature and therefore require specialised knowledge and advice to enable the President give the appropriate guidance in their formulation.

Apart from Cabinet, there is therefore need for the President to have advisors in those specialised area to assist him, such as in agriculture, economic affairs, the media, HIV/AIDS, et cetera.

As under Article 172(2) of the Constitution, the holders of the offices of Presidential Advisors are employed on the personal staff of the President, and they deal with him directly. Therefore, in determining who shall be on his or her personal staff, the powers of the President are not subject to the powers of any other authority, or Parliament.

Having identified an area of specialisation and the need for specialised knowledge and advice, the President would, after consulting with the relevant service commission, establish an office and make the appropriate appointment for that purpose, as provided for under Article 171 of the Constitution.

It follows, therefore, Mr Speaker, that although under Article 171 of the Constitution the Public Service Commission has to be consulted before the office of the Presidential Advisors are established, such consultation would more often than not end up with the establishment of the offices.  

In other words the Public Service Commission, or any other authority including Parliament, does not have powers to appoint or recommend the appointment of public officers to serve as Presidential Advisors, without the consent of the President.

Finally, unlike other public officers whose security of tenure is protected by Article 173 of the Constitution, Presidential Advisors do not enjoy security of tenure. The President appoints and removes them from office at pleasure. This explains why there is provision in their contracts of service that their services may be terminated at any time as the President may direct.

Mr Speaker, before I leave this matter at that, I would like to add that it has been suggested that we may need to have a special law for the appointment of this category of people. My advice is that such a law would not be necessary. Presidential Advisors are public officers and as honourable members know, public officers are defined in Article 173 of the Constitution as people who are employed in the Public Service. 

Of course this may not take us any further but Public Service is again defined as “service in any civil capacity, the emoluments of which are charged on the Consolidated Fund”. Therefore, it is my submission that Presidential Advisors are public officers. They can be appointed under Article 172 of the Constitution. However, they are subject to clause (2) of that Article, which simply states that, “Except with the consent of the President, no person shall be appointed under this article to act in any office on the personal staff of the President.” Thank you.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I have a few supplementary questions to put to the Attorney General. I am glad that he has admitted that there is no specific law authorising the President to appoint such people. 

My first question is, were these posts of Presidential Advisors first established before the appointments were made or were the appointments made and then offices were assigned to them? It is extremely important for us to know the justification for establishing these posts, and for appointing officers to them.

Secondly, is there evidence that the President did actually consult the Public Service Commission on the matter? Can this evidence be tendered to Parliament for scrutiny?  

Third question, if these people are public servants, why are they not subject to public service laws?    

Fourth question, there is a sentence here on page 2, which says: “Many of the policies are of strategic nature and therefore require specialised knowledge and advice.” What advice of strategic nature is, for example, the Presidential Advisor on Culture expected to provide to the President? When the President was locked up in Northern region for four months, the Presidential Advisor on Culture should have told the President that Dolotia was the most famous song in the country. (Laughter).

Advice has been rendered to the President to cease the appointment of these people. If they are people who have specialised in particular fields, why are they not being appointed to the respective ministries?

We have five ministers in the Ministry of Finance. We have four ministers in the Ministry of Education, we have four ministers in the Ministry of Agriculture, and I think six in the Ministry of Gender. We have a total of 64 ministers. If you add to that these 36 people, who we are not sure whether they are ministers or not, we are talking about 100 ministers for this country. Can this country afford to have all these people? 

Is it also true, Mr Speaker, that Parliament cannot restrict the appointment of personal staff of the President? Even if such staff are drawing salaries from public funds and they are not cost effective?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this sentence worries me: the interpretation of the Attorney General on the last page where he says, “It follows, therefore, that although under Article 171 of the Constitution the Public Service Commission has to be consulted before the offices of Presidential Advisors are established, such consultation would more often than not end up with the establishment of the offices.” That means that even if the Public Service Commission said, “no”, still the President could go on and appoint these people. What country are we running? (Applause).

DR STEVEN CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee did review the activities of some of these Presidential Advisors at length. When we looked at some of the activities, some Presidential Advisors had not even met the President for five years, let alone submitted their briefs to the President. And if they did, they did submit their briefs to the Minister in charge of the Presidency, and some of these reports never reach the President.  

So, in our meeting with the Minister in charge of the Presidency, we agreed that the Presidential Advisors were too many and in contradiction of the civil service review, which was meant to cut down on the number of civil servants. I would like to ask the minister who has just answered the question, how is he consulting with the Minister in charge of the Presidency to cut down on the number of Presidential Advisors, which the minister did inform the committee about? Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If it is true that these advisors take five years before they can see the President, surely, how can anybody imagine that they actually advise the President?  

In the statement by the Attorney General, he said that this category of people is unique. He never explained why it is unique and how it is unique. I would appreciate if he could throw some more light on this. 

He also says that unlike other public officers whose security of tenure is protected by Article 173 of the Constitution, Presidential Advisors do not enjoy security of tenure. Is this constitutional, that a person can be given a job and he cannot be guaranteed security of tenure? Is it true that they are casual labourers? Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my opinion, before I seek my clarification, nothing could be further from the truth than the statement that the Presidential Advisors are appointed on strategic needs because of their specialised knowledge. Nothing could be further from the truth. For that matter, could the Attorney General tell us, what specialised knowledge do Madam Anuna and Mr Zakayo Achuku, who are Presidential Advisors, have? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Attorney General, would you answer please?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to redirect my question not so much to the Attorney General who is interpreting the law, but to the substantive minister in only matters of appointment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Attorney General was asked about the legal basis of the appointment of the Presidential Advisors. Other questions have gone in detail and asked about their kind of work and how they do it. I do not know whether this question, which was directed to the Attorney General, should be answered by him or other ministers.  

So I suggest that the Attorney General answers only those questions which he can answer. For other questions, it would be unfair for him to attempt to answer them. If people are interested in those questions, they should direct them to a line minister to answer. The issue is, he is not on the Order Paper –(Interruption)- I do not know whether he is willing, but the problem is, it is not proper.

The question was directed to the Attorney General and these are supplementary questions following his answer, which he has given. When you introduce another minister simply because he is willing to answer, you would be mixing up the procedure.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start with the last supplementary question by the hon. Member for Kagoma. He is concerned about the statement that after the consultation, more often than not, the end result would be the establishment of the office. He went on to say that it would appear that whether or not the Public Service Commission is consulted, the office would be established. The position is that consultation is consultation. Perhaps I should read out the manner in which this provision is structured so that I can explain it.

Article 171 of the Constitution reads: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and any Act of Parliament, the President may, after consultation with the appropriate service commission, establish offices in the public service of the Government of Uganda.” This provision means that all the President needs to do is consult. Once he has consulted, the final decision is his. If he does not consult, then there will be a problem. But the moment he consults, the rest is upon him or her to decide. That is the position, and you are quite right in thinking that it is that way, but actually that should not be a worry to you.

The first question of the hon. Member for Kagoma, by way of supplementary, is whether the appointments were made first and the offices established later. I would like to assure him that my information from the Chairman of the Public Service Commission is that the offices were established, the appointments were made and they approved them.

The other question is, “why not subject the Presidential Advisors to the same laws that applies to public officers?” Mr Speaker, I have just stated that in my answer to the question. Public officers are appointed under Article 172 of the Constitution. There are those categories of public officers who are of, or above, the rank of head of department. Those are appointed by the President. There are those public officers who are below that rank and those are appointed by the Public Service Commission. 

When we accept a situation whereby the Presidential Advisors are public officers, then their appointment will be governed the same way as other public officers, as under Article 172 of the Constitution. The only difference, which I also indicated, is that this category of public officers is unique in the sense that they are appointed to be personal staff of the President. They deal directly with the President.

The hon. Member for Tingey wondered whether the Attorney General’s chambers do interface with the Office of the President, or with the President, when it comes to considering whether they should have so many Presidential Advisors; and whether the current number should be cut down. I wish to say that I am not in position to advise on this.  I think it will be my colleague in the Office of the President to do so. 

However, I have already indicated that the situation arises where the President, in the strategic position that he holds, decides that a particular policy matter requires specialised advice. This justifies the creation of an office for that purpose, and appointment of a particular individual for the purpose. 

As for the numbers, I will leave that to somebody else to answer.

The question of security of tenure was raised by hon. Mwandha. What I meant here is that they do not enjoy security of tenure like other public servants because of the manner in which they are identified, the manner in which they relate with the President and the fact that they are on the personal staff of the President. However, they are not appointed in an ad hoc manner. There are terms of service, there is an agreement for their terms of service, and it is stipulated as to how they are to be hired and fired.

Hon. Okulo Epak wondered what specialised knowledge some of the Presidential Advisors, whom he mentioned, have to give the President. With regard to the particular person he mentioned, if I may refer to Anuna, I think she is a special Presidential Advisor on Political Matters - (Laughter)- and I think honourable members know very well that you can acquire expertise in politics as you go along the way. You do not need to have a degree; you do not need to go through very formal education in order to acquire that expertise. As long as you are a practising politician, you can acquire that.

MR SAIDI OKUTI: Thank you, Attorney General, for giving way. What you are trying to explain to the Members - I can chip in – although I am not the appointing authority. I do not know why the President appointed the person of Hajat Anuna. 

However, if you can look at our Constitution in Article 10 we have included the Nubians in the indigenous communities of Uganda. Knowing Hajat Anuna as a very conversant person with the Nubian culture, maybe that is the reason why the President appointed her. That is political. Thank you. (Laughter).

MR AYUME: Mr speaker, I can only express how I am greatly indebted to the hon. Member for Arua Municipality. Thank you.

MR ISSA KIKUNGWE: Motion under rule 40(k)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, read it.

MR KIKUNGWE: “Motions without notices. The following motions may be moved without notice - (k) Any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency.” (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Well I have not certified it as a matter of emergency. Next item –(Prof. Bukenya rose_). It seems the Minister in charge of Presidency wants to say something. As I said, according to our rules, questions are answered by honourable ministers on matters falling within their portfolio. If I allow other ministers to come in –(Interruption)- well I am only explaining this.

Normally the question should only be answered by one minister. Anything outside a minister’s portfolio, he or she is not obliged to answer. But since we want to get information and the Minister in charge of the Presidency is here, then he can inform us. But this is on the understanding that the question was to the Attorney General not any other minister.

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. All I want to do is clarify on the issue of numbers and affordability. I do agree that public administration is really big. It is not only big among the Presidential Advisors, but it is also big in totality. I think we must therefore address it.

As far as the Presidential Advisors are concerned, we have taken a very bold step by substantially reducing those on a full-time basis, and put most of them on retainer. They continue doing their work and whenever they are needed for that specific advice we call them, and only give them transport and some facility. 

I think this is very crucial. These are not job seekers or as someone called them, casual labourers. Most of these are senior colleagues of ours, like Mzee Acupu who comes from Lango, he has been around in the political circles since 1953. Often at times I talk to him. He is a typical encyclopaedia of Uganda, and I think the President needs this. 

Mr Speaker, mine was purely to allay the anxiety, and to thank hon. Nabwiso for bringing it up. Yes, public administration is big. We have started shrinking it and I think in the next two or three weeks you will get the practical answer. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, 
CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC 
COMMITTEE ON THE SALE OF UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK LIMITED

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE SALE OF UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK LIMITED (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, honourable members. I am presenting the report of the Parliamentary Ad hoc Committee on the Sale of Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd.  

On 15 May 2002, the Parliament of Uganda passed a resolution, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, rule 157, appointing a Parliamentary committee to investigate the manner, procedure and priority of selling 80% majority shares of Uganda Commercial Bank to Stanbic Limited of South Africa, by the Bank of Uganda.

Parliament was also concerned about reports that the remaining 20% shares that Government of Uganda had reserved to be offered for sale to the public on the Uganda Stock Exchange at a later date, would also be sold to Stanbic, as stated in the decision of an extraordinary board meeting of Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd, March 20th, attached to this report as Appendix 1.  

The resolution of Parliament appointing the ad hoc committee, also attached to this report as Appendix 2, was prompted by a motion moved by hon. Nandala Mafabi, MP Sironko County. The motion is attached to the report as Appendix 3. Specifically, Parliament was concerned about the following:

• The total disregard by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development of the resolutions of Parliament regarding the selling of Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd.

• The likely breach of undertaking by the minister, reflected in his statement of 31 December 2001 to Parliament, where a promise was made to retain 20 percent in Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd for the public. This was least honoured.  

Mr Speaker, this report summarises the evidence, the discussions and findings of the committee, and draws conclusions, and finally makes recommendations to the House for adoption.

A quick background: Uganda Commercial Bank, as you all know, was established by an Act of Parliament in 1965 and the mission of the bank was affirmative: to give indigenous Africans access to banking services, which had been denied them by imperial banks. This position is still largely true today as it was in 1965.

With the exception of 1979, when UCB had to incur huge losses as a result of the liberation war, and in 1989 when the bank carried out rapid branch expansion, Uganda Commercial Bank operated reasonably well, given the policy environment of the time, and to a large extent the bank fulfilled its mission. The bank provided a variety of banking services to Ugandans including:

• Acceptance of customer deposits through current, savings and fixed deposit accounts in all branches across the country;

• Extending credit facilities in the form of working capital loans, overdraft facilities, short-term loans, mortgages etc; 

• Provision of trade finance facilities such as letters of credit for imports and exports and bank guarantees;

• Provision of foreign exchange services, such as telegraphic transfers, drafts and travellers cheques;

• Salary transfers;

• Tax collection on behalf of Uganda Revenue Authority;

• Safe custody facilities; 

• Provision of the core infrastructure of commercial banking system, which served Uganda’s enterprises and private clients over many years. 

Indeed Uganda Commercial Bank earned the name “The People’s Own Bank”, and it contributed to employment creation. Many Ugandans became professional bankers, and it also accelerated the Africanisation of the national economy.

The privatisation effort of Uganda Commercial Bank, as we all know, started in April 1998 when the Government of Uganda sold 49 percent of the bank’s equity to a Malaysian based company, Westmont Land BHD Asia, for the sum of US $5 million plus US $6 million as working capital. Westmont took control of the management of the Uganda Commercial Bank under a three-year management contract at a fee of US $2 million per year.

Westmont management lasted a few months and caused considerable losses to the bank. The bank became insolvent to the tune of Shs 16.3 billion and suffered considerable financial loss wiping out the Shs 118 billion government had used to re-capitalise the bank to zero net worth before privatisation. 

The first attempt at privatisation of Uganda Commercial Bank was, therefore, a fiasco. In subsequent events, government instituted civil proceedings against Westmont. In November 2000, the arbitration proceedings determined that the 49 percent shares held by Westmont revert to the Government of Uganda, which thus government regained 100 percent control of Uganda Commercial Bank. 

The cost of arbitration alone, to recover Uganda Commercial Bank from Westmont mismanagement, amounted to Shs 11 billion.

The seizure of Uganda Commercial Bank by Bank of Uganda: 

In April 1999, the Bank of Uganda seized the management of Uganda Commercial Bank, in accordance with the provisions of sections 31 and 32 of the Financial Institutions Statute 1993, and removed Westmont from management and control of the bank.  

Mr Speaker, it is important to note that the Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, having at any rate allowed Westmont to own and manage Uganda Commercial Bank, cannot justifiably blame Uganda Commercial Bank governance alone for subsequent gross mismanagement and insolvency of the bank. The point here is that Bank of Uganda should have carried out due diligence to prevent Westmont managing the bank.  

The management and sale of Uganda Commercial Bank by Bank of Uganda: 

As already noted, the Bank of Uganda seized the management of Uganda Commercial Bank in April 1999 and directed its operations until 21 February 2002, when Standard Bank Investment Corporation took over the management of Uganda Commercial Bank.

During the period of statutory management by the Bank of Uganda, Uganda Commercial Bank fully recovered from its financially impaired position, caused principally by Westmont mismanagement and the violation of the share holding sale agreement. The bank returned to profitability and solvency.

Questions were therefore raised about whether the statutory management of Uganda Commercial Bank should not have ceased immediately Uganda Commercial Bank met all the statutory requirements given the above background. The following questions were raised: was it legal for the Bank of Uganda to sale a solvent bank? What signal did this act of selling a solvent bank give to private banks? Was the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank under the Financial Institutions Statute a smokescreen intended to circumvent serious scrutiny of the privatisation process by stakeholders, which would have happened under the Divestiture Reform Implementation Committee, and accountability to the public? No satisfactory answers were forthcoming. 

Consequently, there was a strong view that the privatisation and sale of Uganda Commercial Bank should have been executed under the PERD Statute 1993, rather than under the Financial Institutions Statute 1993, under which the sale to Standard Bank Investment Corporation took place.

The concerns of Parliament as reviewed by the committee were as follows: 

The 6th Parliament had urged government to divest only 51 percent shares in Uganda Commercial Bank, and retain 49 shares for the people of Uganda. Uganda Commercial bank was there and then partially privatised in April 1998 when government sold 49 percent of the bank’s equity to Westmont, with an option for Westmont to buy an additional two percent at a future date.

If this privatisation exercise had been done properly, the execution would have been done in line with the desire of Parliament, with some involvement of Ugandans in their own banking system. Following reports of a second attempt to sale Uganda Commercial Bank, Parliament, on 28 September 2001 once again passed a resolution and urged government as follows:

“Since Uganda Commercial Bank has fully recovered from its insolvent financial position that existed when the Bank of Uganda seized it for statutory management in April 1999, and Uganda commercial Bank has fulfilled all the profitability and capital adequacy requirements since 2000, the Bank of Uganda should hand over Uganda Commercial Bank management to its shareholders without further delay;

Uganda Commercial Bank should be privatised under the scope of the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Statute to provide opportunity for all stakeholders under DRIC to participate in the privatisation process and ensure greater transparency and accountability;

A phased and sequenced privatisation modality should be adopted by offering a certain percentage of Uganda Commercial Bank shares on the stock exchange to allow Ugandans to participate in the shareholding of Uganda Commercial Bank. UCBL is a public institution and its privatisation should be done with full disclosure and offer first opportunity to Ugandans who are the owners of the bank in the first place. A strategic investor may also be considered under this arrangement;

In order to promote competition and efficiency in the banking sector, measures should be taken in privatising Uganda Commercial Bank to avoid transferring the public monopoly and dominance of Uganda Commercial Bank into a private monopoly that might result into greater inefficiency and abuse in the absence of anti-trust laws;

The Minister responsible for Finance should report to the House, within three months, the measures taken to implement the provisions of these resolutions.”  

This inquiry therefore examined, among other things, whether during the process of sale of Uganda Commercial Bank, the views and concerns of Parliament expressed above were taken into account and if not, why.  

The inquiry also examined whether the process of sale conformed to expected standards of transparency, accountability and professional integrity as would be necessary in selling an asset of such a national and strategic importance to the national economy.

The methodology used in carrying out the work:

The committee held its first meeting on 17 May 2002, to review the intent of the resolution of Parliament and to define the scope of work involved in the prior investigation. The terms of reference were formulated and are attached to this report as Appendix 4.

The committee received and reviewed a series of documents in connection with the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank. The list of the most important documents received by the committee is attached to this report as Appendix 5. 

The committee also conducted public hearings in accordance with the powers and authority of the committee provided in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Article 90(4)(a), and summoned to appear before the committee key individuals as witnesses. The list of individuals who appeared before the committee to give evidence relating to the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank is attached to this report as Appendix 6.  

Mr Speaker, these were our findings. After carefully sifting through evidence and patiently listening –(Interruption)-

DR CHEBROT: Mr Speaker, this report is about 31 pages long, and I am perturbed that the member is reading it verbatim. If we go along with the way he is reading it, it means we will finish this tomorrow. Is it possible for the member to summarise it? He should at least have prepared an abridged version of this report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, we are on page 7, I think. I personally would not mind if it is summarised, because I think members have read – (Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I can do exactly that, if it is the wish of the House.

THE SPEAKER: Any objection to that method?
 
MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, there is so much noise coming in from the corridor.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us stop it. I think you should summarise the report.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I can summarise it, Mr Speaker. However, I was advised that for purposes of record, it should be read in full. I was doing it purely for the record. Anyway, I can summarise. For instance on page 7, I can say, the bidding process –(Interruption)-

MR MWANDHA: For purposes of the record, the report can be recorded in full even if he reads us the summary. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Is that possible, Mr Speaker?  

THE SPEAKER: It is possible.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Well then if it is possible, I shall proceed to summarise this.

On page 7, paragraph 4.1 we were attempting to give the names of officials who composed the working committee to oversee the management of Uganda Commercial Bank and to develop strategies for the bank. The names are given from the then Deputy Governor, Mr Kasekende, to Mrs Margaret Matovu. Later, the team was expanded to make it a working group, and it included the Governor Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile and Neal Curtin who was the External Advisor.  

In addition, there was a negotiating committee, which consisted of three people, namely Mr Bbosa, Bank of Uganda Legal Counsel, Ms Wendy Abt, an American Financial Advisor, and Neal Curtin, an American External Legal Advisor. These three are key as they are going to become a subject of comment as we continue with the report. 

Mr Speaker, the point to emphasise is that the bidding process was not – this is a major criticism - advertised competitively and neither was the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank openly tendered. Instead the approach used was private placement and personal approach. This was done principally by the consultant, Wendy Abt, who is reported to have privately approached the 11 banks, soliciting bids.

Mr Speaker, the other major point of concern is that the committee was concerned that since there was no advertising of the intended sale, many potential bidders, who might have offered even better selling terms, did not know about the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank. Therefore the bidding process did not meet the expected standards of fair competition and transparency. 

The committee therefore made the following observations:

• There were unwarranted fears in the seller camp that the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank may not attract high quality bank investors and that public disclosure of impending sale would cause “depositor flight” to the detriment of Uganda Commercial Bank, and the economy. Subsequently, there was undue haste to sell the bank secretly, in the shortest possible time. It is a concern.  

• Under the above circumstances, our conclusion on this section of the bidding process is that it was not transparent.  It omitted open advertising, which should have been a requirement for a sale of this nature. Consequently, in the opinion of the Committee, the resulting sale price and terms cannot be regarded as the best the market could offer.

Paragraph 4.2 deals with evaluation and comparison of the two bids. The essential point here is on page 13, because page 13 attempts to show the various price options offered by the two banks, which were finally short-listed for bidding, and the factors in their favours and against their bids. 

When you look at DFCU factors, in the paper of the bid, they offered a headline price of Shs 75 billion, which in dollar terms was equivalent to US $42.9 million. If you convert that for purposes of comparison, Stanbic had offered 90 percent. So, 90 percent of Shs 75 billion would be equivalent to US $31.61 million. This was a strong offer!  

Also, DFCU is a strong investor in the country. They have interest in Centenary Bank; they have interest in Housing Finance; they also have interest in DFCU bank; and they have a leasing subsidiary, backed by reputable investors CDC, IFC, DEG and the Government of Uganda. 

However, against it is the price they offered, which included Shs 9.278 billion that the Bank of Uganda had made a mandatory transfer before sale. Second, the excluded assets formed part of payments of their deal. And third, the net cash-down payment that they offered of Shs 31.1 billion or equivalent to US $12.123 million, was much less and the substantial portion of the price offer of Shs 43.9 billion would be paid over a five-year period and from generated profits. 

They did not provide severance costs for retaining UCB employees. There was also a question of 18.5 percent Government shareholding in DFCU, which DFCU thought was an advantage but Government and Bank of Uganda thought was a disadvantage.  

When it comes to Standard Bank Investment Corporation, it offered a price ranging between US $18 million to US $25 million for 90 percent of UCB shares. 

The second strong point in their case; they also had agreed in accordance with Bank of Uganda to transfer the Shs 9.278 billion to Bank of Uganda before sale. They offered to pay the entire price by the time of closing as follows: 

They would pay 80 percent of the shares, which would be US $15.64 million. The 20 percent, which would be US $3.91 would be put in an escrow account to settle any bargaining items. They also agreed to meet the costs for retained UCBL employees. 

The disadvantage against them was that the price, which they stated, was just a range. The Committee felt that they were avoiding being specific, but finally they later came to pay only US $19.55 million. The lack of clarity with respect to integrating Uganda Commercial Bank and Stanbic Bank Uganda was a point of contention. Stanbic later agreed on a merger. 

Stanbic’s intention to close five branches, which it deemed unprofitable, was a disadvantage. The Committee felt that if we sold the bank because Stanbic was a better manager, then the retention of these branches was part of the national economic interest of extending banking services to greater parts of our people.

In the conclusion, when it came to price comparison, the methods of sale preferred by BOU were not directly comparable. They did not advertise, and it was difficult to see whether the prices offered were competitive. Therefore, the conclusion is that these prices were low, according to the Committee.   

When it comes to negotiations, the role of advisors became so central. Mr Speaker, you will permit me because this was very central according to the Committee. During interviews with the witnesses, the Committee received complaints from DFCU that in the course of negotiations, they felt BOU’s financial advisor, Ms Wendy Abt, was not properly communicating their bid proposals to Bank of Uganda officials. They sought clarification from the Bank of Uganda and this was granted later. 

But the feeling was, in the negotiation meetings, that Ms Wendy Abt dominated and did most of the talking. DFCU wrote to the Governor protesting the conduct of the financial advisor.

The Committee also learnt that later the Governor called the DFCU team. He called them on 12 Friday and 13 Saturday, but the winner of the bid was announced the following Monday. Therefore the Committee was not very sure whether even their complaint was really treated fairly. For us it appeared like DFCU was encouraged to bid as a stocking horse, to legitimize the bidding process and avoid the possibility of only one favoured bidder getting the bid.  

Then we looked at the price paid and the money for value analysis again. Mr Speaker, this information can be obtained from table No.2. Bank of Uganda had hired KPMG to evaluate and establish the value of the bank. The criticism we had is that the Bank of Uganda did not have a reserve price and they hired KPMG to carry out the business evaluation. What KPMG did was to use a multiple approach of evaluation using the discounted cash flows, the earnings-based approach and the asset-based approach, and gave a range of prices. 
 
Mr Speaker, allow me to give a quick implication of what is given here. What is quoted here is what KPMG did. So they gave two ranges. The upper limit was got using different methods of evaluation. The discounted cash flow gave the lower limit of the value of the bank at Shs 51 billion. The upper limit would be Shs 71 billion. If you compute the average of these two, it comes to Shs 61 billion. 

The earnings-based approach would give a lower limit of Shs 33 billion and the upper limit of Shs 66 billion. If you average the two, the value is Shs 49.5 billion.

The asset-based approach would give you Shs 21.6 billion as the lower limit, and Shs 64.9 billion as the upper limit. You average these two to get a specific price of Shs 43.25 billion.

If you get the average of averages D, E, and A, you get a crude sum of Shs 51.2 billion. From this analysis - and this is the point that should be understood - KPMG itself was hired by the Bank of Uganda. If you consider that Stanbic paid 80 percent equity of UCBL, the purchase price should have come to Shs 22.27 billion, but Stanbic paid Shs 19.5 billion.  

So, all we are showing is that Bank of Uganda was ready and willing to take Shs 19.5 billion even when the crude average would have been Shs 22.7 billion. This was Shs 3.2 billion below what would have been valued for the bank. This is the essential point we are trying to establish here.

Mr Speaker, there were also other areas of contention. The excluded assets issue was not resolved. The figures stated by the Deputy Governor, after he appeared before the Committee, seem to conflict with Annex A of the sale agreement. For instance, we looked at the Nkrumah Road Building. If you look at the two valuations, one was Shs 2.080 billion, and the second valuation was Shs 1.31 billion. So, it is not clear why these excluded assets valuations are different.  

Another central issue is the conversion of the Government’s 20 percent ownership in Uganda Commercial Bank, to 10 percent in the merged Stanbic/UCBL. The central point is to merge two banks at fifty-fifty. They should be of equal value. The table which is given on page 22, shows the evaluation based on the Income Statement Balance Sheet. It shows that if you valued these two banks in terms of contributions to the merged entity, Uganda Commercial Bank would be bringing to the table 58 percent and Stanbic, 42 percent. 

When it came to the negotiations, the Bank of Uganda agreed that it should be a fifty-fifty contribution. Therefore, the agreed position is that when UCBL merges with Stanbic, it would be done as if they were equal in terms of contribution, even when the analysis of the factors is definitely different.

The conclusion, therefore, is that even in the merger, Bank of Uganda was willing to bend, or at least accept, the unequal treatment.  

I also want to report, Mr Speaker, that the Bank of Uganda financial advisor’s report states that: “To establish an exchange ratio, Stanbic valued Stanbic Bank (U) at US $44.7 million using a median international bank multiple of 7.7. By virtue of a 10 percent exchange ratio in the combined entity, for 20 percent of Government share in UCBL, the value is also US $44.7 million at closing. Thus the merged bank is priced at a value of US $89.4 million at closing, which means that Government’s 10 percent shareholding is valued at US $8.9 million.” 

The point we are trying to establish here is that 80 percent of Uganda Commercial Bank was bought at Shs 19.55 million, leaving 20 percent. If 20 percent of the shares is to be offered to Ugandans, it should be offered to Ugandans at the same proportion price as Stanbic bought its 80 percent. But if the merger takes place before this is done, the Ugandans buying 10 percent shares of the merged bank will pay twice the amount. Therefore, you will have been cheated while the other ones bought it cheap.  

Therefore, the recommendation we are making is that it should first be offered and then those who buy these shares participate in the merger process.

Mr Speaker, we come to the legal issues. This is page 24. The legal issues during the sale process and their effects on the validity of the contracts: 

The first legal question that we faced was whether the Bank of Uganda had any legal position to sell a bank which is solvent. The Bank of Uganda evoked the provision of the Financial Institutions Statute and sold Uganda Commercial Bank when it was solvent already. The Bank of Uganda’s explanation was that they did not want to return this bank to the owners who had mismanaged it in the first place. They also wanted to safeguard the depositors’ stake in the bank. 

Bank of Uganda placed a condition for releasing statutory management control to a reputable international bank. Anyway, we have gone over this argument many times. Our position is that Bank of Uganda should not point an accusing finger as if the bank itself, if it had exercised its due diligence, would not have prevented the mismanagement of Westmont.

The Committee was also concerned with the role of the Attorney General in the sale process. The Attorney General’s Office testified that they were left out of the entire sale process, except where the Minister of Finance sought a legal opinion on the already signed agreement.

According to the Attorney General’s Office, their exclusion in the early stages of the sale process was on the grounds that the matter under discussion was extremely confidential. The Committee found this absolutely unacceptable, given that the Attorney General is the chief advisor of Government. Excluding him implied that he was unworthy of being trusted with any matter that requires utmost confidence. 

Article 119 of the Constitution lists the functions of the Attorney General as: “To draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions and documents by whatever name called, to which the Government has an interest.”  

Article 119 (5) adds, “…no such documents shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney General, except in such cases and subject to such a condition as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

While appearing before the Committee, the Attorney General complained against the exclusion of his office in the sale process, and hoped the law would be respected in future. The Committee therefore observed that the mandatory role of the Attorney General as under the Constitution was disregarded in conducting the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank.  

Furthermore, there were anomalies related to law. None of the consultants that the Bank of Uganda hired, including KPMG (Kenya), Wendy Abt (Financial Advisor) or Neal Curtin (External Legal Advisor), had local practicing certificates. This was in contravention of the Accountants Statute (No.12 of 1992) Section 21(1) and (2) as well as the Advocates Act (No.22 of 1970) Section 12(1)(2)(3). 

These clauses are tantamount to Bank of Uganda hiring and entering into contract with unqualified persons under the applicable law. All the consultants were illegally practicing in Uganda. There was also no clear basis for their selection among alternative consultants to conduct the sale. The Committee felt that the hiring of such consultants was not transparent since they never gave opportunity to competitors. 

In the job contracts, which were signed by the consultants, Bank of Uganda also agreed that they would not pay taxes on their income, contrary to the Constitution of Uganda, Article 152, which reserves such powers of tax exemption to only persons and authorities so empowered by law. The consultants being non-resident contractors or professionals are supposed to pay 15 percent under section 86 of the Income Tax Act, and Bank of Uganda had an obligation to withhold the tax under Section 121, 122 of the Income Tax Act. 

As a result of the waiver of taxes, Bank of Uganda should be liable to pay the taxes due. The officials who caused this tax liability should be held responsible and Parliament should be informed of the action taken. The tax evaded is given in Table 5.  

Table 5 gives the amount that was paid to these consultants. KPMG – US $0.5 million. It evaded tax of nearly US $76,000. Wendy Abt was paid nearly US $1.5 million and she evaded of US $223,000. Bingham Dana was also paid more than US $0.5 million. It should have paid US $78,000 in tax. The total tax evasion comes to US $378,470.42. This was an anomaly and the Committee was concerned.  

Further anomaly is the seal of the Bank of Uganda, which by law shall be authenticated by the signatures of the Governor and the Secretary to the Board. Section 4(2) says, “In the absence of the Governor, the Deputy Governor may sign in his place and the person performing the functions of Secretary may sign in the absence of the Secretary.” 

Section 4(3) says, “A document issued by the bank, which document is sealed with the seal of the bank and authenticated in a manner provided under this section shall be received and taken to be a true document without further proof unless the contrary is shown.” 

The Committee observed that the Uganda Commercial Bank sale agreement was signed by the Bank of Uganda Executive Director of Supervision, Mr Katimbo Mugwanya, and bore no official seal. In view of the above provisions, especially section 4(3), the ad hoc Committee found the failure of the Governor of Bank of Uganda to sign and seal Uganda Commercial Bank sale agreement, when he was present at the signing ceremony, unsatisfactory.  

The ad hoc Committee asserts that Uganda Commercial Bank sale agreement is of such importance as to require the Bank of Uganda seal and the Governor’s signature. We got an explanation from the Bank of Uganda that at the time of signing the agreement, the reserve bank of South Africa had not given assent to the sale, thus the Governor could not sign since his counterpart had not signed. But interestingly, the Minister of Finance signed and there was no promise in the agreement that a final authenticated and sealed agreement would be signed later after the necessary approvals from the reserve bank of South Africa had been obtained. These points further reinforced the ad hoc Committee’s view that the agreements should be re-drawn and properly authenticated. 

There was the petition of Kampala residents, which was also passed to the ad hoc Committee. The petitioners were concerned about the sale and they asked us to look into these grievances. The summary of it is that most of the grievances, which they raised, were genuine and were part of the public outcry regarding transparency, accountability and respect of resolutions of Parliament. Most of the points were time-barred because they were overtaken by events, and some of their concerns are also addressed in the recommendations.  

The rationale of selling 80 percent instead of 51 shares: 

The Committee was informed that Uganda Commercial Bank was transferred from Schedule No.2 to Schedule No.4, to be fully divested. Accordingly, Statutory Instrument 14 of 1997, which was laid before Parliament in May 1997, was made in accordance with this provision. So, by law this was done right. However, the Committee feels that the Minister of Finance should still have brought this matter of sale to be conducted by Bank of Uganda before DRIC.  

Conclusions: 

Mr Speaker, based on the above analysis, the Committee drew the following conclusions:

1. The views and resolutions of Parliament on the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank were obviously ignored. Instead, Bank of Uganda used its purported powers under the Financial Institutions Statute and sold Uganda Commercial Bank disregarding the call to release the bank to DRIC.

2. The tendering method used by the Bank of Uganda of headhunting and privately seeking for buyers through the sole effort of a hired financial adviser was found to be unsatisfactory and was not transparent enough for a transaction of this magnitude.

3. Concerning whether the bid evaluation and negotiation process was fair to both bidders, the evidence shows DFCU was not treated fairly during the negotiations. They complained. 

4. Regarding the purchase price, the Committee observed that even the crude average value by KPMG was Shs 51.2 billion or US $28.472 billion. 

Considering that Stanbic bought 80 percent of UCBL equity, the estimated price paid should have been US$22.776 million. Stanbic offered only US$19.55 million, which is US$3.2 million below the estimated average value of UCBL. This shows that Bank of Uganda was willing to take any price. A competitive market process might have turned out a higher price, but it is very difficult to know, since it was never advertised.  

Bank of Uganda’s explanation that they used a non-competitive method for fear of depositor flight in UCBL is not convincing. The sale method used had the merit of getting known potential buyers and credible investors, if it had been advertised.

7.5 Regarding fears that Stanbic management were planning to acquire 100 percent of UCBL equity without leaving any portion for the public, the ad hoc committee learnt that under the sale agreement, the 20 percent government stake in UCBL would convert to 10 percent stake after UCBL and Stanbic had merged. The government is free to offer its 10 percent to the merged bank. 

The conversion of 20 percent previously UCBL shares to 10 percent in the merged bank was based on equal value treatment of the two banks. Under the “merger of equals” approach, the 20 percent shareholding of government in UCBL would convert 10 percent in the combined entity.  

However, considering the contribution ratio, which I have shown in the table, of the two banks to the merged entity, which was 60 to 40 percent for UCBL and Stanbic respectively, the use of the “merger of equals” approach evidently gave a big concession in favour of Stanbic.  UCBL, the largest bank in Uganda controlling more than 28 percent of total deposit can hardly be equal at the time of merger to Stanbic, which had only one branch.
 
7.6 The price per share of the merged bank is going to be unfair to Ugandans because they will pay US$8.9 million instead of US$4.875 million they would have paid if they had bought at an equivalent of what Stanbic did when they were buying the 80 percent.

7.7 There were drafting inaccuracies in the sale agreement that need to be addressed between the contracting parties, for the sale agreement to be a document to reflect a broad consensus of all concerned. The relevant paragraph in the sale agreement is pointed out.

7.8 The value of excluded assets, Mr Speaker, is big. The figures stated by the Deputy Governor after he appeared before the committee seem to conflict with those of Annex A to the sale agreement. We have given the example of Nkrumah Road building, and so many other examples in the Annex.

7.9 A major objective of UCBL resolution was to ensure that the entire branch network - I should mention this one because it is a controversial point in liberalisation - but this is a negotiated argument. The point is this. If the major objective of resolving Uganda Commercial Bank was to ensure that the entire branch network is maintained to assure citizens that the banking service is around the country; the committee noted that the sale agreement only guaranteed this for two years, after which any branch deemed unviable by the buyer may be closed or retained with a subsidy from the Bank of Uganda.

The committee therefore concluded that the problem of public subsidies to Uganda Commercial Bank has not yet been resolved if this was agreed, even after the bank is 100 percent owned by Stanbic. Although a government subsidy to a bank in which the government has equity ownership may receive public empathy, a subsidy to a private bank with foreign majority shareholding will be extremely controversial. Therefore, we are of the view that since this is a negotiated agreement, the government should devise an alternative solution to the problem of providing banking services to areas of the country that are less attractive, but also insist that these branches should be maintained, since they are better managers.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we made the following recommendations for adoption by the House.

Partnership in the Government System:
 
The committee recommends for adoption that while there must be separation of powers between the three arms of government, namely, the Executive, the Legislature and Judiciary as essential elements for democracy, the three must work in partnership and must show mutual respect for the good governance of the country, and for the benefit of all Ugandans.  

The disregard of the resolution of Parliament relating to the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank by the Executive arm of government is therefore regrettable, very deplorable and should be proscribed.

To remedy the problem of resolutions of Parliament not receiving the attention they deserve by way of directing implementation or otherwise, Parliament should enact a law that makes the resolutions of Parliament legally bidding and enforceable.

The sale of Uganda Commercial Bank by Bank of Uganda: 

The Financial Institutions Statute of 1993, which is before the House for review, should be amended to address the lacuna existing in law regarding the powers of the Central Bank resolving a previously insolvent bank that has regained solvency under statutory management. 

This caused us a lot of trouble but the law was silent on when the bank returns to solvency and capital adequacy. Whether you can sell it, as was happening, was not clear.

The independence of the Central Bank: 

Mr Speaker, the independence of the Central Bank as enshrined in the Constitution and the Bank of Uganda Statute was misinterpreted and must be given correct interpretations. The independence of the Central Bank is principally focussed at monetary and fiscal policy, domestic price stability, and external equilibrium in the balance of payments. It can neither mean independence from public accountability nor can it mean independence from political guidance. 

This should be given correct interpretation in the upcoming constitutional review. The Financial Institutions Statute itself is before you.

Maintenance of branches: 

The committee feels very strongly that there is uncertainty regarding the fate of 52 upcountry UCBL branches. Forty-seven of those branches (almost the entire upcountry network), according to the sale agreement, will stay open for two years. Thereafter any branch may be closed if deemed unviable by the buyer or if it is to be retained, it will be maintained by a Bank of Uganda subsidy. 

The ad hoc committee observed that the risk of closure leans heavily on Bank of Uganda or the public who may lose access to the banking services. The sale agreement exonerates the buyers of any managerial inefficiency that may cause some branches to be unviable, thus needing closure. 

The Committee therefore recommends that since this is a negotiated agreement, all branches of Uganda commercial Bank at the time of sale should be maintained by the buyer and no compensation in form of subsidy should be paid to the buyer to keep such branches open since Uganda Commercial Bank was sold as a going concern and on “as is” basis. The sale agreement should be amended to reflect this.

We emphasised that the rationale for selling Uganda Commercial Bank to Stanbic at a give away price was ostensibly to get the bank into the hands of better managers whose exceptional competence would yield larger benefits to the entire economy in the medium and long term. Stanbic therefore should live up to this expectation.

Payments to the Consolidated Fund: 

Mr speaker, there were so many payments arising from the sale of UCBL, which we thought should be paid to the Consolidated Fund. These included, at the time of this report:

• Shs 8.5 billion transferred from Uganda Commercial Bank to Bank of Uganda as “excess liquidity” at the closure of the sale. Bank of Uganda - at the time of this report - was still holding these funds, and we feel they should be remitted to the Consolidated Fund.

· 80 percent of US $19.55 million, which is US $15.64 million, of the purchase price. It had not been paid to the Consolidated Fund at the time of writing this report.

• Shs 1.1 billion was paid to Bank of Uganda as management costs for the deferred closing. There was some deferred closing, which according to the agreement resulted into Shs 1.1 billion. This one had also not been paid to the Consolidated Fund.

• There were dividends of 20 percent shareholding of the Uganda Commercial Bank to Government. This had also not been paid by the time of writing the report. 

• There was rent of US $7,000 per month for UCBL on Nkrumah road.

All we are saying is all that for avoidance of any misappropriation or misuse of these funds, they should be put to the Consolidated Fund.

Escrow Account Transactions: 

In the sale, US $3.91 billion was deposited on the Escrow account to settle any balances remaining in the negotiation. We feel that this account should be closely monitored and fully accounted for by Bank of Uganda. The Auditor General should examine and audit the transactions and report to Parliament. Any balances on this account should be passed on to the Consolidated Fund.

I think members would appreciate that this Escrow account was put at the disposal of the Bank of Uganda for settling as they negotiated the merger obligations arising from each side. All we are saying is that this should be monitored, otherwise it might pay for wrong things not related to the sale.  

Liabilities due for payment: 

Well, the following liabilities should be settled without delay to avoid the suffering of the affected persons as a result of privatising Uganda 

Commercial Bank: 

We have the redundancy payment to 500 UCBL employees who were affected. We would like this to be done immediately. 

There are Long Service awards still. At the time of writing they had not been settled.

There was also the unpaid due staff leave. It had not been paid. 

There also were the gratuity awards for contract employees. The affected persons are Ugandans and they are suffering. They should be paid so that they do not become victims.

Taxes on the Consultancy Payments:

The contracts with consultants during resale process contravened the laws. So, we are saying these taxes, which we have analysed in the table amounting to US $378,470.42, as taxes unpaid by the consultants, should be paid.  

The ad hoc Committee recommends that Parliament, by resolution, tasks the Uganda Revenue Authority to follow-up on this matter and report to Parliament within three months.

Establish the actual value of excluded assets: 

Mr Speaker, the Committee observed a wide variation in the value of excluded assets and their depreciation figures within a span of about three months. Parliament should, by resolution, task the Bank of Uganda to resolve the differences in asset values and inform Parliament of the actual value of the excluded assets.

The sale of excluded assets:  

With regard to excluded assets spelt out in the sale agreement, they should be quickly liquidated through open public bidding, and the funds is banked on the Consolidated Fund account of Government.

The anti-trust law should be appreciated. Uganda Commercial Bank has been the largest bank in Uganda, controlling more than 28 percent of the total market sales. To avoid the merged UCBL/Stanbic Bank creating a monopoly and introducing inefficiency in the banking system, an anti-trust law should be enacted immediately.

The offer of the 20 percent shares for sale before merger:  

The intent of Government as asserted in the minister’s statement was to retain 20 percent for Ugandans. As such, since Stanbic acquired 80 percent and paid US $19.5 million, then Ugandans acquiring 20 percent should pay US $4.875 million. Buying after the merger, as proposed in the sale agreement, will result in Ugandans buying 10 percent of the merged bank at US $8.9 million, which is unfair.

Consequently, the ad hoc Committee recommends that the 20 percent shares should first be purchased through the stock exchange before the merger, and the new owners should be party to the UCBL/Stanbic merger process.  

Parliament’s displeasure:

The Committee wishes to request Parliament to resolve as follows:

That Parliament expresses displeasure with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Governor -(Interruption)- no, it is displeasure, not censure. 

The Committee expresses displeasure with the Minister and the Governor, Bank of Uganda for:

1. Disregarding the PERD Statute and the resolutions of Parliament and insisting on selling a solvent bank under the Financial Institutions Statute instead of selling it through the PERD statute;  

2. Entering into a sales agreement of this magnitude without fully involving the Attorney General as required by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

3. Recruiting consultants and headhunting for bidders without competitive bidding, which undermined transparency in the entire process and value for money for such high cost consultancy services;

4. Avoiding responsibility by leaving the negotiating process almost entirely in the hands of foreign consultants who prepared bid documents, sourced buyers, negotiated the final purchase price of such a national strategic institution.

5. Selling 80 percent of Uganda Commercial Bank Limited to Standard Bank Investment Corporation at a give-away price, without a reserve price. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report and the recommendations.

(Full text of the Committee Report follows below)

PROF KAMUNTU: Hon. Speaker, and Hon. Members,

1.1 On May 15, 2002, the Parliament of Uganda passed a resolution in accordance with the rules of procedure of the Parliament of Uganda (Rule 157) appointing a Parliamentary Adhoc Committee to investigate the manner, procedure and propriety of the sale of 80% majority shares of Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd. (UCBL) to Standard Bank Investment Corporation Limited of South Africa by Bank of Uganda. 

1.2 Parliament was also concerned about reports that the remaining 20% shares that the Government of Uganda had reserved to be offered for sale to the public on the Uganda Stock Exchange at a later date would also be sold to M/s Stanbic Bank (U) Ltd as stated in the decision of the Extra Ordinary Board Meeting of UCBL of March 20, 2002 attached herewith as appendix  1. 

1.3 The Resolution of Parliament appointing the Adhoc Committee (attached to this report as appendix 2) was prompted by a motion moved by Hon. Nandala Mafabi, (MP Sironko County). The motion is attached to this report as appendix 3. Specifically, Parliament was concerned about: 



• Total disregard by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development of the resolutions of Parliament regarding the sale of UCBL;

• The likely breach of undertaking by the Minister, reflected in his statement of December 31, 2001 to Parliament, whereby the promise made to retain 20% shares in UCBL for the public would not be honoured.   
                                          
1.4 This report summarises the evidence, discussions and findings of the Adhoc Committee, draws conclusions and finally, makes recommendations.

2.0 Background:

2.1 Uganda Commercial Bank was established by an Act of Parliament No. 22 of 1965. The mission of the Bank was affirmative: to give indigenous Africans access to banking services, which had been denied them by imperial banks. This position is still largely true today as it was in 1965.

2.2 With the exception of 1979 when UCB had to incur huge losses as a result of the Liberation war and 1988/89 when the Bank carried out rapid branch expansion, the Bank operated reasonably well, given the policy environment, and to a large extent fulfilled its mission. The Bank provided a variety of banking services to Ugandans including:

• Acceptance of customer deposits through current, savings, and fixed deposit accounts in all its branches across the country;

• Extension of credit facilities in the form of working capital loans, overdraft facilities, short-term loans, mortgage loans, etc.;

•  Provision of trade finance facilities such as letters of credit for imports and exports and bank guarantees;

• Provision of foreign exchange services, such as telegraphic transfers, drafts and travellers cheques;

• Salary transfers;

• Tax collection on behalf of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA);

• Safe custody facilities;

• Provision of the core infrastructure of the Commercial Banking system, which served Ugandan enterprises and private clients over many years.

2.3 UCB earned the name – “The People’s Own Bank” and contributed to employment creation, trained many Ugandans to become professional bankers and accelerated the Africanisation of the national economy.

2.4 The Privatisation of UCB:

2.4.1 As part of the financial sector reform, UCB became a limited liability company and changed its name from UCB to UCBL in October 1997 in preparation for privatisation. During the 6th Parliament the PERD Statute (Amendment of the first schedule, 1997) removed UCBL from Class II enterprises in which government would retain majority shareholding, to Class IV Enterprises to be wholly privatised. Thus, the question and concern of Parliament was not whether UCBL should be privatised but the manner and propriety of the privatisation process.

2.4.2 The initial privatisation of UCBL took place in April 1998 when the Government of Uganda sold 49% of the bank’s equity to a Malaysia- based company, Westmont Land BHD Asia (hereafter called Westmont) for a sum of $5 million plus $6 million as working capital. Westmont took control of the Management of UCBL under a three-year Management contract at a fee of $2 million per year. The Westmont Management lasted a few months and caused considerable losses to the bank. The Bank became insolvent to the tune of shs 16.3 billion and suffered considerable financial losses wiping out the shs 118 billion Government had used to recapitalise the bank to zero networth before privatisation. 

2.4.3 The first attempt at privatisation of UCBL was, therefore, a fiasco. In subsequent events, the Government instituted civil proceedings against Westmont and in November 2000, the arbitration proceedings determined that the 49% shares held by Westmont revert to the Government of Uganda, which thus regained 100% control of UCBL. The cost of arbitration alone, to recover UCBL from Westmont mismanagement, amounted to U shs. 11 billion.

2.5  Bank of Uganda Seizure of UCBL:

2.5.1In April 1999, the Bank of Uganda seized the Management of UCBL in accordance with the provisions of sections 31 and 32 of the Financial Institutions Statute (FIS) 1993 and removed Westmont from the management and control of the Bank. It is important to note that Bank of Uganda and the MoFPED having brought and allowed Westmont to own and manage UCBL, cannot justifiably blame UCBL governance alone for subsequent gross mismanagement and insolvency of the bank.

2.6  The Management and sale of UCBL by Bank of Uganda:

2.6.1 As already noted, the Bank of Uganda seized the Management of UCBL in April 1999 and directed its operations until February 21, 2002 when Standard Bank Investment Corporation (Stanbic) took over the management of UCBL. During the period of statutory management by BoU, UCBL fully recovered from its financially impaired position, caused principally by Westmont mismanagement and the violation of the share-sale agreement. The bank returned to profitability and solvency. 

2.6.2 Questions were raised whether the statutory management of UCBL should not have ceased immediately UCBL met all the statutory requirements given the above background. Was it legal for the Bank of Uganda to sell a solvent Bank? What signal does this act of selling a solvent bank give to private banks? Was the sale of UCBL under FIS a smokescreen intended to circumvent serious scrutiny of the privatisation process by stakeholders under the Divestiture Reform Implementation Committee (DRIC) and accountability to the public?

2.6.3 Consequently, there was a strong view that the Privatisation and sale of UCBL should have been executed under the PERD statute 1993, rather than under the Financial Institutions Statute 1993 under which the sale to Standard Bank Investment Corporation (Stanbic) took place.

2.7 Concerns of Parliament:

2.7.1 The sixth Parliament urged the government to divest 51% shares in UCB and retain 49% shares for the people of Uganda. UCBL was then partially privatised in April 1998 when Govt. sold 49% of the Bank’s equity to Westmont with an option for Westmont to buy an additional 2% at a future date. If this privatisation exercise had been done properly, the execution would have been done in line with the desire of Parliament for some involvement of Ugandans in their own banking system. Following reports of a second attempt to sell UCBL, Parliament on September 28, 2001 once again passed a resolution and urged the Government as follows, that1;

• “Since UCBL has fully recovered from its insolvent financial position that existed when the Bank of Uganda (BoU) seized it for statutory management in April 1999 and UCBL has fulfilled all the profitability and capital adequacy requirements since early 2000, the BoU should hand over UCBL management to its shareholders without further delay;

• “UCBL should be privatised under the scope of the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Statute 1993 (PERD) to provide opportunity for all stakeholders under DRIC to participate in the privatisation process and ensure greater transparency and accountability;

• “A phased and sequenced privatisation modality should be adopted by offering a certain percentage of UCBL shares on the stock exchange to allow Ugandans to participate in the shareholding of UCBL. UCBL is a public institution and its privatisation should be done with full disclosure and offer first opportunity to Ugandans who are the owners of the Bank in the first place. A strategic investor may also be considered under this arrangement;

• “In order to promote competition and efficiency in the banking sector, measures should be taken in privatising UCBL to avoid transferring the public monopoly and dominance of UCBL into a private monopoly that may result into greater inefficiency and abuse in the absence of Anti-Trust laws.   

• “The Minister responsible for Finance should report to the House within three months, the measures taken to implement the provisions of these resolutions”.

2.7.2 This inquiry therefore examined, among other things, whether during the process of sale of UCBL the views and concerns of Parliament expressed above were taken into account and if not, why not? The inquiry also examined whether the process of sale conformed to expected standards of transparency, accountability and professional integrity as would be necessary in selling an asset of such national and strategic importance to the national economy.

3.0 Methodology:

3.1 The Adhoc Committee held its first formal meeting on May 17, 2002 to review the intent of the resolution of Parliament and to define the scope of work involved in the investigation. The terms of reference were formulated and are attached to this report as appendix 4. 

3.2 The Committee received and reviewed a series of documents in connection with the sale of UCBL. The list of the most important documents received by the Committee is attached to this report as appendix 5.

3.3 The Committee also conducted public hearings in accordance with the powers and authority of the Committee enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Article 90 (4) (a) and summoned to appear before the Committee key individuals as witnesses. The list of individuals who appeared before the committee and gave evidence relating to the sale of UCBL is attached to this report as appendix 6.

4.0Findings:

After carefully sifting through evidence and patiently listening to many viewpoints, the committee found the following:
4.1 The Bidding Process: 

4.1.1 In November 2000 BoU established a “Working Group” to oversee the Management of UCBL and to develop strategies for the bank. This is the group that later oversaw the eventual resolution of UCBL. The initial composition of the group was2 : 

• Dr. Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor, BoU,
• Mr. E Katimbo Mugwanya, the Executive Director Supervision Function, BoU;
• Mr. Jayant Virani, Acting Managing Director, UCBL,
• Mr. Joseph Bossa, Legal Counsel, BoU,
• Mr. S Wootton, FMAP Secretariat, BoU;
• Mrs Margaret Matovu, Director Commercial Banking, BoU;

The Working Group was expanded over the course of 2001 with the following additional members:

• Mr. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebire, (who assumed Chairmanship on being appointed Governor in January 2001)
• Mr. Keith Muhakanizi, Director of Economic Affairs, MoFPED;
• Mr. Otweyo Orono, Team Leader, MoFPED,
• Mr. Martin Brownbridge, Advisor, MoFPED,
• Ms Carmencita Santos, IMF Advisor, Bank Supervision, BoU;
• Ms Wendy Abt, WPA (Financial Consultant)
• Mr. Neal Curtin, Bingham Dana (External Legal Consultant)

4.1.2 In addition to the above Working Group, BoU later established a negotiating committee, which consisted of only three people, namely, Mr Joseph Bossa, BoU’s Legal Counsel (a Ugandan), Ms Wendy Abt (an American), BoU’s Financial Advisor, and Mr Neal Curtin (an American) of Bingham Dana, BoU’s external Legal Advisors3 . This is the committee that principally negotiated the sale of the bank to the bidders.

4.1.3 There was no advertised, competitive and open tender to sell UCBL. Instead, the approach used was private placement and personal approach to potential buyers. This was done by the Financial Consultant, Wendy Abt, who, it was reported, privately approached up to eleven banking institutions soliciting bids.  

4.1.4 The initial explanation given by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was that the selective bidding approach was adopted because “BOU felt it necessary to actively encourage the prospective buyers to think seriously about the possibility of purchasing UCBL. Without this proactive approach by the BoU, of marketing UCBL, the prospects for attracting high quality bank investors were not high”4 . 

4.1.5 The banks approached were: Stanbic Bank Ltd, Standard Chartered Bank, Barclays Bank, Citibank, Banco Santander, HSBC, ABSA, Nedbank, Fortis, BNP Paribus, and Societe Generale.

4.1.6 Only three of the banks approached, namely Stanbic Bank Ltd., Standard Chartered Bank and Barclays Bank expressed an interest in purchasing UCBL. Dfcu Ltd was also invited, at their request, to conduct on-site due diligence of UCBL. In July 2001 the BOU circulated bid packages to all prospective purchasers and invited them to make a bid. Only Stanbic Bank Ltd. and Dfcu Ltd returned their bids. The bids were opened on 1 October 2001. The bidders were invited on October 10, 2001 to begin negotiations for the purchase of the bank. During the negotiations they were informed of the fact that BOU was desirous of concluding the negotiations by 14 October 2001. However, both bids were found to be unsatisfactory and the bidders were told to make improvements in specified areas. This was done and after due analysis, the Working Group established by BoU to conduct the sale resolved that the Stanbic Bank Ltd. bid was superior to that of Dfcu Ltd. because, according to the Minister of Finance in his statement to Parliament dated December 31, 2001, “it met the primary objectives for the resolution of UCBL, including:

• Ensure the safety and soundness of the deposits to the fullest extent possible,
• Ensure the branch network is retained and all of the essential branches are kept open,
• Enables 20% of UCBL’s equity to be offered to the public on the Uganda stock exchange”.

4.1.7 The Adhoc Committee, however, raised serious questions about the bidding process. The committee was concerned that by not advertising the intended sale, many other potential bidders who might have offered even better selling terms did not know about the sale of UCBL. The bidding process was therefore commercially detrimental to UCBL.

4.1.8 The explanation given by the Bank of Uganda Head of Supervision, Mr. Katimbo Mugwanya as to why open bidding was not done was that BoU considered the risk of “depositor flight”. However, this argument was not valid. There had been a number of public disclosures about Government’s plan to resolve UCBL by selling a controlling stake to a reputable banking investor. For example the Minister of Finance mentioned the impending sale in the budget speeches of 1999 and 2000. Later on, the Governor BoU explained how the sale was to be conducted while appearing before the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on February 15, 2001. But none of these disclosures had caused a run on UCBL by depositors. Besides, Parliament had also been discussing the matter publicly and giving suggestions on how the sale should be conducted, such as during the sitting of September 28, 2001 when Parliament gave specific instructions in a resolution. None of these public discussions of the sale of UCBL caused depositors to transfer their deposits from UCBL. All that the public was interested in was to know that Bank of Uganda was taking all necessary measures to ensure that UCBL was resolved in a smooth and orderly manner that would safeguard their deposits and allow them equity participation.

4.1.9 The Committee, therefore, made the following observations regarding whether the tendering process was transparent and whether it conformed to expected standards:

• That there were unwarranted fears in the seller camp, that the sale of UCBL may not attract high quality bank investors and that public disclosure of the impending sale would cause “depositor flight” to the detriment of UCBL, the Government and the entire economy. Subsequently, there was a hurry to sell the bank secretly, in the shortest possible time and at any price.

• Under the above circumstances, the tendering process was not transparent. It omitted open advertising, which should be a requirement for a sale of this nature. Consequently, the resulting sale price and terms cannot be regarded as the best the market could offer. 

4.2 Evaluation and comparison of the Stanbic and Dfcu bids: 

4.2.1 As mentioned above, Ms Wendy Abt, the Consultant BoU hired as Financial Advisor, singularly sourced for bidders. After only two bids were submitted from Standard Bank Investment Corporation (Stanbic) and Dfcu (U) Ltd, she chaired a negotiating team of three, consisting of herself, Mr. Joseph Bossa, (BoU Legal Counsel) and Mr. Neal Curtin (external Legal Consultant). This team principally conducted all the direct sale negotiations with the bidders.

4.2.2 The Working Group, which was meant to deal with UCBL’s eventual resolution, seems to have surrendered its responsibility, to a great extent, to the negotiating team. Neither the Governor, nor the Deputy Governor as the Chief Executives of the Bank of Uganda, negotiated directly with the bidders. The negotiations were largely conducted by the financial advisor and the legal advisor, both of whom were external, with no known equity or national interest in the matter. The Adhoc Committee found this absence of BoU Chief Executives in the negotiations to be negligent, in view of the importance of the matter at hand.

4.2.3 After the bids from Stanbic and Dfcu were opened on October 1, 2001, both bidders had opted to buy on “as is” basis, that is, as a going-concern rather than selected assets and liabilities. Stanbic offered a purchase price for 90% of UCBL’s shares of a range of $18 to 25 million; (100% shares would equate to a range of $20 to $27.8 million at the exchange rate of $1 to Ushs 1800) On the other hand, Dfcu offered a purchase price for 100% of UCBL’s shares of shs 75 billion ($42.9 million) (equivalent to $31.61 million for 90% shares). This was the initial negotiating position of the two bidders.

4.2.4 The bidders were free to exclude some assets and liabilities in their bid offer. BoU made this provision allegedly to make the sale more attractive by not requiring buyers to acquire assets they may not be interested in. The referred assets and liabilities included: UCBL Head Office (City Branch and Corporate Branch), Nkrumah Road Office, Non-core Real Estate, Non-utilisation of Computer Software License and Staff Loans. Stanbic excluded all the above items except the software license. Dfcu excluded all the above items. 

4.2.5 The Adhoc Committee’s investigations showed that although Dfcu’s headline price offer of $42.9 million appeared substantially higher than Stanbic’s offer, the figure was not directly comparable because:

• It included the shs 9.278 billion which BoU had already indicated would be transferred from UCBL to BoU (as excess cash) prior to the sale of the bank;

•  It treated the UCBL Head Office and Nkrumah Rd buildings plus various other excluded assets as part of the means of paying the offer price.

• The remaining balance of U shs 43.9 billion would be paid in annual instalments over a 5-year period starting one year from the date of purchase and dependant on profit turnout.  Hence, the “net present value” of the Dfcu offer was implicitly less than the headline price and was calculated by the working committee as equivalent to $9.9 million5 . 
 
• Lack of provision for severance costs for retained UCBL employees (excluding the 500 employees to be laid off, whose costs BoU would meet).

• The Adhoc Committee’s further study of the differences in bid offers shows that Dfcu proposed a cash-down payment of shs 31.1 billion ($17.278 million) (including the figure of shs 9.278 billion to be transferred from UCBL prior to closing). This meant that Dfcu proposed net cash down payment was $12.123 million, of the overall net price offer of $26.46 million (excluding the shs 9.278 billion), assuming both companies bid for 90% shares. Stanbic on the other hand later changed their price offer from the range of $18 to 25 million to a specific amount of $19.55 million and offered to pay the entire amount as follows: 80% ($15.64 million) and the balance of $3.91 million would be paid into the escrow account.

• There was also the unresolved issue of Government ownership of 18.5% of Dfcu shareholding that conflicted with BoU and GoU’s intention of fully removing government ownership in UCBL. Dfcu had presented this aspect as an advantage in their bid, but as it turned out, BoU considered it a disadvantage. The key differences between the two bids are presented in table 1 below.

4.2.6 As can be seen from table 1, there were substantial divergences in the two bids relating to payment methods, asset exclusion options, employment provisions etc. 

4.2.7 According to the BoU-instituted UCBL resolution “Working Group” the complete bid evaluation process, taking into account all the considerations like net asset value of excluded assets, warranties and indemnities etc. is attached as appendix 7. It shows Stanbic in a favourable net position over Dfcu. 

Table 1:  Tabular comparisons of the two bids and status after negotiations:
	                            			

Factors in favour of the bid
F actors against the bid and their resolution
Dfcu Ltd
• Headline price offer of 
shs 75 billion ($42.9 million) for 100%  of UCBL’s shares (equivalent to $31.61 million for 90% shares),

•Strong investment interest in the country with equity interest in Centenary Bank Ltd, Housing Finance Co. (U) Ltd, Dfcu Bank Ltd and a Leasing subsidiary, backed by reputable investors (CDC, IFC, DEG, & Govt of Uganda)

• Price offer included the shs 9.278 billion mandatory transfer from UCBL to BoU; excluding this figure price offer reduces to $32.895 million.

• Used excluded assets as part of payment,

• Net cash-down pay was shs 31.1 billion ($12.123 million).

• A substantial portion of the price offer (shs 43.9 billion) would be paid over five years from generated profits.

• Lack of provisions for severance costs for retained UCBL employees,

• The unresolved issue of Government ownership of 18.5% of Dfcu shareholding that conflicted with BoU and GoU’s intention of fully removing government ownership in UCBL. 	

Standard Bank Investment Corporation
• The bid price offer of $18 to 25 million for 90% of UCBL shares was considered credible,

•Shs. 9.278 billion mandatory transfer from UCBL to Stanbic not part of the price offer,

• Offered to pay entire price by time of closing as follows: 80% ($15.64 million) and 20% ($3.91 million into an escrow account).

• Would consider meeting severance costs for retained UCBL employees.	

• Price not stated specifically but as a range. This was later settled at a price of $19.55 million,

• The lack of clarity with respect to integrating UCBL and Stanbic Bank Uganda. Stanbic later agreed on a merger.

• Stanbic’s intention to close five branches which it deemed unprofitable. Later agreed the five branches be retained with a BoU subsidy.	



4.2.8 However, the Adhoc Committee observed that the method of sale preferred by BoU predictably failed to generate a competitive sale process, resulting in low price offers.  

4.3 Negotiations and the role of advisors: 

4.3.1 During interviews with witnesses, the Committee received complaints from Dfcu, that in the course of negotiations, they felt BoU’s Financial Advisor Ms Wendy Abt, was not properly communicating their bid to BoU officials. That there was a time they sought clarification on some issues, but they never received a full answer. They also claimed that in negotiation meetings, “Ms Wendy Abt dominated and did most of the talking”. Dfcu later wrote to the governor protesting the conduct of the financial advisor and threatened to withdraw from the sale process if the matter was not addressed. The Adhoc Committee took this matter seriously and wanted to know why there was no provision for direct communication between the bidders and BoU top executive officials, as and when such communication was needed.

4.3.2	The Committee learnt that following Dfcu’s formal complaint, the Governor BoU convened a face-to-face meeting with the Dfcu negotiating team to iron out any differences in communication. However, given that the meeting convened for Dfcu was held on Friday 12th and Saturday 13th October, 2001 and the winner of the bid was announced the following Monday, it appears to have come too late in the negotiation process to affect any decisions. The Adhoc Committee is therefore not convinced that Dfcu was treated fairly during the negotiations. A fair process should have given equal opportunity to both bidders to communicate their proposals and all subsequent improvements to BoU top executive officials without intermediaries in form of the negotiating team. It appears Dfcu was encouraged as a stocking horse, to legitimise the bidding process and avoid a possibility of only one favoured bidder.

4.4 The price paid and money for value analysis:
 
4.4.1 BoU did not state what in their opinion was the value of the bank they were selling. Neither did they have a reserve price. Although BoU hired KPMG to carry out a business valuation of UCBL, KPMG only turned out estimated-value-ranges according to three different calculation methods, in their report dated June 30, 20017  (see table 2). A summary overview of the methods used is attached to this report as appendix 8. KPMG’s conclusion, based on the three valuation methods was that the value of 100% equity in UCBL was between U shs 45 billion and U shs 60 billion.  KPMG therefore did not come out with any specific value for the bank they set out to value, but left such value to wide speculation by only stating estimated value ranges that were openly divergent. It would appear that KPMG did not want to take responsibility for stating a value that is later proved to be false or unrealistic. They were paid $58,500 for this job.

4.4.2 Using the KPMG valuation estimates and working out averages as measures of central tendency for each of the methods used, and then working out an average of the three methods combined, brings the ‘crude’ average value of UCBL to 51.25 billion shillings (equivalent to $ 28.472 million at exchange rate of $1 to shs 1800) (see table 2).

Table 2.Calculation of crude average value of UCBL based on KPMG valuation
VALUATION METHOD
Discounted Cash Flows
LOWER LIMIT (L)
Ushs. 51 billion	
UPPER LIMIT (U)
Ushs. 71 billion	
AVERAGE (V)
61 billion (d)	
Earnings Based Approach
Ushs. 33 billion
Ushs. 66 billion
49.5 billion (e)	
Asset Based Approach	
Ushs. 21.6 billion
Ushs. 64.9 billion
43.25 billion (a)	

Note: the last column (V) is added, based on the first two with figures generated by KPMG  

Estimated crude average value (shs) = d + e + a  = 51.25 billion or ($ 28,472,222)
						        3
4.4.3 Considering that Stanbic paid for 80% equity of UCBL, the purchase price could be estimated as 80% of the above figure, which equals $22.776 million. However, the amount paid by the buyer to Bank of Uganda for 80% equity was $19.55 million. The difference between the figures is $3.226 million and indicates that BoU was ready to take any price, even one $3.2 million below the average value of UCBL. 

4.4.4 It is worth noting, however, that the Adhoc Committee queried an amount of 9.278 billion shillings indicated in paragraph 2.2 of the sale agreement as part of the “total purchase price”. That amount was supposed to be transferred from UCBL, to BoU prior to the closing date. The Committee argued that if the said amount was truly part of the purchase price, then the transfer should have been from Stanbic Bank Ltd (the buyer) to Bank of Uganda (the seller). 

4.4.5 Towards the closure of this investigation, Bank of Uganda changed its reference to that amount as part of the purchase price and instead called it “excess liquidity” in UCBL, according to the explanation given by the Deputy Governor to the Adhoc Committee dated June 20, 2002. This change, however, reinforced the view of Members of the Adhoc Committee that there was some drafting confusion in the sale agreement that needed to be settled between the contracting parties for the sale agreement to be a document that reflects a collective consensus of all concerned parties, including this August House. 

4.4.6 The value of excluded assets is also not yet resolved. The figures stated by the Deputy Governor BoU after he appeared before the Committee seem to conflict with those of Annex A of the sale agreement. For example, whereas Annex A to the sale agreement dated November 20, 2001 indicates the value of UCBL Nkrumah Road building as shs 2.080 billion and depreciation on the same as shs 520 million, the final agreement transferring excluded Assets and Liabilities to BoU dated February 20, 2002 states the value of the same property as shs 1.31 billion with depreciation of shs 158.575 million. It was not clear as to the cause of this wide variation in figures within a span of three months.   

4.5 The conversion of Government’s 20% UCBL shares to 10% in a merged Stanbic/UCBL:
 
4.5.1 This is a general overview of how the working group worked out the merger of Stanbic and UCBL as described in the report of BoU’s financial advisor. The merger process had about three major stages:

• Stage one involved valuation of UCBL and Stanbic Bank (U) using four approaches, namely: contribution analysis, price earnings multiples, book value multiples and discounted cash flow (DCF).

• Stage two was to determine the merger method. The preferred method was “merger of equals”, meaning that the two banks would be merged as if they were equal in value. According to the financial analyst, such a merger characteristically occurs with banks that have similar levels of capital, no large concentrations of minority shareholding and where no sale price premium is contemplated. 

• To do a “merger of equals”, first a contributions analysis of what each bank would bring to the merger was calculated as indicated in table 3. Although results indicated a 60/40 contribution for UCBL and Stanbic respectively rather than a 50/50, the analysis was regarded broadly to be consistent with the merger of equals, whose outcome would be to convert 20% stake of Govt. in UCBL to 10% in the combined entity. 10% was therefore set as the Working Committee’s minimum acceptable exchange ratio.

Table 3: Contributions of UCBL and Stanbic to the common entity

UCBL

SBU

Income statement
Adjusted Core net income
56.7%
43.3%
Balance sheet:
	Loans	
Total Assets
Total Deposits	
Total Capital

32.7%
69.1%
71.3%
59.9%


67.3%
30.9%
28.7%
40.1%

Average
58.0%
42.0%

Source: WPA Technical appendix to Working Committee proceedings.
Table 3 shows the contributions of UCBL and Stanbic to the merged bank. The overall contribution average was about 60% by UCBL and 40% by Stanbic (U).

• The last stage was negotiations. On comparing the “sustainable earnings valuation” of the two banks, UCBL is said to have presented a less favourable picture compared to Stanbic. (see table 4 showing the strengths and weaknesses of UCBL and Stanbic (U) at merging).  As a consequence, Stanbic argued that the 20% stake of Government in UCBL would convert into a 4.4% stake in the combined entity. After negotiations, it is reported that Stanbic increased their recommendation to 8%, but BoU insisted on no less than 10% and on February 14, 2002, Stanbic agreed.

Table 4: UCBL and Stanbic weak and strong points at merging:

STRONG POINTS
WEAK POINTS
UCBL
Higher contributions ratio of 60%
Lower sustained earnings capacity
Stanbic Bank (U)
Stronger sustained earnings capacity
Lower contributions ratio of 40%


• According to the BoU Financial Advisor, the exchange ratio of 10% means that the two banks were priced to reflect equal value at closing. While two shares in UCBL will now equal one share in the combined bank, the value of that share, i.e. future earnings per share, are expected to be twice as high. “Because the new UCBL/Stanbic will benefit from UCBL’s branch network and accomplish both economies of scale and scope, the future earnings of all shares will be enhanced if the bank is effectively and prudently managed”.

• The BoU’s financial advisor’s report further states that: “To establish an exchange ratio, Stanbic valued Stanbic Bank (U) at $44.7 million using a median international bank multiple of 7.7. By virtue of a 10% exchange ratio in the combined entity, for 20% of [Govt] share in UCBL, the value of UCBL is also $44.7 million at closing. Thus, the merged bank is priced at a value of $89.4 million at closing, which means that Government’s 10% shareholding is valued at $8.9 million”.

4.5.2 However, the Adhoc Committee observed that whereas BoU commissioned an independent valuation of UCBL before the sale, a similar valuation was not conducted for Stanbic. BoU instead relied on the valuation provided by Stanbic. Although at the time of merging the two banks, UCBL contributed a smaller proportion of the loan portfolio (32.7%) to the merged entity than Stanbic (67.3%) (see table 3), it (UCBL) had a superior deposits ratio of  71.3% compared to Stanbic (28.7%), which deposits could be converted into a growing loan portfolio after merging. The “merger of equals” approach therefore seems to have given an unfair concession to Stanbic. The two banks were clearly “not equals”. The merger settlement therefore reflects either poor negotiating skills or lack of interest in UCBL on the part of BoU.

4.6 Legal Issues during the sale process and their effect on validity of the contract:

4.6.1 The first legal question the Committee faced was whether BoU had legal jurisdiction to sell UCBL after it regained solvency under statutory management. After all, Parliament had passed a resolution on September 28, 2001 that since UCBL’s insolvent status had been reversed, it should be handed back to the owner (Govt.) and divested under the PERD Statute. 

4.6.2 However, BoU decided to invoke their purported supervisory powers and independence8  and proceeded to sell UCBL under the Financial Institutions Statute (FIS) 1993. The Committee observed that the current law is silent on the course of action when a bank seized under charges of insolvency regains solvency under statutory management. A strong view was that the current law gives too much power to BoU and needs to be reviewed. 

4.6.3 BoU’s explanation was that they did not want to return UCBL to owners who had mismanaged it in the first place. To safeguard the depositor’s stake in UCBL, BoU placed a condition for releasing statutory management and control of UCBL on a reputable international bank investor gaining majority shareholding in UCBL. It should be noted, however, that the financially impaired position and insolvency of UCBL was brought about by Westmont Management, which caused most of the losses.  

4.6.4 The second legal issue was the almost absent role of the Attorney General in the sale process. The Attorney General’s Office testified that they were left out in the entire sale process, except where the Minister of Finance sought a legal opinion on the already signed agreement. According to the AG’s office, their exclusion in the early stages of the sale process was on grounds that matters under discussion were extremely confidential. 

4.6.5 The Committee found it deplorable that the Attorney General, being chief advisor of Government, should be found unworthy of being entrusted with any matter that requires utmost confidence. Article 119 (4) of the Constitution lists one of the functions of the AG as: 

“To draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions, and documents by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest.” Article 119 (5) says, “…no such documents shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney General except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.” 
4.6.6 While appearing before the Adhoc Committee, the AG complained against the exclusion of his office in the sale process and hoped the law would be respected in future. The Committee therefore observed that the mandatory role of the AG under the Constitution was disregarded in conducting this sale. 

4.6.7 There were also anomalies related to hiring consultants. None of the Consultants BoU hired including KPMG (Kenya) who BoU claims did the UCBL pre-sale valuation, Wendy Abt (the financial advisor) or Neal Curtin (external legal advisor) had local practising certificates. This was in contravention of the Accountants Statute (No. 12 of 1992) section 21 (1) and 21 (2) as well as the Advocates Act (No. 22 of 1970) section 12 (1) (2) (3). These clauses are tantamount to BoU hiring and entering into contract with unqualified persons under the applicable law. All the Consultants were illegally practising in Uganda. There was also no clear basis for their selection among alternative consultants to conduct the sale, since their hiring was not a transparent process giving others opportunity to compete.

4.6.8 In the job contracts signed with the consultants, BoU agreed that the consultants would not pay taxes on their income, contrary to the Constitution of Uganda Article 152 clauses (1) and (2) which reserves such powers of tax exemption to only persons and authorities so empowered by the law. The Consultants being non-resident contractors or professionals are supposed to pay 15% under section 86 of the Income Tax Act and BoU had an obligation to withhold the tax under section 121 and 122 of the Income Tax Act. As a result of the waiver of the taxes, BoU is legally liable to pay the taxes due. The officials who have caused this tax liability should be held responsible and Parliament should be informed of the action taken.

Table 5: Amount BoU owes in Unpaid Taxes on Consultants

Consultant	
Amount paid by 
BoU ($)
15% Tax ($)
KPMG 	
506,738.27
76,010.74
WPA (Financial advisor)
1,491,397.87
223,709.68
Bingham Dana 	
525,000.00
78,750.00
Total	
2,523,136.14
378,470.42


4.6.9 There were also anomalies with the signing and authentication of the UCBL sale agreement and other related contracts. Section 4 (1) of the Bank of Uganda Statute (No. 5 of 1993) states: 
“The seal of the Bank of Uganda shall be authenticated by the signatures of the Governor and the Secretary to the board”. Section 4 (2) says “In the absence of the Governor, the deputy governor may sign in his place and the person performing the functions of Secretary may sign in the absence of the Secretary”. Section 4 (3) says “A document issued by the bank, which document is sealed with the seal of the bank and authenticated in a manner provided under this section shall be received and taken to be a true document without further proof unless the contrary is shown.” 
4.6.10	The Adhoc Committee observed that the UCBL sale agreement was signed by BoU Executive Director of Supervision, Mr. Katimbo Mugwanya, and bore no official seal. In view of the above provisions, especially section 4 (3) the Adhoc Committee found the failure of the Governor Bank of Uganda to sign and seal the UCBL sale agreement, when he was present at the signing ceremony, unsatisfactory. The Adhoc Committee asserts that the UCBL Sale Agreement is of such importance as to require the BoU seal and the Governor’s signature.

4.6.11	The explanation by BoU was that at the time of signing of the sale agreement the Reserve Bank of South Africa (RBSA) had not given assent to the sale. Thus the Governor could not sign. Interestingly, however, the Minister of Finance signed. And there was no promise in the agreement that a final, authentic and sealed agreement would be signed later after the necessary approval from the RBSA has been obtained. These points further reinforced the Adhoc Committee’s view that the agreement should be re-drawn and properly authenticated.

5.0 The Petition by the residents of Kampala City/District:

5.1 As the House will recall, in October, 2001, a petition by residents of Kampala City/District was presented to this Parliament by Hon. Mabikke Micheal (MP Makindye East Division, Kampala) which raised several grievances concerning the sale of UCBL. The petition was committed to the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development during the 1st Session of the 7th Parliament and consequently the Petition has been considered by the Adhoc Committee investigating the sale of UCBL.

5.2 The petitioners were concerned at the haste with which the sale of UCBL was being conducted and expressed fears about possible re-occurrence of the Westmont fiasco of 1998. The petitioners prayed the House for a select Committee of Parliament to be instituted to do the following:
• Look into the grievances raised by the petitioners concerning the refusal of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avail Parliament copies of bid documents relating to the sale of UCBL; Stanbic bid being favoured; disqualifying the current Governor from sale of UCBL having been involved in the initial failed sale as Secretary to the Treasury, member of DRIC and member of Board of UCBL etc;

• Look into the relevant laws relating to the functions and powers of Bank of Uganda and the Minister of Finance in supervising Financial Institutions;

• In the meantime, to halt the process of sale of UCBL. The Petition of the residents of Kampala City/District is attached here as appendix 9.

5.3 A representative sample of the petitioners was invited and offered opportunity to explain their petition. Hon. Mabikke also gave evidence relating to the grievances of the petitioners. The committee observed the following:

• Most of the grievances raised in the petition were genuine and were part of the public outcry regarding transparency, accountability and respect of resolutions of Parliament;

• Possible remedies to some of the grievances such as halting the process of sale of UCBL were time-barred;

• The analysis and recommendations made in this report have addressed grievances raised by the petitioners, especially, the powers of the Central Bank; the need for Partnership and harmony between executive and legislative arms of government etc.

6.0 Rationale behind sale of 80% instead of 51% of UCBL shares:

6.1 The Committee was informed that since UCBL was transferred from schedule II enterprises in which Govt. would retain majority shareholding on divestiture to schedule IV to be fully divested (100%), Government acted in accordance with the PERD Statute 1993 by selling 80% of UCBL to a strategic investor. By Statutory Instrument No. 14 of 1997, which was laid before Parliament on Tuesday May 20, 1997, the then Minister of State for Finance in Charge of Privatisation Mr. Matthew Rukikaire, made the above transfer. 

6.2 However, the Committee still asserts the Minister of Finance should have brought the matter of whether the sale should be conducted by BoU or DRIC before the House. 

7.0 Conclusions to note and act upon:

Based on the above analysis, the Adhoc Committee drew the following conclusions:
7.1 That the views and resolutions of Parliament on the sale of UCBL were ignored. Instead, BoU used its purported powers under the FIS (1993) to sell UCBL and disregarded the call to release the bank to be privatised under DRIC. 

7.2 The tendering method used by BoU, of headhunting and privately seeking for buyers through the sole effort of a hired financial advisor was found to be unsatisfactory and not transparent enough for a transaction of such a controversial nature. The method used had the inevitable limitations of failing to generate competitive bids that would have assured the public that UCBL was sold in a transparent manner and at the best possible price. 
7.3 Concerning whether the bid evaluation and negotiation process was fair to both bidders, the evidence shows Dfcu was not treated fairly during the negotiations. The fact that Dfcu complained in writing to BoU Governor about the conduct of BoU’s Financial Advisor, Ms Wendy Abt, shows that the negotiation process was not impartial and fair for all the bidders. The Adhoc Committee sent out summons for Ms Wendy Abt to appear before it but received no response. 

7.4 Regarding the purchase price paid for UCBL, the Committee observed that the crude average value of UCBL based on various valuation methods by KPMG was 51.25 billion or ($ 28,472,222). Considering that Stanbic bought 80% of UCBL equity, the estimated price to pay should, therefore, have been $22.776 million. Stanbic offered and paid $19.55 million, which is $3.2 million below the estimated average value of UCBL. It shows BoU was willing to take any price. A competitive market process might have turned out a higher price. BoU explanation that they used a non-competitive sale method for fear of depositor flight in UCBL is not well supported by the several public disclosures about the impending sale, which did not result in depositor flight.  Although the sale method used had the merit of getting potential, known and credible investors interested in buying, without open advertisements, it does not assure the public that all possible buyers were reached.  

7.5 Regarding fears that Stanbic Management were planning to acquire 100% of UCBL equity without leaving any portion for the public, the Adhoc Committee learnt that under the sale agreement, the 20% Govt. stake in UCBL would convert to a 10% stake after UCBL and Stanbic banks have merged. The Government is free to offer its 10% shareholding for sale to the public. The conversion of 20% Government ownership in UCBL to 10% in the merged UCBL/Stanbic (U) Bank was based on equal value treatment of the two banks. Under the “merger of equals” approach, the 20% shareholding of Govt. in UCBL would convert to 10% in the combined entity. However, considering that the contributions ratio of the two banks to the merged entity was about 60% to 40% for UCBL and Stanbic Bank (U) respectively, the use of the “merger of equals” approach evidently gave a big concession in favour of Stanbic. UCBL is the largest bank in Uganda controlling more than 28% of total market deposits and can hardly be equal to Stanbic. 

7.6 The price per share will be higher in the merged bank, which is unfair to Ugandans. It would have been better for Ugandans if the shares were floated for sale before the two Banks are merged. The intent of Government as asserted in the Minister’s Statement of December 31, 2001 to Parliament was for Ugandans to acquire 20% of UCBL; as such, since Stanbic acquired 80% of UCBL shares at $19.55 million, then Ugandans should be entitled to acquire 20% of UCBL shares at $4.8875 million. Buying the shares after the merger as proposed in the sale agreement will result in Ugandans buying 10% of the merged bank at $8.9 million, which is unfair. However, the latest report by the Auditor General’s office mentions that Stanbic claims that there is currently “low absorptive capacity” for the 30% shares of Stanbic (U) Ltd. they have already offered for sale. Floating more shares (from the UCBL sale) would probably have the effect of lowering the average share price. The Adhoc Committee, however, does not agree that there is low absorptive capacity before stimulating the market through alternative means like advertising. An equitable deal for Ugandans, therefore, is for 20% of UCBL shares to be offered for sale at a total share value of $4.8875 million, before merger.
  
7.7 There were drafting inaccuracies in the sale agreement that need to be addressed between the contracting parties for the sale agreement to be a document that reflects a broad consensus of all concerned, including Parliament. The relevant paragraphs in the sale agreement include 2.2 (Purchase and sale of Assets and Liabilities – shs 9.278 billion not part of total purchase price), 6.6.2 (Indemnification of Property Title deficiencies – why bother with this after selling the bank as a going concern?) and 7.1.3 (No Prohibition clause – too sweeping and prevents legitimate action when necessary), among others. There were also anomalies in signing and authenticating the sale agreement and related documents like the “Deed of Cession and Assignment”. The Committee observed that these errors need to be corrected.

7.8 The value of excluded assets is also not yet resolved. The figures stated by the Deputy Governor BoU after he appeared before the Committee seem to conflict with those of Annex A of the sale agreement. For example, whereas Annex A to the sale agreement dated November 20, 2001 indicates the value of UCBL Nkrumah Road building as shs 2.080 billion and depreciation on the same as shs 520 million, the final agreement transferring excluded Assets and Liabilities to BoU dated February 20, 2002 states the value of the same property as shs 1.31 billion with depreciation of shs 158.575 million. It was not clear as to the cause of this wide variation in figures within a span of three months.
   
7.9 A major objective of UCBL resolution was to ensure that the entire branch network is maintained to assure citizens banking services around the country. However, the Adhoc Committee noted that the sale agreement only guarantees this for two years after which any branches deemed unviable by the buyer (Stanbic) may be closed or retained with BoU subsidy. The Committee therefore concluded that the problem of public subsidies to UCBL has not yet been solved, even after the bank is 100% privatised. Although a Govt. subsidy to a bank in which the Government has equity ownership may receive public empathy, a subsidy to a private bank with foreign majority shareholding will be extremely controversial. The Government must, therefore, immediately devise an alternative solution to the problem of providing banking services to areas of the country that are less attractive to private banks.   

8.0 Recommendations:

Based on the above analysis, the Adhoc Committee made the following recommendations:
8.1 Partnership in the Government system: 

8.1.1 The Committee recommends that while there must be separation of powers between the three arms of Govt. namely the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary as essential for democracy, the three must work in partnership and must show mutual respect for the good governance of the country and the benefit of all Ugandans. The disregarding of the resolutions of Parliament relating to the sale of UCBL by the executive arm of Government is, therefore, regrettable, deplorable and should be proscribed.

8.1.2 To remedy the problem of Parliamentary Resolutions not receiving the attention they deserve by way of direct implementation or otherwise, Parliament should enact a law that makes the resolutions of Parliament legally binding and enforceable.

8.2 Selling of Banks by BoU: The Financial Institutions Statute (1993), which is due for review, should be amended to address the lacuna existing in the law regarding powers of the Central Bank in resolving a previously insolvent bank that has regained solvency under statutory management.

8.3 Independence of the Central Bank: The independence of the Central Bank as enshrined in the Constitution and the Bank of Uganda Statute was misinterpreted and must be given correct interpretation. The independence of the Central Bank is principally focussed at monetary and fiscal policy, domestic price stability, and external equilibrium in balance of payments and cannot mean independence from public accountability. This should be given correct interpretation in the upcoming constitutional review. The Financial Institutions Statute (1993) should also be reviewed accordingly.

8.4 Maintenance of Branches: There is uncertainty regarding the fate of 52 upcountry UCBL branches. Forty-seven of those branches (almost the entire upcountry network), according to the sale agreement, will stay open for two years. Thereafter any branch may be closed if deemed unviable by the buyer (Stanbic) or maintained with a BoU subsidy. The Adhoc Committee observed that the risk of closure leans heavily on BoU or the public who may loose access to banking services. The sale agreement exonerates the buyers of any managerial inefficiency that may cause some branches to be unviable, thus needing closure. The Committee therefore recommends that all branches of UCBL at the time of sale should be maintained by the buyer and no compensation in form of subsidy should be paid to the buyer to keep such branches open, since UCBL was sold as a going concern and on “as is” basis. The sale agreement should be amended to reflect this. The rationale for this is that the object of selling UCBL to Stanbic at a give away price was, ostensibly, to get the bank into the hands of better managers whose exceptional competence would yield larger benefits into the entire economy in the medium and long term. Stanbic should therefore live up to this expectation.

8.5 Payments to the Consolidated Fund Account: There are payments arising from the sale of UCBL for which we recommend should immediately be remitted to the Government’s Consolidated Fund Account:

• The shs 8.5 billion transferred from UCBL to BoU as “excess liquidity” at closure of the sale. BoU is still holding it without reason.
• The $15.64 million (i.e. 80% of the $19.55 million) purchase price of UCBL;
• The 1.1 billion paid to BoU as Management costs for deferred closing;
• Dividends on 20% shareholding of the Government of Uganda in UCBL;
• Rent of $7000 per month for UCBL Nkrumah Rd. branch. 

8.6 Escrow Account Transactions: The $3.91 million deposited on the escrow account should be closely monitored and fully accounted for by BoU and the Auditor General should examine and audit the transactions and report to Parliament. Any balance of money on this account should be passed on to the Govt. Consolidated fund account. 

8.7 Liabilities due for payment: The following liabilities should be settled without delay to avoid the suffering of the affected persons as a result of the privatisation exercise:

Table 6:  Liabilities due for Payment:
• Redundancy payment to 500 UCBL employees so affected;
• Long Service award;					
• Unpaid due staff leave;	
• Gratuity awards for contract employees;	
8.8 Taxes on Consultancy Payments: The contracts with Consultants during the sale process contravened the tax laws of Uganda by exempting the consultants from paying taxes. The consultants being non-resident contractors or professionals were supposed to pay 15% of their earnings under Section 86 of the Income Tax Act. BoU should have deducted this amount of tax and remitted it to Uganda Revenue Authority. Consequently, BoU should be liable to pay the taxes due on the following payment and the officers who have caused this tax liability to BoU should be held responsible and Parliament should be informed of the action taken. 

Table 7: Amount BoU owes in Unpaid Taxes on Consultants

Consultant	
Amount paid by 
BoU ($)
15% Tax ($)
KPMG 	
506,738.27
76,010.74
WPA (Financial advisor)
1,491,397.87
223,709.68
Bingham Dana 	
525,000.00
78,750.00
Total	
2,523,136.14
378,470.42

The Adhoc Committee strongly recommends that Parliament, by resolution, tasks the URA to follow-up this matter and report to Parliament within 3 months.
8.9 Establish the actual value of excluded assets: The committee observed a wide variation in the value of excluded assets and their depreciation figures within a span of about three months (see par. 4.4.6 above). Parliament should by resolution task BoU to resolve differences in asset values and inform Parliament of the actual values of the excluded assets.

8.10 Sell excluded Assets: With regard to excluded assets spelt out in the sale agreement, they should be quickly liquidated through open public bidding and the funds realised banked on the consolidated fund account of Govt. 

8.11 Anti-Trust Law: UCBL has been the largest bank in Uganda controlling more than 28% of the total market deposits. To avoid the merged UCBL/Stanbic creating a monopoly and introducing inefficiency in the banking system, Anti-Trust Law should be enacted immediately.

8.12 Offer 20% UCBL Shares for Sale before merger: The intent of Government as asserted in the Minister’s Statement of December 31, 2001 to Parliament was for Ugandans to acquire 20% of UCBL; as such, since Stanbic acquired 80% of UCBL at $19.55 million, then Ugandans should be entitled to acquire 20% of UCBL at $4.8875 million. Buying after the merger as proposed in the sale agreement will result in Ugandans buying 10% of the merged bank at $8.9 million, which is unfair. Consequently, the Adhoc Committee recommends that the 20% shares should first be purchased through the stock exchange before merger and the new owners should be party to the UCBL/Stanbic merger process. 

8.13 Parliament’s Displeasure: The Committee wishes to request Parliament to resolve as follows: that Parliament expresses displeasure with the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development and the Governor Bank of Uganda for:

• Disregarding the PERD Statute and the resolutions of Parliament and insisting on selling a solvent bank under the FIS (1993) instead of through the PERD Statute (1993);

• Entering into a sales agreement of this magnitude without fully involving the Attorney General as required by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

• Recruiting Consultants and headhunting for bidders without competitive bidding, which undermined transparency in the entire process and value for money for such high cost Consultancy services;

• Avoiding responsibility by leaving the negotiating process almost entirely in the hands of foreign consultants, who prepared bid documents, sourced buyers and negotiated the final purchase price of such a national strategic institution.

• Selling 80% of UCBL to Standard Bank Investment Corporation at a give-away price, without a reserve price. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson.

MR JOHN ERESU: Mr Speaker, the report submitted by the Chairman of the Committee on Finance reveals many big issues. Some of these issues include the actual sale, the transfers and the signatures involved. They also include a motion by hon. Mafabi, as in Annex 2, and the taxes that should have been paid but have not been paid. My crude calculation is that about Shs 1.5 billion, which should have been paid to Uganda Revenue Authority, was not paid.  

In light of all this, Mr Speaker, I move on a point of procedure that before we debate this report, the Minister of Finance should first give us his response to what the report has pointed out. That way, members will have a clear picture of how to proceed. We shall have heard the minister’s position, and also the report before us.

Secondly, I request you to give us time to reflect on some of these things tonight so that tomorrow we can debate the report accordingly, after the minister has given us his position. I thank you. 

MR MWANDHA: I think that in the process of summarising the report, our chairman - I am a member of the Committee - omitted a number of things. One of them concerns the building housing the headquarters of Uganda Commercial Bank. When the bidders put in their bid, they excluded the headquarters building. Later on, for reasons which were unclear to the Committee, the building was included in the sale agreement but at the same price as was quoted before including the building. 

The Committee concluded that this was a gift given by Government to the bidders. I think that element was omitted. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We had better dispose of the procedural point raised by hon. Eresu, first. He said that before some of us who were not part of the Committee debate this report, we better hear the side of the minister in charge of this sector. That way, when we start the debate, we will have the two sides to this, and we shall be able to comment on the views expressed. I think that is okay. So, let us get his side and then start the debate. Any other point?

DR OKULO EPAK: No, that is the exact point I want to support.

THE SPEAKER: Okay then, that is how we shall proceed.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, another point of procedure. I would like to hear from the Attorney General whether contracts which are entered into without his consent, bind this Government. We should get this on record from the Attorney General.

THE SPEAKER: That should also be answered. Let us proceed this way: I invite the Minister of Finance to respond first.

HON. MEMBERS:  Tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow? Okay. In view of the fact that he has a written report and members want to read it, we shall continue tomorrow. He shall also present a summary tomorrow, and when he does, he will be reading something that you at least have an idea about. I think this brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gerald Ssendaula): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. My response in writing has been passed on to the Clerk to Parliament for multiplication of copies. I do not know how fast he will be able to have these ready. But in any case, we handed it over to him this afternoon. So, by tomorrow, everybody will have a copy. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.13 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 19 February 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)



