Wednesday, 11 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. One point I want to inform you about is that in future when you get the Order Paper there will be time allocated to each business item. We are not going to have open debates on subjects; we will be giving out the hours and days to dedicate to each item. That is how we are going to deal with the time management of our business. 

I also want to say again that you are expected to be here on time to transact business because if Parliament fails to carry out its business then we may be accused of causing financial loss. Since we do not want to be accused of that, I appeal to you to be on time so that we transact business. I thank you.

2.42
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala):  Mr Speaker, since I came to Parliament one thing I have observed is that some Members of Parliament are allotted a lot of time when they are deliberating and submitting on the Floor of Parliament, and for some of us the time we begin, even when we are still on the preamble the bell rings. I do not know what criteria you use, or what methodology they use; some of these old members we found here. 

According to your deliberations, how you are going to manage this? Are we going to be equal this time?

THE SPEAKER: Well, you may have a point. I do not have facts but we have decided that we will be agreeing on the time to be allotted to a member depending on the subject before us. We are going to have watches on the sides where it will be indicated that you are given ten minutes and when you start your contribution you will see the minutes ticking away - one minute, two minutes, three minutes, for example. So, at the end of the day it is the time that will shut you up, not the presiding officer. Very soon you will see these changes. This is in pursuit of time management -(Mr Mwandha rose)_ but limit your contribution to my communication.

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Strictly within your communication, Mr Speaker, and knowing that we are talking about time and that the Prime Minister has always promised this House that the time will be found for members’ questions to be answered; and knowing that those promises have not been fulfilled, we have very many questions. 

I for one have questions languishing in the office of the clerk; maybe some of them have outlived their usefulness. Each time we raise this matter the Prime Minister comes and promises he is going to make sure that the Ministers answer the questions. Sir, we are going to be serious about time because the rules are very clear. They say that once a question has been put in, it must be answered within 14 days. I have questions, which have not been answered for over a year. What advice do you give this House in view of the fact that the Prime Minister has not fulfilled the promises that he has made to this House for a very long time, Mr Speaker?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I am very proud of the Front Bench. They have always answered your questions and we are willing to answer your questions until midnight. But if the matter is not put on the Order Paper, what do you expect us to do? I am very proud of the Front Bench.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, this is to do with time management. I do recognise that we are likely to end this session in another two, hardly three months. So, in order to really utilise the limited period we have I think it would be good for you to have all the outstanding business listed. 

Secondly, all the expected business indicated by the Government should be put on programme and you stick to that programme. And the debate on election violence is one of the matters that were not concluded last time. So, I would really be pleased if the Business Committee could sit down and see what is outstanding and what should be handled among the legislation allocated to it. Some of them are very formal legislation, like the refugee law.  These ones are non-controversial things, they just go and we wait for the most important things like the constitutional amendment, which we shall spend more time on.

On the issue of questions for oral answer, I want to support my honourable colleague that questions have stayed for over a year. I have two or three questions, which have remained unanswered, like the one on police and welfare. 

I asked a question on school fees last year and I was also advised to contact Social Services Committee. The situation is getting worse, Mr Speaker, as I speak now the school fees I think is for the rich in this country and I do not know whether this is the policy of the Government. All the schools are now charging over half a million Shillings for primary and secondary schools and I do not know where we are going. This is something, which the Government must come out and tell us about. Some schools build every year, and charge development fund, and schools that were built by this government and the country over 100 years ago are still charging exorbitant school fees. Where are we going? 

These are areas on which the Government and this House must come out very clearly. Research must be carried out by the Social Services Committee on this issue of school fees, and the questions about it answered.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, concerning the business, actually a draft list of the pending business is on my table. And even the proposed allocation of time of dealing with each of the business items is also there. Soon you will get copies of the list of pending business. 

As for the questions, it is important that they are answered. But we are also changing the policy formulation of questions because in the past you would have a two-page question. A question should not be two pages. It should be just two sentences and then an answer will be brief. 

As I said, we want to have about ten or 12 questions answered in an hour. So, whoever has now a question to ask, you write your story as you want it, as a kind of inquiry, and send it to the clerk. We now have a mechanism of assisting members to just have very brief questions so that they can be answered. The Minister should not read stories; he should also be brief in answering the question. We will be able to clear the backlog. I regret that a number of questions have been pending for quite some time, but let us proceed with our agenda.

LAYING OF PAPERS
CERTIFICATES OF FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS

2.49
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am laying on the Table two certificates. One is in connection with the Referendum and Other Provisions Bill, 2003 and another one in relation to the Domestic Relations Bill, 2003. These two certificates had been already sent to the Clerk to Parliament, but that was during recess time, on 22 December 2002. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committees take up these certificates, study them and make a report on the relevant Bills.  

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 1998

2.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Dr Okulo Epak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We managed to photocopy the first five pages of the report, which is introduction or summary, which is now available to honourable members. 

The report of the Public Accounts Committee consists of two parts: this summary and the minutes of discussion of each department’s audit comments, and we expect members to read both and ask questions or seek clarifications even on the minutes. Now that they cannot get the entire report, they will only benefit from the summary and that is the most unfortunate aspect of it. However, Mr Speaker, I have the honour to present the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Public Accounts of the Government of Uganda for the financial year ended 30 June 1998.

Introduction:

By the time of the Sixth Parliament 1996/2000, Parliament was behind in reviewing reports of the Auditor General from the 1994/1995 accounts. Therefore, the Public Accounts Committee of the Sixth Parliament reviewed, with the accounting officers, reports submitted by the Auditor General on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda since 1994/1995 financial years.  

The committee then published five main reports and one special report on SWIPCO, all of which contain its findings and recommendations arising from the Auditor General’s investigations.  

This report is another work of that committee, which it carried out on the appropriation of sums of money granted by the Sixth Parliament to meet the public expenditure for the financial year ended 30 June 1998. This was done in accordance with rule 123 of our Rules of Procedure.

Summary of the common problems encountered by the committee in its investigations:

During the four years (1996 to 2000) of its work, the Public Accounts Committee identified some common factors, which contributed to poor financial management and led to loss of funds.  The committee hereby reports a summary of these to the House.  The details of the deliberations between the committee and the accounting officers are recorded as minutes and attached as annex to this report.  

Accounting Officers:

The committee found out that some accounting officers are wanting in areas of financial management and, therefore, could not detect fishy payments brought to them for their signatures. Others were simply careless or negligent and failed to critically study what their accountants did, leaving the latter to handle funds as they wished.

Accountants/Treasury Matters:

Mr Speaker, very few university graduates or professional accountants are employed to manage the accounting departments of government. There is both shortage and low qualifications of the accounting staff. Most of the senior staff originally joined the service as clerks and have climbed the ladder with no professional qualification in accounts. This has resulted in serious weakness in records keeping and failure to comply with the accounting regulations both in the Treasury and in the ministries/departments. 

It is very unfortunate, even in the Treasury, and it is worth noting. They constitute the basic staffing of government accounts departments. There is an urgent need to uplift the skills of the existing staff through training, to recruit professional staff, and to fill existing vacancies.  

There are many examples that illustrate problems associated with staff deficiencies and shortage:
Advances made to officers for official purposes are not accounted for. During the financial year under review alone, a total of Shs 436,850,510 was not accounted for in eight ministries/departments, contrary to the requirements as reported by the Auditor General.

Unauthorized expenditure, payments unsupported by documents were made and in the financial year under review alone they totalled Shs 5,348,538,355 and covered 10 ministries/ departments.

Financial statements submitted by the Treasury together with related books of accounts were still in arrears; no bank reconciliation statements, and there were lots of incorrect issues or expenditures.

The actual issues (releases) also did not correspond to actual expenditure.  

The committee noted that the Auditor General has exposed serious weaknesses and shortcomings in the performance of the Treasury with regard to its financial management and role under the Constitution, Public Finance Act and Treasury Financial Regulations. This is a very serious remark about an office charged with managing the finances of this country.

Weak Support Systems:

The committee held the view that some weakness would have been checked to safeguard public funds if the existing system of investigations and sanctions were functioning properly.

The investigative institutions such as the IGG, the Auditor General, and the CID are either too thin on the ground or institutionally not facilitated enough. As a result they are unable to promptly check the mismanagement of the public funds as soon as they occur. The courts cannot fulfill their roles properly if these investigative institutions cannot perform their own roles effectively.

Similarly, institutions such as the Central Tender Board are also ineffective due to poor methods of work.

The committee has, at its service, a CID PAC squad, which it directed to investigate some of the cases of mismanagement and in some instances the culprits have been charged in courts of law. However, the CID is not facilitated with adequate resources to enable them assemble evidence expeditiously especially where much money is involved. Sometimes the interdiction of the suspects is lifted for lack of prosecution of the cases.

The committee considered this to be one of the most serious reasons why most of the cases are dismissed for lack of enough evidence.

Project Funds:

The project funds had been targets for embezzlement and the committee came to the conclusion that the local culprits handling such projects are aided or abetted by officials of the foreign/international governments/institutions, which fund such projects. Accounting officers must take keen interest in the running of projects.

Lack of Compliance:

Submission of Treasury Memoranda:

Mr Speaker, seven years into the establishment of the Public Accounts Committee in the National Resistance Council 1988-1996 and four years since the establishment of the Public Accounts Committee of the Sixth Parliament, the Treasury had failed to issue any Treasury Memoranda on the reports of the Public Accounts Committee. 

The importance of a Treasury Memorandum is that it completes the process of accountability. Without it, therefore, the work of the Public Accounts Committee remains frustrated and this is unacceptable. It is in the Treasury Memorandum that government undertakes to implement recommendations of PAC and thereafter the Committee on Government Assurances would ensure that these undertakings are implemented.

The committee, therefore, recommends to this House that the Ministry of Finance pays more attention to the committee’s recommendation in its report especially after they are passed by the House. The Ministry of Finance should issue a Treasury Memorandum covering all the issues raised in the various reports so far made by the committee.

Audit of Classified Expenditure:

The Auditor General reported that during the financial year under review, classified expenditure to the tune of Shs 28,136,576,228 was not audited by his office, as it had become the practice for classified expenditure, contrary to Article 163(3) of the Constitution.

The committee, however, reports that government has accepted to resolve this issue. The committee is happy to report to the House that auditing of this expenditure was already in process by the Auditor General. This is a step in the right direction but the committee insists that the various departments concerned should be co-operative and assist the auditors other than frustrating and failing them. The Auditor General has special staff to handle this type of expenditure.  

Domestic Arrears:

Mr Speaker, the Auditor General reported that since 1995/96, domestic arrears, which totaled Shs 62,191,642,883 affecting various ministries/ departments was settled by government to the tune of Shs 37.4 billion only.

This kind of expenditure falls outside appropriations by Parliament and is, therefore, unauthorized and unconstitutional.  

The Ministry of Finance issued a circular during the 1997/98 Financial Year to all accounting officers, stopping them from incurring further domestic arrears. A test check during the financial year under review, however, revealed that on top of the unpaid bills for the previous years, various ministries/departments incurred further domestic arrears totaling to Shs 59,373, 554,851.  

The accounting officers, during our meetings with them, have often blamed the Ministry of Finance for constantly reducing their budgets and monthly releases to unrealistic levels. 

The committee notes that this is partly true, but also agrees with the report of the Auditor General that some of the arrears are caused by financial indiscipline and personal motives on the part of the accounting officers.  

The committee observed that maintaining these domestic arrears unpaid is an act of borrowing by government from the public without interest and without approval by Parliament. Besides, it is harmful to the private sector. Government should urgently settle these domestic arrears otherwise they should attract interest at commercial rates.  

The committee also directed the Ministry of Finance to ensure that accounting officers do not commit government when there is no money in their budgets.

Outstanding Advances:

A number of ministries have continued to spend money without accounting for it. In this financial year alone Shs 436,850,510 was not accounted for by the Office of the President; Shs 12,625,000 by Ministry of Defence; Shs 70,466,640 by Mulago Hospital and Shs 6,720,000 by the Ministry of Agriculture.  

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to make a clarification to the chairperson. The figure that you read for the President’s Office is the total figure. Then the figures that are following are the breakdown.

DR OKULO EPAK:  I thought the statement was very clear. It says a number of ministries have continued to spend money without accounting for it. In this financial year alone, Shs 436,850,510 was not accounted for by the Office of the President. This is English –(Interjection)- Pardon? Which document do you have? Is it different from mine?

MR SABIITI: There was a typing error, Mr Speaker.  The Shs 436,850,510 is the overall total. But there was a mistake; there should have been a full stop. Was it not accounted for? Then you say President’s Office; it is Shs 12,000,000. 

THE SPEAKER: It is clear now.

DR OKULO EPAK: To read it for you clearly, in this financial year alone a total of Shs 436,850,510 was not accounted for. The Office of the President did not account for Shs 12,625,000; Ministry of Defence, Shs 70,466,640; Mulago Hospital, Shs 6,720,000; Ministry of Agriculture, Shs 57,726,100; Ministry of Public Service, Shs 2,242,003; Ministry of Labour, Shs 5,000,000; Electoral Commission, Shs 268,480,000 and Mbarara University, Shs 13,590,470.  

Whereas some of the accounting officers managed to bring documents of accountability to the committee, a number also failed completely to make their accountability. In both circumstances the committee is of the view that late accountability is unacceptable since one cannot rule out the manufacturing of accounting documents.

Accounting officers are directed to account for all the public funds under their disposal within the financial year concerned. The advances, which are not accounted for, are to be recovered from the responsible persons including the accounting officers.

Losses:

During the financial year under review, losses amounting to a total of Shs 328,731,398 were either reported by ministries/departments or discovered by the Auditor General during audit. The Ministries involved were Butabika Hospital – for drugs worth Shs 9,174,910; Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development (HDPE pipes) Shs 9,500,000; another type for pipes for the same institution was worth Shs 500,000 and tyres of unknown value.

Electoral Commission vehicles worth Shs 56,000,000; Ministry of Agriculture cash worth Shs 9,904,000 and store Local Purchase Orders (LPOs) of unknown value; Ministry of Works cash of Shs 23,000,000; Ministry of Trade and Industry (store funds) Shs 70,000; and Ministry of Defence on smart money card Shs 121,035,852; Bank of Uganda cheques worth Shs 2,002,576 and cash worth Shs 97,544,060.

The amounts involved in these losses are high and the committee recommended that the Ministry of Finance should institute more serious mechanisms of control or else hold the offending officials responsible. As of now it appears some of these losses are just reported and no further interest is shown and no follow up action is made. The committee noted that most of these losses were either caused by negligence of some public officers or lack of strong systems in place.

The committee further noted that it is unreasonable to treat the funds, which were closed in the International Credit Bank to the tune of Shs 121,035,853 deposited in the smart money card scheme, as losses. The committee noted that since depositors in this bank were being paid by the Bank of Uganda, these deposits should be treated in the same manner. 

The committee is of the view that public servants who cause losses to the Government should be made to make good such losses in addition to sentences that would be administered by the court. The committee will bring up this proposal in the new Public Funds Finance Bill that is about to be presented to the House.

Unauthorized Expenditure:

Accounts of the following ministries showed unauthorized vote expenditure in Appropriation-in-Aid totalling to Shs 5,358,759,855. The Ministries affected, without wasting time of reading the details, are: Public Service, Foreign Affairs, Works, Information, Defence, Internal Affairs, Mulago Hospital, Makerere University, Gender and Community Development and Mbarara University with the figures for each ministry shown in the total column. 

This type of expenditure is made outside the approval of Parliament. The committee warns the accounting officers against usurping the powers of Parliament and spending money outside the budget. The committee directs the Secretary to the Treasurer to take disciplinary measures against accounting officers who breached that financial regulation.

Un-vouched or incompletely vouched expenditure:

Examination of documents in the ministries or departments reveal that a total of Shs 29,600,669 was either un-vouched or was incompletely vouched and affected the following ministries:

Office of the President – Shs 4,146,000
State House – Shs 17,306,911
Public Service – Shs 5,608,616
Information – Shs 2,509,142

Whereas those ministries or departments have since made much improvement in these areas, it is surprising that the Office of the President and State House should actually set examples for other ministries still involved in poor record keeping. The committee directs all accounting officers to have competent accountants to man their accounts departments and to avoid such occurrences. 

Reports by departments as recorded in the report of the Auditor General:

Mr Speaker, with the above summary of the state of affairs of the public expenditure for the period ending 30 June 1998, permit me to refer members to the minutes of the individual ministries and departments as attached to the report. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House now debates this report plus the minutes of the meetings attached to it. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, chairperson of the committee for the report.

3.19
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. In your report you referred to certain minutes that are supposed to be attached. At least on the report that I have, they are not there. 

Then, you have made a very clear and precise accounting position within government, but what your report does not do is to tell us what we should do, because for me everything is clear. What I expected was for you to tell us that this is what we want Parliament to do. What recommendations did you come up with, because what we should be debating is whether we support those recommendations or not. I thank you.

3.20
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, I seek clarification from the chairman of the committee with respect to page 5 of the report where he gives a table under item 4116 – Unauthorised Expenditure. He stated that Shs 5,358,759,855 was the total amount of money that was spent as unauthorised expenditure. But then when you go to the table below, the summary of the grand total is 5,348 giving a variance from 5,358. The figures therefore, are not the same. May I know whether this is a typing error or there is some discrepancy in the addition of those figures?

3.21
MR AKISOFERI OGOLA (West Budama  South, Tororo): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the Floor. I would like clarification on the question of domestic arrears. Quite a big sum of money is indicated as part of the domestic arrears. I know that pensioners in this country have been screaming, begging the Government to pay them the arrears outstanding. May I know whether the Public Accounts Committee can separate this domestic arrears and give us how much of it, for instance, belongs to the pensioners?

The pensioners are in trouble; most of them are getting old, including yours sincerely speaking now. The Government owes us money, for ten years the upgraded pensions have not been paid; they said they are going to pay for those who are about to die, that is, those of 71 years and above. I do not know how they come to know that when you are 71 you die before the one of 69. But, Sir, this is a serious matter and, therefore, before I dwell more on this question, is it possible to know how much of the domestic arrears is to go to pensions? 

I also know that some time back, I think from around 1996, the ex-soldiers and the retired Police officers are all under the charge of the Public Service Ministry. Some of these ex-soldiers were asked around 1992 to register. We took some of them all the way to Bombo, they registered for their pensions and to this day things are quiet. When we go to rural areas they ask us when they should expect to be paid. Some of them can hardly walk now. May I know how to handle this matter especially with regard to matters of the pension?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.23
MR NYOMBI THEMBO (Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the Floor. On page 3, I seek clarification on 1.4.3, the first paragraph. I do not know whether it is a contradiction or there is some missing information. I quote the second sentence; “These kind of expenditures fall outside appropriation of Parliament and they are, therefore, unauthorised and unconstitutional.”  

Then the second last paragraph of the last sentence says; “Government should urgently settle these domestic arrears, otherwise they should attract interest at commercial rate.” I wonder whether it is a contradiction after saying that they are unauthorised and unconstitutional, then immediately we recommend that government should urgently pay. I do not know whether there is missing information or it is a contradiction. 

On page 4, Mr Speaker, I want to make a simple observation and to get clarification. In public sector accounting, do we not consider the issue of materiality, because when we start reporting on Shs 70,000 – when I say Shs 70,000 I have seen somewhere one thousand something, is that material to be reported to Parliament? Yes, why am I saying this? Because, the question of materiality means that you do not put time on small things to be detracted from bigger things, because every transaction that you look at takes time. I just wanted a clarification because in the private sector accounting, this concept is very important. Thank you.

3.25
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the Public Accounts Committee for a very clear report and recommendations made therein. The Ministry of Finance is charged with the resources of this country and indeed it should keep a very close eye on accounting officers. I did not, however, see any recommendation from the committee as to what this House should do about the Ministry of Finance for failure to come up with Treasury Memoranda on the reports of the Public Accounts Committee that have been made time and again. 

What moral authority does the Ministry of Finance have to discipline accounting officers when it cannot discipline itself to be able to complete the audit exercise?  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for raising this matter. I want to inform this House that for all Public Accounts Committee reports that have been made we have prepared Treasury Memoranda and I have them. But there is an appropriate time when they are to be laid on the Table and that appropriate time has not yet come. I have, for example, a copy for 1998, the one that is being discussed and I will lay it on the Table at the appropriate time.  

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI: When is the appropriate time, Mr Speaker?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, my understanding of the procedure is this: what has been presented is a report by a committee of this House on what it has found. After this House has made pronouncements or has debated this report, they will now cause or request us, the Government, to make a response to those issues. Those responses are made first in writing and this is the Treasury Memorandum, and then I will make additional speaking notes. That is the procedure, as I understand it, Sir.

MR WAGONDA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate that the Minister has done his duty to come up with Treasury Memoranda on the reports of the Public Accounts Committee, but the issue is not keeping them in his office. Those memoranda are supposed to be presented to this House for debate. Indeed, I am not being so unfair as to ask him for the memorandum on the current report being debated. The committee noted that even on previous reports, no Treasury Memoranda had been made, and that would have enriched the debate of this House.  

Mr Speaker, I am also aware that about the year 1994, the Ministry of Finance set up an Internal Audit Department. The import of this department was to minimize losses and irregularities in ministries by posting internal auditors to every ministry. However, the impact of that department does not seem to be realised, according to the findings of the Committee on Public Accounts.

Mr Speaker, as leaders, we owe our people explanations when certain things cannot be done in time. The issue of accumulation of domestic arrears is a very sad matter indeed. These arrears are partly made up of rent owed to landlords for office accommodation occupied by government. I do not know where the Government got the idea that it is cheaper to rent office accommodation than to construct it.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, my colleague and thank you, Mr Speaker. You recall there is a house called Okello House. The rent, which has been paid to-date, is equal to three big buildings. And Okello had wanted to sell that house to government but the Government was not interested. There should be a reason why they were not interested. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you for that information. Actually I am very much aware of the Okello House deal, and what is known is that even where countries have liberalized, governments do not cease to own property. So, there is really no justifiable excuse why government cannot build its own offices and stop the accumulation of domestic arrears owed to landlords.

Finally, I would like to comment on the issue of lack of qualified accountants. This is a recurrent matter. Virtually every report of the Auditor General mentions the lack of qualified accountants and yet every year we churn out qualified accountants. What is the problem? Why could the Government not employ accountants who are on the streets?  

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the information I want to give is that the Auditor General is one of the anti-corruption agencies, and one of the reasons these agencies cannot do away with corruption is their total incapacity in terms of almost everything: skilled personnel, modern equipment, all these kinds of things. Poor remuneration is the main reason that these offices, call it Solicitor General’s Chambers, Attorney General’s Chambers, IGG, Integrity - I do not know how many officers he has now. 

In all these offices, the people just go away. You recruit them, train them, but they just go away to greener pastures because the salary they get is simply not enough to make them resent corruption. That is what is happening.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you very much my colleague, for enriching the debate. 

The Government commissioned a job evaluation exercise, which was supposed to take care of the anomalies in remunerating technical staff like accountants. You find the highest accountant in a ministry is of the level of principal accountant and his pay is just about half a million shillings when the fellow is handling billions of shillings! How do you expect the fellow to be able to shoulder all the risks of handling such heavy assets and expect to do away with corruption? 

Definitely while government moves into selective enhancement of payment, the accountants in ministries should also be considered for selective enhancement of their remuneration in order to boost their morale. Then you can expect from them very good performance in the maintenance of government accounts. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.35
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for presenting such a report that has comprehensively covered this exercise. 

Let me amplify the point of domestic arrears. The issue of domestic arrears has actually pushed many people out of business. If you look at the amount of these domestic arrears, it is mostly the business people who have been supplying government departments and as a result they have gone out of business. I know many people whose property has been auctioned when they had got the goods on credit. So, this issue should actually be looked into by the Government to save the situation.  

Mr Speaker, in most of the recommendations, the committee is giving directives to the institutions that handle such losses, like the Secretary to the Treasury. But the clarification I would like to get from the chairman is, which mechanism is there to ensure that the directives are going to be complied with? Because, you find that there are losses, theft, robbery, it is overwhelming. So, which mechanism is there to ensure that these directives will be complied with?  

Mr Speaker, it is overwhelming that a lot of businesses in government departments have gone amiss. I think the departments concerned like the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity and others should ensure that these kinds of losses should actually be sealed. Because in some departments like the Electoral Commission you report loss of vehicles worth Shs 56 million; how do you get a loss of a vehicle? Was it theft?  

On page 4 under 1.4.5 – Losses, they say, “Vehicles worth Shs 56 million,” what kind of loss is this? Was it theft? Did somebody take the car and never bring it back? We need to be clarified about these issues so that we know how the public funds are being spent. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the chairman for the good report. But one of the big problems we have got with our external auditors is that they are housed with the people they audit. If you are housed with the person you are auditing, most likely you are compromised. What do I mean? You get an external auditor for the Ministry of Education who is permanently there for five years and he becomes an employee of the Ministry of Education. At the end of it the report he produces is a compromised report. 

I suggest that the external auditors should stop being housed in the Ministry or the departments they audit, this will reduce the compromise. This also applies to the districts; it applies to all the departments.

Mr Speaker, I saw the Minister of Finance walking in with the document he was trying to lay on the Table. We would be happy if he laid that document on the Table because it might be one of the memoranda answering these questions.

We have discovered that the richest persons are the external auditors. Hon. Matembe said they are paid about Shs 300,000 or some little money around that figure, but they are the richest because they are auditing the people who are wrong; the wrong ones pay them for the service. In fact we would prefer that as soon as the Public Accounts Committee gets the report from the Auditor General, we should only authorise the Auditor General to drop a query. But the Auditor General should not drop a query then he comes and reports that we have dropped this query.

On the document submitted from the Auditor General on page 9, it says, “Uganda Revenue Authority transferred Shs 771 billion whereas the Treasury Department acknowledged Shs 769 billion,” giving a difference of about Shs 2 billion. If Uganda Revenue Authority transferred that money, where did the Shs 2 billion disappear to? Was there connivance between URA and the Treasury or the money disappeared between whichever bank to Bank of Uganda? I would have been happy if PAC had told us where the Shs 2 billion went –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: I notice that the honourable member is using a different report – the one for the year 2000. We are debating the report for the year 1998. Although there are mistakes even in the report, we are debating 1998.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not lack eyes. This is the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda, which was submitted to you. I am referring both to your document and the accounts, which were submitted to you, for the year ending 30 June 1998. I am referring to the documents they gave you and the one you have; page 7, do you have it? You need both of your documents, Sir. You need this and the one you have -(Interjection)– I am sorry, I apologise, Mr Speaker, I am going to address the Chair. So, if you never saw it as you were auditing, I think that is a big error, which needs to be looked at.  

On the same page, there is an unaccounted for Shs 108 billion; this is how it arises. They say the cashbook had a bank overdraft of Shs 563 billion – I will not count the other figures – but the bank statement had an overdraft of Shs 671 billion. There was no bank reconciliation to ascertain the cause of the difference of Shs 108 billion. I am certain that as a Committee on Public Accounts, you should have taken an interest in this Shs 108 billion. This is a serious figure, and how can it arise? 

Finance officials can collude with the banks and decide to understate one account and have all funds moved out. It is a serious omission, which you never looked at.  

Pay As You Earn (PAYE) in Uganda Revenue Authority - we all pay PAYE but URA has never given us receipts for PAYE for purposes of accounting. Because, if I pay my tax, I am entitled to a receipt, but URA does not do it. This is a place open to fraud because nobody will come and demand for a receipt. I think the Public Accounts Committee should have questioned that, because you are talking of PAYE transferred but corresponding receipts are missing.  

Mr Speaker, on illegal loans – the same document, an officer in the President’s Office, on page 11, went and got US $200,000. He convinced a bank manager and borrowed US $200,000. The man never paid and they sued the Attorney General and charged the Attorney General an additional US $104,000 plus costs of Shs 12,880,000 and even demanding an additional balance outstanding of Shs 157,000,000. I would have preferred the committee to come up with a stringent recommendation on this matter –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Could the honourable member first have a look at the document he is referring to? When he is referring to say, State House, he should tell us which page and which number, whether it is 5.1, 5.2, so that we follow it. It appears he has a wrong document.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the document I am following is the one, which was presented to you where you made your recommendations, unless you are telling us you do not want to consider this one.  

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, we are not presenting the Auditor General’s report here. This House referred the report to the Public Accounts Committee and the committee is reporting on how it dealt with it.  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much. That is how you dealt with it, but this is a serious matter. If you never dealt with it, I think it is wrong. An officer to go to the bank to get money –(Interruption)  

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I do not know the basis for the honourable member’s allegation that we never dealt with it, because in this report, I said we have two sections. There is a summary, which we read here, and then the minutes of discussions on individual departmental accounts - that is what he is referring to. If he gets hold of this report he will find how the questions he is raising had been dealt with under that ministry and subject. But it would be impossible for the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee to read the summary plus the minutes. It would require almost three days’ reading. 

So, I beg the honourable member to use the report of Public Accounts Committee not the report of the Auditor General; or to read the report of the Auditor General and refer to the report of the Public Accounts Committee on how it dealt with that issue. I beg that he approaches it in that way. Thank you.  

MR MWANDHA: I think the way this report appears - for instance if you look on page 1, 1.1.2, in (i) you have advances to officers for official purchases not accounted for. Under (ii), you see unauthorized expenditure; (iv) you see actual issues, that is to say, releases not corresponding with expenditure. I expected the committee to tell us those officers who were responsible for this and what actions have been taken. 

If you simply say that such and such happened and you do not indicate that something happened to the person responsible, then we are lost. We do not know whether we should commission a new investigation so that these officers who were responsible for these losses should be apprehended and prosecuted. So, it does not really help us.

And the same could happen, as under page 4.  When you enumerate all these losses, which occurred, and do not indicate the people responsible and what actions have been taken against them, it does not help this Parliament. There is need for even naming and shaming the people concerned. I know from the law that a public officer is accountable for his actions even when he has left. If we do not expose them, what do you expect? 

You see, the way the report is given indicates that we have to commission another inquiry to find out the culprits and maybe find ways of how this can be handled. So, in a way I want to agree that if the Auditor General mentioned specific areas of loss and even officers by office or by name, I think the committee should have helped Parliament to say, “Look, actions were taken on these people” or no action was taken. We recognize that action should be taken and where necessary they should be naming and shaming. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to look at page 2 of the report? When you look at page 2 of the report under the heading, “Weak Support Systems,” the committee had its services – a CID PAC squad. Do you not think that the committee was using this particular one to pursue the people who were involved in this matter and that is the action they took?

MR MWANDHA: If you read the rest of the page, they say, “However, the CID are not facilitated with adequate resources to enable them to assemble evidence expeditiously especially where such money is involved, etcetera,” which means that it is only in a few cases where this was done. I think that in the cases where no CID investigation took place, Parliament should advise as to what further action we should take. By the way, the Auditor General expects us to help him to close in on those people who have been responsible for these malpractices.

THE SPEAKER: No, but would you expect all the details of cases handled by CID? He is only expressing that they have a problem; that they are not facilitated. But I think this report - CID being there, it means they are working but it cannot list down all the cases the CID has handled. This is the action, which I gather from the report, that the committee was conscious of its responsibility to pursue people who have mismanaged the funds.

MR MWANDHA: We have heard in this House, specific cases have been mentioned. Why could the committee not mention those successful stories where CID was able to apprehend some people and prosecute them?

DR OKULO EPAK: I would like to assist the honourable member. You do not have the full report to begin with. Details of persons and what was recommended to be done to them are in the minutes and they are dealt with under each department. They are in the minutes; this is a summary just telling you what happened and the problems faced. If you want details of that nature you have to, and I said so earlier, read this summary in conjunction with the minutes. That is where you will find all the names and the actions that were recommended to be taken against them.  

Honourable members, the Auditor General’s report comes here in this size; even as it comes it does not have all the details. When we quiz the accounting officers we get more details. If you want us to give you all those details, we will have a volume bigger than even that of the Auditor General.  

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, some clarification.

THE SPEAKER: But has the point not been made?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: You see, Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that the members do not have the reports, which were given to them, and they have got a summary of the report. I would take a case in point, which has been raised by hon. Nandala Mafabi about some funds, which were transferred from URA.  In the report it is clear because the accounting officers explained that they had not captured - I could maybe read it here. 

The Auditor General’s report, page 35 says: “Accounts submitted by the Treasury - the revenue unaccounted for. According to Uganda Revenue Authority final accounts, Uganda Shs 771,532,058,239 was transferred to the Consolidated Fund as at 30 June 1998. However, Treasury acknowledged only Uganda Shs 769,657,719,561, the balance of Uganda Shs 1.8 billion was not explained.” 

The report says, “The accounting officer in his submission explained that URA banking as at 30 June every year was higher than what was received in the Consolidated Fund. He said that there was usually cash in transit that would always be captured by URA, but had not yet been banked on the Consolidated Fund. He further reported that the records had been passed on to the Auditor General for verification and a new system, where cash in transit was taken care of, was being introduced.”  

What we were given here, what has been photocopied does not include the details of everything reported by PAC. So, I think if we had debated this report with all the documents, the minutes and the Auditor General’s report, we would follow better because this summary we have without the minutes, it is so thin. We cannot follow. Otherwise, we would blame PAC and the committee chairperson when actually they did their work and it is in the minutes. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS MATEMBE: In view of what is going on, I am rising to seek clarification. It is my view that when the Auditor General submits the report to this House, he is finding so many things, so many losses here and there. Like it is said on page 2, where there are so many losses talked about here briefly. And this report was submitted to the committee, the committee studied it and interviewed the necessary people, and they came to testify as to what happened. 

For instance, what hon. Banyenzaki was raising about vehicles, I thought they would interview these people and say what happened here, what happened to these losses and then finally the Public Accounts Committee would come out with a report where it would give us recommendations as to what should be done in relation to those officers who did wrong, the systems that are not good, and everything that the Auditor General finds wrong. And it is after this that government goes to implement what we have recommended upon which now hon. Musumba’s Treasury Memoranda would be coming here to tell us what they have done so far about what we recommended. 

If this report does not contain the recommendations - because I can see, Mr Speaker, the chairperson of the committee maybe is not happy. But in view of the fact that I do not have those minutes referred to –(Interruption)- can I finish my clarification first because I was giving my clarification a preamble? If we do not have recommendation – (Interruption)- do not show me that one, it was meant to be for the committee. I know what I am talking about -(Interjection)- what if I refuse and continue to talk because I want to finish this clarification then you can answer me. Because in view of the fact that I am holding this, and I do not know what recommendations the chairperson of the committee is giving to the House so that eventually the Treasury Memoranda will be based on - I do not know what is going on.  

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I was the one holding the Floor and I should be the one to allow –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, has this really not been hammered out? Could you conclude?   

MR SABIITI: I wanted to give clarification, Mr Speaker. This report was circulated to all Members of this Parliament, and every Member of Parliament received this report. 

Number two; the summary, which the chairman has delivered, even touches on some of the issues you are raising. Take, for example, what hon. Mwandha raised on page 4. We are recommending that the advances, which are not accounted for, are to be recovered from the responsible persons including the accounting officers. You are going to approve or disapprove this recommendation and then these recommendations go to the Government, to the Secretary to the Treasury. Then they will come up with a Treasury Memorandum responding whether, for example, the accounting officers have refunded. 

If they have not, that is when we again ask government why they have not done it. If you look at the summary and then look at what is in this book, everything is there. So, I would request that members, as they ask questions, should consult the minutes and the summary so that we go together. Thank you.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, what hon. Jack Sabiiti is referring to, I never said advances - I said illegal loans. The advances, you are going to get them from civil servants. But I am saying illegal loans. That is what I was referring to. 

Having said that, it would have also been important, as much as you have that book you are talking about, to make a summary of what action you have taken on these officers here.  

Interest: colleagues, you must all know that we all get money from all the donors and our partners in development when they do not have a partnership deed. This is the money, which comes in form of projects. It is very absurd to come and tell us that the special accounts, the dollar accounts, had no interest accrued to them. There is no banking regulation, which stops us from having interest accrued to it. Therefore, there must have been interest, which accrued to those accounts, and has been taken by some officers. I will read for you. 

On page – it is good the chairman of the committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, since you have specific cases, do you not think it would serve you better to ask the committee? “I see in this report this and this, you as Public Accounts Committee, what did you do with this case?” So that they inform you whether they dealt with it or whether they ignored it. Otherwise, there will be many such cases and then you start also giving your own opinion as to what should be done when something has been done. I think we rather get clarification and then we proceed.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. Definitely, also the committee alluded to this issue where on this account in the Auditor General’s report page 91 they say that the unutilised balance as by 31 June 1998 stood at US $571,516, and you said there is no interest, which accrued to this account? I think that is wrong. These are special accounts projects. So -(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: You assigned the Public Accounts Committee the duty of studying the Auditor General’s report in detail and for your information, Mr Speaker, this committee has Members of Parliament, a good number of whom have had enough information as to how to handle the matters of the committee. 

We came up with this report and we expect members to critically look at this report and look at the recommendations. But when you want to now be the Auditor General and audit what has been worked on, it becomes a problem. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable member to continue reading the Auditor General’s report here when the Auditor General’s report was properly read in the Public Accounts Committee?

THE SPEAKER: I think it is a way of making his contribution but as I see, he can be assisted if he seeks clarification rather than attacking something, which was done by the Public Accounts Committee. In any case a report is a report. It cannot give every detail. But if you think there is something missing and you want to know what happened, I think you would rather ask the committee since they have presented the report then we get an answer. I think that is the best way to move.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I want to ask the committee how they resolved the issue of the interests not accruing on special accounts. 

Two, I want them to help us –(Interjection)- could I be protected from hon. Jack Sabiiti? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, may I take the opportunity to help my Chairman of the Committee on National Economy? For each of those queries, which were raised by the Auditor General, they fall under a certain department or ministry. And the summary, which he is holding now, is a summary of all the queries as the committee handled them. 

After that on paragraph 1.5, the chairman of the committee said; “Mr Speaker, with the above summary of the state of affairs of the public expenditure for the period ending 30 June 1998, permit me to refer members to the minutes of individual ministries/departments as attached to this report.”

All this, which I am holding now is the attachment and I would like to help my chairman with my copy so that for every query the Auditor General raised, he looks under the relevant ministry or department and sees the response of the committee. I thank you.

MR NANDALA: I thank you very much my –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Katirima should be fair to this House. The rules require every committee to keep minutes and those minutes are supposed to be laid on the Table, normally one huge pile of minutes. In fact, in the Committee on Election Violence, our minutes were on diskettes because it was impossible to get them printed. How do you expect the House to refer to minutes of proceedings of committees? First of all, they are so bulky that for actually –(Lt Col Katirima rose_)- no, let me just make my point –(Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: The minutes are contained in this very book.

MR MWANDHA: How do you expect the House to continually keep on looking at the minutes as understood by our Rules of Procedure, which are supposed to be laid on the Table to support a report?  

THE SPEAKER: No, as I said, a report cannot contain everything. If you want a particular answer, then somebody can say, “If you want an answer, please look at the attachment or minutes. You will find an answer.” Were you not given the copies of the minutes?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I referred to the minutes, as I understand them from the Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR MWANDHA: Those minutes are normally required to be laid on the Table and there is always one copy of those minutes. They are not intended to be distributed to all members.

THE SPEAKER: Then this time if they have given them to you and the answer can be found in the minutes, why do you not read the minutes?

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, even in the summary of the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, please, wind up because you have really –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: I am about to wind up. Mr Speaker, I have been interrupted so many times that I could not wind up. Even the committee has talked about project funds that are being embezzled so much. It would have been very important even in the summary to mention how funds are being embezzled. 

I want to make just a small comment on interest. If somebody has money on an account he can decide to say that the interest is debited on another account while this money remains here and at the end of the day, because that one on the account is not declared, he will take that money. I would prefer that the committee tells us how it came up on this one.

There is a small comment on Nytil. This factory was sold at US $10 million and a deposit of US $0.1 million was made, and an agreement and the transfer of the title in the name of the buyer was made. All of us are aware the company mortgaged this thing. What did the committee recommend about this, because this garment factory ended up paying where they had mortgaged while they had paid a deposit of about US $2.1 billion out of US $10 million? 

Finally, how did the committee handle its privatisation and the issue of asset stripping? Thank you.

4.17
MR FRED KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking so much the chairperson of the committee, and also thanking the Auditor General’s team for the exposition to the committee, for doing so much with very little. 

When people die, doctors carry out a post mortem. The purpose for that is to ascertain the cause of the death, and also that it can be a case of study such that when they are dealing with other related cases in future, care is taken. Definitely, we had carried out a form of post mortem on what has happened in government departments. It is generally my wish and prayer that eventually the real causes of the problems are discovered, and actions are taken to make corrections.  

Having said those words, I would like to turn to point 1.1.2 of the summary. The chairperson put it categorically that very few university graduates or professional accountants are employed to manage the accounting department of government. Honestly, why should government fail to employ professional accountants or graduates in this era when unemployment is so rampant? If you went to these accounting firms in the private sector, Ernest and Young, PriceWaterhouseCoopers, they employ very qualified accountants. Why is government reluctant to employ qualified accountants? 

As long as we continue to employ or to work with people who are already on the job, refusing to recruit qualified people who are languishing on the streets to do a proper job for government, we shall be sitting here day in day out, doing nothing and reaping no results. Unemployment is at its peak in this country! Mr Speaker, there is a book I am reading called –(Mr Loote rose_)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform my colleague that, just as you have said, in the private sector they offer the best salaries and they follow the specified criteria of selection to get the best personnel. But within our ministries, the recruitment procedure - and we pay the lowest salaries. How do you now expect us to attract the best accountants to work in our ministries?

MR KIDEGA: I thank my colleague for the information. Definitely, you will always reap what you sow. If government is paying poorly, definitely we expect to recruit poor people. A member just stated here that there has been job evaluation. I imagine that in the evaluation they determine how much should be given to a qualified accountant working for government. Every job in government has a job definition and description. It is not a good practice of human resource to employ somebody who does not fit in that kind of description or definition. 

There is a book I am reading here on unemployment stress, a case study of educated people who are unemployed. People are suffering in this country, suffering from unknown diseases because of unemployment stress. They are physiologically and psychologically demoralised and disintegrated. They are running mad because of unemployment, and here we have a government refusing to employ qualified people. People are getting sick everyday! So, I think we need to get serious on this. 

We as parents who are investing in education –(Laughter)- you take your children to school, they go to very good universities, they study, they come and hang around on the street without employment yet there is opportunity! I have a case of a student I met in my constituency in Kitgum. The boy got a first class degree; he is an accountant. He has been looking for jobs, and everywhere he goes he is turned down because his passes are so high, people fear to employ him. This is a case I met just last week. This is how unserious some of the offices we have –(Interruption)

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is wonderful the honourable member has got somebody with a first class degree in accounting and has no job. Bring him, I will give him a job. (Applause).

MR KIDEGA: Mr Speaker, I must thank him for this offer in advance, but we need pro-action oriented people in this kind of situation. The point I am driving home is that let us get a little more serious. We have been discussing a lot of issues, corrective measures in this House, and still we see a lot of cases going out of hand. I think we need to get a little serious and employ – (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I thank you and my colleague for giving way. An impression is being created in this House as if outside there Uganda has so many qualified professional accountants who are unemployed. When you make a comparative analysis between Kenya and Uganda, actually we have a deficiency of over 5,000 qualified accountants.  All these people who are making blunders in ministries have degrees in commerce, degrees in business administration, but they are not professional accountants. 

That is why of recent, the civil service has put a condition: in order to be appointed a principal accountant of a ministry, you must possess a professional qualification in accounts like CPA, ACCA or CPA of Uganda. Many people who are outside there employed and making these blunders have a lot of theory in accounting with many degrees, but they are not professional accountants. Government must invest heavily to ensure that these people are properly trained to that they meet the job standards that we require. I thank you.

MR KIDEGA: In conclusion, Mr Speaker, government should also have deliberate efforts to upgrade the people they employ. If you have recruited somebody as an accounts clerk and he has been working for you and you want to promote that person, first develop that human resource before you promote him. That is important.  

The last point I want to make is that the system of recruitment in government is so defeatist. For you to be recruited in the public service system at a principal level, you cannot be below the age of 35. So, all these systems must be checked if we are to fight these mishaps. I thank you so much.

4.25
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report and in particular for the committee’s observation about project funds. The observation of the committee is that project funds have been heavily targeted for embezzlement, and that is true. 

However, I am fairly disappointed with their recommendation in the last sentence that accounting officers must take keen interest in the running of the projects. I do not know which keen interest they should take because there are ministries we know where there are very many projects and the accounting officers have targeted the projects funds especially to facilitate officials in the ministry for trips here and there, abroad especially. And when an accounting officer has approached a project co-ordinator for resources to sponsor certain officials, is this the keen interest the committee has advised? 

After the accounting officer has taken money and there is no item in the project document to facilitate a certain officer where the money has gone, certainly the project manager and the accounting officer may have to work together to make sure that hole is filled by some documents. So, I would have wished the committee to be more emphatic on the project funds and how the accounting officers can prevent embezzlement of the same.

I happen to have served on a select committee in the last Parliament that investigated the livestock services project, and one of the victims we found was the accounting officer. Indeed, the committee recommended his firing and he was interdicted. With that in mind, I wish the committee to revisit their recommendation so that it is more focused and more particular. Because, saying the accounting officer should take keen interest is not good enough. We are sure that some of the accounting officers have been part of the problem in making or in having funds of projects embezzled, and some cover up done to make sure that things are not unearthed.

So, I would have wished that the committee gave us more information on the project funds. Because in the same select committee, which I am referring to, we unearthed people who were given contracts with no documents, which were supportive enough to qualify them to get the contracts; and we recommended that they be prosecuted. But up to today, and that was about 1999, those people are lingering around the corridors of court, and cases have never been concluded. 

And some of the officials who had been given jobs - and I am very happy that the committee said some of the culprits are abetted by foreign and international institutions. That is true, because I remember that there is a gentleman who was given a job in this livestock services project and he did not have the qualifications. He failed to produce the qualifications to the committee and he is at large, nothing has happened, he is eating the money that he got fraudulently.

And sometimes, Mr Speaker, I get disappointed because I have sat here in this seat for about three years now and some of the issues that are made and debated by Members in this Parliament, I never see somebody on the front bench taking notes to give me the impression that a certain point has been taken. I do not know whether we just talk, I do not know, that is a disappointment! I do not know whether the officials are here but I would have expected somebody on the front bench, if I make a point, to be writing. Then I will know some point has been taken. I thank you.

4.30
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report. I have been attentively listening to colleagues, but I have about three concerns and issues to raise. I am at a loss. You know, these are tears you can see; the country is bleeding! And you wonder who is in charge really, in this country. 

You find that the President is also disappointed at times by some of our officials, the CAOs, Parliament you can see the committee is also disappointed. There is defiance! If you are not complying, the Treasury is not complying, all these losses, unauthorized expenditure, you know name it. So, I do not know what we are going to do as leaders in this country. 

And people are exploiting a lot of things. One of them is the law of this country. For example, taking some of the technical people to court is a bit difficult. I have seen it. To take a CAO to court and you come out the victor is very tricky. The laws are terrible and very laborious, very cumbersome and especially these huge cases involving a lot of money. You go to court but a person can be granted bail. And once you are out you know what happens. So, we need to examine our laws so that we plug all the loopholes, which people are exploiting to bleed this country.  

Mr Speaker, we need to be more united as leaders especially when it comes to some of these issues, which affect our people. The other time I was disappointed, actually I was in the constituency when I think His Excellency made some orders to try some commanders who were alleged to have colluded and caused loss through ghost soldiers. But then some distinguished leaders, Ugandans again came out and said, “No, do you know what, they are picking on people who are anti-third term.” You can imagine! You are already weakening Government then! Why do you say that? 

Why do you not say, “Well, let us pray for them. As long as they are tried in public and are allowed lawyers to defend them, let us watch.” But you find people saying, “No, there is a motive.”

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my honourable colleague that some leaders have come out because some of the suspects are at large and others are taken to court. Why do you not arrest all of them?

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from hon. Capt. Byaruhanga. Could he tell us where those suspects who are at large are?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, if someone is a suspect and is charged at that, how do you say, “You first go and you finish your university degree at Makerere, when you come back we shall charge you”? I think you are not serious!

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, the point I am trying to drive at - do not be surprised even if PAC came up with good recommendations pinning down some officers and we shall regionalize them, put them in the districts and say, “No, that is our person, maybe it is because of this and that”. So, we need to be very united as leaders if we are going to fight some of this evil.  

Hon. Matembe has gone away incidentally, but she alluded to lack of facilitation. She gave a lot of excuses, but when you go to the PAC report, the small men are not there. The messengers, the drivers, these are people who are really badly hit. On the contrary it is the big men. These are people who are going in for big monies to invest here and out. So I do not think the issue of facilitation – is it the Treasury; they are producing the Treasury Memorandum. 

The Treasury is just a few meters away from here. What type of facilitation do they require to produce that Treasury Memorandum? So, there is something wrong somewhere. I have recommended that we think of another revolution to look at structural weaknesses in our system. We cannot be apologising every time.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable member for giving way. Recently it was reported in the press that almost 60 percent of all the properties in Kampala, which have come up of recent, are owned by civil servants. So, what sort of facilitation do they want other than that?

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, my last one is about the project funds. If you read this one it shows that the project funds have been targets for embezzlement. The committee came to the conclusion - they were very firm - that local culprits handling such projects are aided and abetted by officials from foreign lands. You can imagine! Where are we? Foreign, international governments and institutions - you name them.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I thank you very much my colleague for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. What happens with international firms, I will give an example of a road. He is told to build a road of six inches. Then the donor takes two inches, the Ministry of Works takes two inches and the contractor takes one inch because he is the one who gave the money. He would have said, “I have got one inch”, but since he is part of it, we Ugandans benefit with one inch instead of six inches.

CAPT. MATOVU: Yes, you are right I am not refusing, but then these are international governments or institutions, which some of us are yearning – (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I did not want to interrupt the honourable member but he has just made some allegations for which it is extremely important for the Ministry and this House that they are substantiated. Because I do not know of a road of one inch, and if he does know one, I would kindly ask: is it in order for the honourable member to give us the statistics, which do not have any basis? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are being asked: is it a hypothetical case or a real case?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. All of us have been here. Since we came into power in 1986 we have constructed Jinja Road six times and if it had six inches, we would not have redone it so many times. Recently the road between Bugiri and Malaba, it is porridge. We did it and it is now bad. We have got Rakai, it was built last year –(Interruption)- I am giving evidence. Yes, Mr Speaker, you will allow me; I will substantiate.

If they were six inches the road would not be like porridge now. There was a road, which was built from Mbale to Soroti. It was built in the sixties but up to now it is still going strong. Why are the current roads being re-done? Thank you.

CAPT. MATOVU: Lastly, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have been also disturbed about the loss of drugs. We have seen that Butabika Hospital lost drugs worth Shs 9,000,000. To me the loss of drugs is an equivalent of Kony. Kony is killing our people. You are also causing loss of our drugs, which would help our people. You should be equated to Kony. Kony is also in Butabika. You can imagine!

Honourable members, let us get interested in the IGG reports and recommendations. I have just seen a report and you cannot believe it; tears, the country is bleeding! So, let us look for a way forward. Let us look at another revolution and have structural weaknesses revisited in this country. I thank you.

4.40
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this debate. I also thank the committee chairperson for this report. 

I would like to go to page 2 on project funds. What has been reported here is true and it is important that the accounting officer should take keen interest in what is happening. My colleague hon. Dr Atwooki was suggesting that the accounting officers should be far from the project funds because of what they are doing, allegedly. But I know by the constitutional provision that the accounting officers are charged with the responsibility of ensuring that money that comes to government is properly utilized; and we have not changed that. 

The important point is that we should have mechanisms to detect theft or fraud when it happens; and he admitted that one case where an accounting officer was found wanting and he was dismissed. I think that is the way forward. I cannot see any other way of getting this money well looked after other than by those who have been charged with the responsibility to do so.

Mr Speaker, my worry is on page 3, 1.4.3 – where the domestic arrears are quoted to be at Shs 63,191,642,183. Whereas this is happening, we have this government supporting foreign investors who come to this country. If you look carefully at this report, in this section, what is being said is that in fact this government is robbing our local investors of their money by refusing to pay and making them to collapse. I think this is a very serious matter. 

This government wants to create a middle class, but one cannot create a middle class while one is stifling those who are struggling to set up their businesses. I think this is a very serious matter. We cannot as Ugandans give money to foreigners to set up business here like Tri-Star, BITCO and so on, and give them a lot of facilities of Ugandans, and at the same time take money from Ugandans to pay. I think this is a very serious matter, Mr Speaker, and I request that it should be reviewed and this money paid. Because, if we do not pay this money, we will in fact be doing two things: 

One, we are giving our economy to foreigners. But more importantly, we are creating a situation where the economy cannot take off, as it should. Government should take this matter very seriously and it should be corrected immediately. If not, Parliament should take a very serious step to ensure that this sort of trend does not continue.

Mr Speaker, my last point is on page 4 of the committee’s recommendations. What should be done to civil servants who cause loss to Government? I urge that other than this, there should be consideration of confiscating their assets if they cannot pay. If somebody is working in government and causes massive loss to government; he makes us unable to move in our development path and puts the money in his buildings or whatever; he may be taken to jail. But he comes out to enjoy what he has stolen! This is wrong. The most important thing is to ensure that we give other people examples to deter them from trying to steal public money. I hope that when the recommendation is finally retuned, this aspect should be taken into account. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.42
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. However, one general observation is that the report is too summarized. I would have loved to see a summary, which brings out strong recommendations. Maybe the recommendations are in the minutes as they said earlier on.  

My comment is on page 3 under item 1.3, on domestic arrears. Over this issue, there is need for Parliament and the Executive to be sincere to this country, because every financial year we have shortfalls in revenue, and ministries complain of under-funding. So we need to actually look at this issue critically. When you look at what the committee is giving us here, they are saying that during their meeting with the accounting officers, they were informed that the problem was due to the Ministry of Finance, which constantly reduces their budgets and monthly releases to unrealistic levels.   The committee concurred with this view though they are saying that they did so partly. 

However, Mr Speaker, when you look at their recommendations where the committee directed the Ministry of Finance to ensure that accounting officers do not commit government when there is no funding; this is the usual song, which we are hearing every financial year. “Accounting officers should not commit government unduly without funding.” I think we need to do much more than this. Even Parliament here is concerned. Does Parliament really appropriate realistic budgets or they are ambitious and over inflated or exaggerated? 

We need to answer this question as Parliament, and we may also be responsible for this problem. Maybe we are also exaggerating the budgets, which we appropriate as Parliament. The same should also go for the Executive. They should also be realistic. Every year there are shortfalls. Why can we not stick within our means rather than exaggerate the budget when you know that we cannot be able to meet it? That is why we get these problems 

Then, we also have cases of capital development where part of the money is released then the accounting officer has to make commitments then towards the end of the financial year when commitments have been made no more money is released to complete those projects. Here you cannot blame the accounting officer. The committee should have come up with strong recommendations on how we should deal with cases where the Ministry of Finance fails to release funds as appropriated by Parliament. In many cases Parliament is not even informed that the Government is experiencing problems of revenue generation. We only get it during another financial year that we got shortfalls, maybe make supplementaries here and there.

We need to come out with clear recommendations on this issue. One; we should make realistic budgets and two; the Ministry of Finance should really take it to task so that the funds are released as per the budget. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.45
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Earlier on there was some misunderstanding for which I must also make my position clear. The way the report is written - what we have here is the executive summary and the rest of it are the details. So, when the chairman was referring to minutes, we were using different languages because there is no word “minutes” anywhere in the table of contents to show that those were actually minutes. In fact it is the main part of the report.

In addition to that point, Mr Speaker, I want also to refer to the question of project funds. It is evident that project funds are abused and here I want to draw particular attention to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business. If our development partners get to know that this is actually what happens to project funds, they will be extremely concerned. Government should investigate this report because it is extremely damaging. 

You hear of various allegations of officers always trying to have projects in their departments and many officers are known to be building houses from funds of projects and this is very serious. The way it is put here does not augur well for us. This is a matter, which should interest government and we get to the bottom of it so that a solution can be found.

With regard to the question of Treasury Memoranda, in future we should have them together with the report of the Public Accounts Committee because that is when we would know what actions government is taking on issues unasked by the Public Accounts Committee. That is when we can have the full story. If the proposals by government are not adequate, we can actually tell government that the proposals, which are coming –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when we look at this Treasury Memorandum it says, “Treasury Memorandum on the Report of the Public Accounts Committee.” So, it cannot come at the same time. The report must be produced before the memorandum is produced.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the report is there, it is nicely bound. We also have the report of the Public Accounts Committee. What was wrong with the Minister circulating that report at the time when we started debating this report? Maybe there is a reason for it, but I want to refer to the audit of classified expenditure –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: To avoid further comments on this, the rule and the procedure, even in the Finance Act, is that the committee’s report is passed by Parliament and then submitted to government. Then within – is it three months – the Treasury is expected to produce a Treasury Memorandum, which is then tabled to the House and –(Interjection)– just wait for this information, please. It is again referred to the Public Accounts Committee, which will check against the recommendations made in the PAC report whether Government has complied, or to what extent government has complied, and report back to the House. 

Unfortunately - and the honourable minister should really not have raised this issue - these reports are being dealt with very late. At the time the reports were published the Treasury had access to them and being efficient and effective, responded to the reports, which had not been passed by Parliament. That is why we told them to hold it. It should never have been mentioned here that the report is there. Supposing Parliament decided to say something else, they would have to go back and amend that report. This report, which the Minister is mentioning, has come here prematurely and we want to thank them for that efficiency, nevertheless.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much for that explanation, Mr Chairman. On the question of classified expenditure, I am happy to know that the Auditor General has a special staff to handle classified expenditure. The committee has not told us whether the report arising out of that audit will also end up with the Public Accounts Committee and then this Parliament. Maybe the chairman will clarify that when he comes.

On the question of domestic arrears, I would like to say that this is a problem, which arises from the way we budget. The Minister of Finance in an effort to balance his budget comes up with ceilings and some of these ceilings are not realistic. He knows it and everybody in government knows it that the ceilings being imposed on departments are not realistic. Otherwise, the departments would be totally grounded. They even bring in the so-called commitment control system, which everybody also knows is very difficult to operate if you are given unrealistic ceilings. So, it appears to me that we are hiding our heads in the sand and pretending not know what the problem is. 

The amount of money made available to departments is just not adequate. At the end of the day these accounting officers are bound to get credit from people in an effort to run their departments. I think the solution should really be made clear. It may not necessarily be because these are indisciplined but it is because of the situation in which they find themselves. But of course those who are indisciplined take advantage of that and do things even outside all reason –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable member, for giving way. I just wanted to inform you that this report we are considering is of 1998. Surely there is an improvement since that time. I am a member of this committee and we are at least seeing some improvement in the accounting system; maybe in future we shall not get such shortcomings. I thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, for the information and thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is the appropriate time to adjourn proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. when the chairperson will reply.

(The House rose at 4.53 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 February 2004, at 2.00 p.m.)


