Thursday, 12 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the communication is in form of a regret. Due to a number of meetings that we held this morning and afternoon, we have not been able to start on time. We intend to start on time in future.  

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, I had something of national importance and urgency. It is about the incident of Fr Rodriquez whom they want to deport. I wanted to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would not like to interrupt you because normally I do not, but I think we agreed to adhere to the business of the day. If anything has to arise, it has to be from the communication - yes. If what you have talked about happened, then please, you should have notified me that, “There is an urgent issue I want to raise on the Floor when we convene.” Then I would perhaps take it tomorrow. Let us dispose of this business and then come to that one.

BILLS
FIRST READING

LOCAL COUNCIL COURTS BILL, 2003

2.47
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Council Courts Bill, 2003” be read the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, is the certificate there?  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Yes, it is very much here, Sir, and it is hereby laid on the Table.  

THE SPEAKER: The Bill accompanied by the Certificate of Financial Implications stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to handle.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

REVISED SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 (INCLUDING ADDENDUM)(JULY 2003-DECEMBER 2003) OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2003/04

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, in December 2003, before you and before this honourable House, was laid a supplementary schedule. Since then there have been amendments and additional supplementary requirements and I beg to lay on the Table the Amended Supplementary Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2003/04. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you! Well, let the appropriate committee, that is, the Finance Committee, handle it and report back.  

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 1998

2.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Dr Okulo Epak): Mr Speaker and honourable members, yesterday after I had presented the report of the Public Accounts Committee for Financial Year ended 30 June 1998; a number of clarifications were sought. Let me start by making one or two general clarifications.  

This is virtually the first Public Accounts Committee report coming to this Parliament, or even in the Sixth Parliament, for years. So, we are not used to the way it is presented. The presentation is a little different from the reports from other committees and in any case, you know we are responding to virtually all departments in this country, including projects. So, the manner of presentation is a little different. That is why I said we have two components. 

This introduction is basically a very succinct summary of what is contained in details in the following sections, which deal with department by department. So, it was inadvertently said that those were minutes. Really, they are not minutes; they are detailed reports on each department and on each question raised by the Auditor General in his report. I would like to correct the fact that they were referred to as minutes; they are not minutes.  

The second general question, which was raised, pertains to the fact that there were no recommendations. There were actually recommendations, and they are very many. In these circumstances a recommendation is made under each subject. For each subject there is always a recommendation at the end and there are of course for 1998; the recommendations were slightly difficult for others to identify. But the Treasury will always identify the recommendations and deal with them, and most of these recommendations are addressed to the Treasury or to the accounting officers. It is rare that there are recommendations addressed to Parliament.  

I also want to apologize of course because there were a number of typographical errors, arithmetical errors and so on. This is an old thing. I am not even responsible for compiling it. 

Then, Sir, there were several clarifications sought by honourable members, but first let me thank honourable members for showing keen interest in discussing that report. They made very useful comments and contributions, which I think the Public Accounts Committee will take into account in its future work, and I also think the responsible Ministry of Finance, will take them into consideration.  

There was a query or a lot of comments on domestic arrears. One member, I think hon. Akisoferi Ogola, said we should separate domestic arrears pertaining to pensions and those arising from other commitments. We have not been doing this. We shall present this to the committee at its next meeting and see whether it is possible to separate them. I want to assure members that if there are any domestic arrears pertaining to pensions, you find it in the Ministry of Public Service. What we have here is an aggregate of domestic arrears arising from all transactions in various departments. But if even in the summary we must separate we shall try our best to do so.  

There was also a question about domestic arrears being illegal and unconstitutional. This is true because that money, which is used in that commitment, is done without the approval and sanction of Parliament. So, it is not in accordance with the appropriation and in that sense it is illegal. And if we considered it as government borrowing from the private sector, then it is borrowing without the approval of Parliament. 

But that is not inconsistent with the subsequent recommendation that the Treasury should try to stop the accounting officers from committing government without appropriation. The Government followed this already. Actually there is what is called commitment control, which we will be observing when we present the other reports. But even that one is still not able to control commitment of government in domestic arrears.  

We also did recommend that if it becomes impossible for the Government to stop domestic arrears altogether, then it should consider giving interest. What we noticed is that some of the people who supplied the goods and services actually borrowed money and they return these loans at interest, but the Government takes the goods and services at a certain value without paying interest. So, most businesses are crumbling. That is why that recommendation came in regard to the same thing. But it is not inconsistent with the constitutional provision. We are not saying condone it, but charge interest; we are not saying so. We are saying, “If you cannot avoid it then obviously consider paying interest”.  

The accounting staff: I think the honourable minister will be able to respond to this one appropriately. As to whether they are the real cause of the mismanagement of public funds, is a different matter. You could have the view that even this mismanagement is being done deliberately. Even people who are professionally proficient, you could expect the same thing. That is a question of discipline, trust and ethics being enforced. 

Some would argue it but it is not necessarily the problem of qualifications. The situation in the Auditor General’s office is a little more serious because the Auditor General’s office is not independent; it is under the Public Service. So, its entire staff is recruited, trained, disciplined or fired by the Public Service Commission and the same also fixes the salary scales.  

You know the Auditor General’s office is one where people should not even have financial embarrassment, because they are going to scrutinise accounts under circumstances where there could be temptations; but they are not well paid. And if the Auditor General were to become independent and determine the salaries of his staff, the quality of staff, the recruitment of staff, the promotion and motivation; we would expect the office to work better. Nevertheless, in whatever they have the Auditor General is now up to date with his work.  

Project funds: in the past we had a situation where projects were managed outside the normal government departments. That is when we used to have project co-ordination and project offices. They were really independent entities. The staff were recruited independently, paid a different salary and abundantly provided for in comparison to the ministry staff. This is a situation, which has stopped since basket funding has started. But at that time, two things contributed to mismanagement: 

First of all, the donors insisted that project funds should have a special account. They were not put together in the Consolidated Fund account. They had a separate account. Of course, the Government agreed on this with commercial banks. Then the withdrawal and expenditure at some stage was not subject to warrants. Eventually they were subject to warrants and that is where a lot of mismanagement took place. But this is a problem, which is really not going to be there anymore, with basket funding and reduction in independent project management.  

Well, somebody wanted us to enumerate the losses and the departments that are affected. These are under specific ministries where a loss was incurred. The items lost are mentioned, and the officers who are responsible are also mentioned. So, if you read the full report under each ministry where there was a loss, you will find that those details we were asked for are actually provided. 

Normally, however - and I think this is the condition the Auditor General does not mention – the names of people in his report are not given. He just talks about losses. When we come to quiz the accounting officers, that is when we force them to tell us who is responsible; that is when names come out. But if you read the Auditor General’s report generally, you will not find the names of any person who has committed those offences.

There was a statement that civil servants who cause losses should be pursued up to the confiscation of their assets. I think there is a recommendation in the report about that. We are not only saying civil servants but also anybody who is committed on fraud should not just be punished by imprisonment. The court should be able to pass two sentences: that of imprisonment and recovery of the sums lost. But at the moment the judges are passing one sentence. You go serve your prison term for one, two years and then you come and start enjoying the billions of shillings, which were stolen.

We are not quite sure why it has not been possible. Maybe the Attorney General will assist us to say whether it is possible to pass that kind of judgment. But our recommendation is saying, pass two judgments, imprisonment and recovery of the loss. If it does not work technically in law, then obviously even the point the honourable member made will not work: pursuing them up to the taking up of their assets.

Classified Expenditure:

Questions arose on classified expenditure. We stated in this report that the Auditor General was going to be able to audit classified expenditure. Unfortunately, that did not take place. Until the recent past - a few months ago actually - the Auditor General has still not been auditing classified expenditure. Now people were asking, “how will it be handled”? Unfortunately, I forgot to ask for the regulations from the Treasury. I think the regulations will specify exactly in what manner it will be handled, but the following are the things that will take place:  

The auditors who will go to audit classified expenditure will be vetted. 

Secondly, their reports will not be submitted in the normal way, that is, a report comes to Parliament and it is tabled. That report will be handled in what you may call a secret way and it means, therefore, that we shall not even be able to report on the examination of the Auditor General’s report on classified expenditure. So, it will remain classified but at least we will know what goes under that expenditure.

MR WACHA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not too sure whether I understand the concept of vetting public servants. I mean, are there different levels of appreciation of trust? What is the vetting for?  

DR OKULO EPAK: What I know is that the officers who are going to audit classified expenditure will be asked to swear an oath of secrecy. Basically that is what vetting means in this case, but the hon. Minister of Finance will be able to answer how they vet them. What I know is that they will take an oath of secrecy. 

Whether the officer will be vetted by any other criteria, I am not sure. As I said, the regulations have only come out and I have not even had a look at them. I see the honourable minister has a copy; he will probably answer more competently how that will be handled.

Mr Speaker, I think I have responded to all the queries, which arose. If any member thinks that I did not cover his interest, I will be pleased to respond.  

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I want to get from the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee is: when he was clarifying on the issue of project funds, he did say that previously there were project co-ordination units, which were set up, but that seems to have been abandoned - if I got him correctly. But presently we have got the PMA Secretariat, which is far from the Ministry of Agriculture, and far from other ministries, which are supposed to be part of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture. 

These are some of the funds, which you highlighted, that are being targeted for embezzlement. We have got the NAADS Secretariat also far away from the Ministry of Agriculture. How do you reconcile that with your statement that project co-ordination is now part of the Ministry structures? And there are examples, which exist.

DR OKULO EPAK: Would you like to –(Interruption)

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Mr Speaker, the chairman had made reference to a recommendation as to whether under the law, in addition to a sentence of imprisonment or a fine for that matter, a court can make or impose another penalty for recovery of any monies that a person is charged for having embezzled. I was standing to respond to that. If you give me the permission I will go ahead, Sir.

Yes, under the law, in addition to a court passing a sentence of imprisonment or fine or both, the court is empowered to make certain orders and some of these orders include compensation. This means compensating the victim of the crime, or restitution, restoring what has been transferred as a consequence of the commission of the offence. Perhaps what can be examined is the extent to which the amount of compensation may be ordered, or what restitution; and whether we should cover restoring actual cash or whether we should use the method of compensation. Otherwise, the procedure is there.

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank the hon. Attorney General for that clarification. First of all, let us be clear what projects we are talking about. I am not sure that NAADS and PMA are projects in the sense we are talking about. 

What is a typical project unit? We used to have one in Kampala City Council and we also have one in the Ministry of Education and Sports. What they call project implementation units are smaller and not on the scale of NAADS and PMA. NAADS and PMA are long-term institutions and they are going to be financed from regular budgets, in addition to any other funds, which may be raised externally. These were based purely on funding by the donor agencies, and the donor agencies had a lot of say in the way the project and the project funds are managed. I think there is a slight difference between PMA and so on. 

I think there are still projects, which are going on, whose terms have not been reached and whose funds are still flowing. But I think by and by they will disappear altogether. I thank you. With that response, if there are no further clarifications, I beg to move.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think I raised a few issues to the chairman, which I feel have not been answered. I want to seek guidance from him. If the recommendation of such issues, which were raised, is not in your statement like here, are we allowed to amend it?  

Secondly, I would have preferred that this audit report would be debated at two levels. One would be general and would zero in on every ministry or department specifically and look at it and see what is happening. 

Having said that, I want to bring back some of the requests I had put to the chairman yesterday. I would start with the one of the bank reconciliation of Shs 109 billion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What are the clarifications you are seeking now? You made a contribution yesterday on the same report and you cannot repeat the same contribution. If you want a clarification, seek it.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I want a clarification on the reconciliation of the Shs 109 billion, which was differing on the accounts that the chairman has not told me about, and the treatment of interest on special accounts, and the Nytil case, among others.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I insist that the honourable member seeks clarification on the specific matter relevant to the report and point out the sections under which the questions arise. Otherwise, one of the questions he asked yesterday is whether we dealt with asset stripping.  Restrictively speaking, we deal with the report of the Auditor General. If the Auditor General’s report does not contain asset stripping, we have nothing to strip. (Laughter)

In any case, asset stripping would be relevant to parastatal organisations and there is another committee of Parliament, which deals with state corporations and commissions. That is where the Auditor General’s report on asset stripping, which is of interest to him, would appear. And I would suggest we wait for that committee to answer that question. 

As to his comments on the manner in which the report should be compiled, definitely I will take it back to the committee and we will invite him. We would really like to benefit from his advice because the consideration of the Auditor General’s report is a very complex report. It is not like the singular issues like the Ministry of Public Service, which we deal with and you just deal with the subjects within the ministries. This deals with all the ministries, departments and accounts in the country and you try your best to present them in the most – but we shall benefit from his advice on how we can improve the presentation.  

I do believe obviously that some people could have a better alternative to what we have been using since time immemorial because this is not the first time this report is presented in this manner. It has been like that from the First Parliament, so we would like to benefit from his advice. We definitely appreciate the fact that he finds this representation a little bit difficult to understand, and I will report to the committee.

THE SPEAKER: You have heard the answer, honourable member. It may not be completely satisfactory but you will get it from them. You approach them. Otherwise, if it becomes ping-pong, where do we end? 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to put a question to my honourable colleague the chairperson of the committee and the hon. Minister of Finance, on a matter of auditing classified expenditure. There are two types, and one has implications on national security. I do not know how you can do it without compromising national security. If it is a question of procurement of equipment, it is simple. You could say, “We bought equipment, here are the receipts”. 

But when it comes to operations, especially in intelligence, how are you going to say, “I gave so and so such an amount of money in such and such a country to do 1,2,3. He accepted the money and he reported back”, without disclosing the name of the person?
 
Mr Speaker, I am raising this matter because it developed last year or two years back when Justice Sebutinde was looking into the operations of the Police. And when it came to the Special Branch, the Director at that time refused to disclose or to give an account of how he spent the money on obtaining information. He said, “If I do it I am going to compromise my sources and thereby in future I will never be able to operate”. So, I do not know! Is this exercise in futility or an absurdity?

DR OKULO EPAK: The Constitution says all public expenditure shall be audited. That is a constitutional directive. It provided no exception to classified-split-security. Any expenditure, which is to be audited, and which in view of those handling classified matters is of very dangerous nature to be exposed, the regulations that have been produced specify how it is to be dealt with. 

Our committee has travelled to New Zealand, to England, I was in Canada recently, and they audit them. The only thing, which is difficult, is reporting because with that – what we want to make sure is that there is no abuse. In fact the area you are touching on is the one, which is very vulnerable to abuse. The expenditure on information and procurement is easy to deal with but on information you rightly said so, I think you are quite knowledgeable on this. It is difficult because the following fellow may not have signed anywhere for that money –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, may I be allowed to proceed without the Front Bench assisting me? I believe the honourable minister will assist me to give further clarification because as I said, this has been a very long-running case. And I think we must praise the Seventh Parliament that we have at least attained the possibility to audit classified expenditure, which has not been done since the First Parliament in this country. I think we have made a step forward and the honourable minister will probably clarify a little more on that.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I want to thank the Chairman and the Committee on Public Accounts for their presentation. I want to respond and make some clarifications on two or three issues before I rest my case. 

The first one that came up is this classified expenditure. Sir, a lot of water has gone under the bridge since the Public Accounts Committee considered the accounts of Financial Year 1997/98, which is the subject of our debate today. There have been a lot of developments, including the passage of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, which provides under section 31(3) that the Minister will make regulations for the auditing of classified expenditure. 

I want to inform this House, Sir, that regulations have been made and it is not usual that public documents are laid on the Table. But I will lay this one on the Table just in case anybody wants to easily access it and familiarize themselves with these regulations. They are comprised in Statutory Instrument No.72 of 2003. I will lay them on the Table. These are the regulations that ensure or lay out the manner in which classified accounts may be accessed, will be audited and a report made upon them and the procedure to follow.

I want to respond to the issue of vetting because it was raised specifically. It is provided for in regulation No.14 in the same regulations and it says in rule 14(1) that; “The Auditor General shall establish audit teams to audit classified expenditure.” Rule 14(2); “An audit team shall be subject to strict confidentiality regulations applicable to persons with access to confidential information relating to the national security interests.” 

Regulation 14(3); “Members of an audit team shall undergo training and sensitisation considered necessary for a reasonable appreciation of the nature and operation of authorized agencies.” These are some of the things that will render a prospective auditor or somebody who wants to be appointed by the Auditor General for this purpose to be prepared for the task of auditing classified expenditure. I lay this one on the Table.

The other point, as I have said, is that a lot of water has gone under the bridge. There was an issue that was raised about professional accountants in government and the finding that absence of qualified accountants in government has affected the book keeping and accounting therein. I wish to report that government has since embarked on professional training and as of July 2003 we had over a 1,000 people who graduated as accountants in the various professional courses. Some of these have now been employed in mainstream government and others are in local governments. 

But more importantly the training is going on. We have continued to support the accountant’s organization in Uganda to train more accountants. Even recently I did preside over the graduation of some of the accountants. We want to reach a target of 5,000 accountants in this economy. We have about 2,000 and we are still continuing.

Of equal importance, Sir, is the fact that we have now to ensure that accountants that we produce are properly equipped for the job. We have put in place the Integrated Financial Management System, which has enabled government to link all government ministries, departments, local governments and town councils that do disburse government accounts to be able to have a uniform and proper accounting system. They should be online to access each other and we are doing this under the Economic and Financial Management Project, commonly known as EFMP II. Some places have already been put on line. Bushenyi is one of them and Kampala City Council and Jinja, and by the end of next month we will have linked more of these government ministries and departments onto the network.

I have two more points, one is to explain this since this is the first time we are discussing these public accounts’ report. I want to explain the Treasury Memorandum because yesterday there was a lot of confusion: “Where is the Treasury Memorandum? Minister you are not diligent.” Sir, the law is very clear. We will start with the Constitution. 

The Constitution in Article 163(4) says: “The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of this article for the financial year immediately preceding.” So, the Auditor General makes the report to Parliament. After that Parliament shall, within six months, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action. After that, under the finance and accountability law, the Minister of Finance will present within 42 days a Treasury Memorandum to Parliament as a response to the report that has been given by Parliament about the Auditor General’s report. So, we are still in time; we have now 41 days - if we start counting from yesterday - and we shall in due course present a Treasury Memorandum.

The other one is, it does appear in the accounts of 30 June 1993 on page 4, 1.4.4 that there are outstanding advances relating to the Office of the President of Uganda, of Shs 12.625 million. Sir, I have investigated this and I have been able to establish under page 6, 2.2 that; “The committee dropped the query relating to the Office of the President failing to account for Shs 12.625 million because they were subsequently verified, confirmed and satisfied.” I was specifically detailed to make that point here: the President’s Office has not failed to account for any money. These instructions came from the Leader of Government Business. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable chairman, do you want to say something?

DR OKULO EPAK: If you may give me a chance again, there was a query on the table on page 5 where the total was inconsistent with the statement above. The sum of Shs 5,358,759,855 is the correct amount. The one in the table is not correct; it should be ignored.  

There was a question, “How do we ensure that these recommendations are implemented?” The first step to ensure that they are implemented is on the response contained in the Treasury Memorandum. 

The second stage in which we ensure that they were implemented or not, is that if they were not, then they will appear again in the next Auditor General’s report. So, the Auditor General will follow. 

The third step for implementation is that each committee could take this report and consider sections relevant to their sector ministry. Then they should be able to ask the ministries at the budget period whether they had complied with recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee. Because in some cases the Public Accounts Committee imposes embargo on certain budget lines and if they were aware, then they would make sure that does not happen. With those few clarifications, Sir, I beg to move that we adopt the report of the Public Accounts Committee.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee in respect of the year 1998 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDING JUNE 1999

3.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Dr Okulo Epak): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to present the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Public Accounts of the Government of Uganda for the Financial Year ended 30 June 1999. For ease, I am reading from text with bigger letters. I had a lot of problems, as you may have noticed yesterday, from reading those small letters. But I will pronounce each section so that you can follow.  

Introduction.

The Public Accounts Committee is pleased to present to the House the work it carried out on the report of the Auditor General on the public expenditure for the financial year ended 30 June 1999.  

The report is made in accordance with section 123 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and Article 163(5) of the Constitution, which mandate the committee to report its findings on the report of the Auditor General on the public accounts of the Republic of Uganda within six months. We are definitely out of that time. The House will, however, note regrettably that this report should have been dealt with and presented to Parliament by PAC of the Sixth Parliament. 

The procedure for carrying out this work involved the committee summoning and examining the accounting officers on queries raised by the Auditor General on their ministries/departments.  

The primary purpose of this examination by PAC was to ensure compliance with Financial and Accounting Regulations, the Public Finance Act, the Standing Orders, Appropriation Act and any other laws governing public expenditure as well as the extent to which the accounting officers had fulfilled their terms and conditions of service. In doing this, the committee was interested in examining why things went wrong and what action had been taken to rectify and prevent the recurrence of such problems.

In carrying out its work the committee was assisted by the office of the Auditor General, the office of the Director of Accounts, the Office of the Director CID and the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. The office of the Attorney General was also consulted in matters of payment of taxes by judges and the issue of classified expenditure. The committee notes with appreciation the contribution to its work by these offices.

Observations and Recommendations/Decision on Policy Issues:

Although cases of outright theft and embezzlement of public funds are on the decrease, there still exist breaches in financial management as a result of failure to adhere to financial regulations. Cases of irregularities regarding public procurement and contracting for goods and services and infrastructure work projects, allocation of plots in urban areas and payment of wages, salaries, pensions and allowances to non-existent employees are still in existence.

Mr Speaker, let me now move on specific irregularities that the committee encountered in its work on this report.

Classified Expenditure:

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as per demands that the Auditor General Office audits all public expenditure. However, the Auditor General has consistently reported that his office is not allowed to audit the so-called “classified expenditure”. The House should note that the so-called “classified expenditure” does not feature in any public finance laws and regulations of this country as of that time. This position is illegal and unconstitutional. Indeed, Parliament never allocates any money under a vote or item called classified expenditure.  

The ministries or institutions which operate funds under classified expenditure are: Defence, Internal Affairs, Police, Special Branch, Inspector General of Government, Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence, Internal Security Organization, External Security Organization, President’s Office and State House.  

During the financial year under consideration 1998/99, the committee found out and as reported by the Auditor General that:

1. The Auditor General did not audit Shs 17,888,403,536 and it is not possible to establish whether they were accounted for.

2. The sum of Shs 931,000,000 allocated to the Ministry of Internal Affairs was simply divided in some proportion and advanced to the two ministers as a matter of practice.

3. Shs 60,000,000 for the so-called “classified expenditure” in the office of the Vice President was simply advanced to the housekeeper of the Vice president.

4. Utility bills in the office of ESO and ISO are not allowed to be audited because they are supposed to be classified expenditure.

5. A number of budgetary allocations are made to specific budget lines of ministries but as soon as the budget and the finances are released the concerned accounting officers for example in Internal Affairs, transfer them to the Ministry of Defence under classified expenditure. This practice has the effect of falsifying the budgets of the Ministry of Defence and the concerned ministries as well as “lying to Parliament”.  

The matter of illegality and abuse of this expenditure was raised by PAC to both the Minister of Finance and the Attorney General. The committee was informed that the matter was being handled by the Government and was not yet conclusive. I think as of today we know it has become conclusive.  

The committee noted that there is need to have these expenditures audited in the most transparent matter, while at the same time ensuring that the security of the country is not compromised. I think this will clarify hon. Awori’s concern.

Non-tax Payment by the Judges: 

During the year under review the Auditor General reported that the accounting officer of the Judiciary did not deduct taxes amounting to Shs 593,847,000 from the salaries and allowances of the judges.  

The accounting officer informed the committee that the deduction of taxes from salaries and allowances of judges would mean loss of privileges, which the judges have been enjoying since 1990. The Attorney General, by his letter MJ/AG/03 dated 10 April 2002, gave a legal opinion in support of the position of the accounting officer.  

Whereas the legal advice given by the Attorney General cannot be challenged, the committee noted and observed that the decision had the following implications: 

(i) The accounting officer in refusing to deduct taxes from the remunerations of the judges acted contrary to the terms and conditions of her service as she was not obliged to comply on any instruction, which contradicts her terms and conditions of service. The opinion of the Attorney General was not available to her by that time.  

During her earlier questioning she refused to provide all the relevant evidence and information to support her case apart from the provision of the Constitution, which itself was not supported or translated into salaries and allowances of the specified Officers Act, 1999.

(ii) It amounted to extending the statutory instrument, which granted exemption on a different ground and for a limited period of time, which should actually have expired by 30 June 1997. At the time in question, judges had asked for exemption, and the Government accepted it because their remunerations were very low. But with the coming into place of the Salaries and Allowances (of specified officers) Act, 1999, this situation was taken care of. This Act does not, however, provide for such exemption nor does it explain in detail the privileges to which the judges would be entitled.

(iii) The privilege being referred to was specific on income tax, but the exemption, therefore, would appear to be tantamount to exempting judges from payment of any taxes at all. The Income Tax Act, 1997 gives powers to Parliament to grant any person income tax exemption, but the Attorney General uses Article 2(2) to support his case.

(iv) Neither the Salaries and Allowances (specified officers) Act, 1999 nor the Constitution specifies the privileges, which are to be enjoyed by the judges. Parliament did not give Judges tax exemption when it enacted the law.

(v) Nevertheless, the committee feels and recommends to Parliament that this matter must now be dealt with fairly and comprehensively because similar constitutional provisions affect other categories of public officers. The Attorney General must equally give his opinion regarding exemption arising from:

(a) Article 128(7) with regard to other persons exercising judicial power such as the magistrates to whom this exemption is not applying; it applies to other judicial officers too.

(b) Article 158 regarding other specified officers who derive their pay from the Consolidated Fund, and would wish to claim the same privilege. The provision of Article 158 and the one the judges are using are exactly the same.  

The committee brought the matter to the attention of Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service who propose to consult with government with a view to resolving the issue.  

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be cautioned for failing to fulfill her duty and attempting to interpret the Constitution.

The committee further recommends that all Constitutional privileges as provided for in Articles such as 128(7) and 158, should be operationalised by Acts of Parliament.

Cases referred to the Solicitor General: 

The committee most often refers cases that need further investigation/prosecution to the Director of CID or the Solicitor General. Some of these cases go to court for prosecution. The committee, however, is concerned that most of these cases take too long to be disposed of and Parliament never gets to know the final decisions made by the Attorney General and the courts. The effect of this is that these issues remain hanging in the committee’s report.  

The committee is further concerned that judgments on embezzlement cases do not take into consideration return or recovery of funds embezzled, stolen or lost. This has actually tended to encourage more loss of public funds.  

The committee was, however, informed by the Solicitor General that the law provides for both penalties including the recovery of the money lost, but leaves it to the discretion of the judges to decide on the appropriate sentences.  

It is the view of the committee that people involved in the embezzlement of public funds not only serve sentences issued by courts of law but also be required to pay back the amounts of funds embezzled. The public, in particular, is highly concerned about this omission.  

The committee advises that a follow-up on this by the office of the Attorney General be made to ensure that the full force of law is implemented.

Retrospective Approval:  

It has become a common practice on the part of the accounting officers to spend money without approval. They do so with the hope that they would seek for retrospective approval from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Quite often, the Ministry has never granted the approval but it has also never informed the ministries of the reasons for its inaction.    

The position on these matters is that:

(a) The Secretary to the Treasury cannot grant retrospective approval because only Parliament can allocate and approve expenditure.

(b) The accounting officers have no powers to commit expenditure, which was not allocated by Parliament. Those who did so acted illegally and must be cautioned.

The Audit Department:

The Auditor General reported that the officers of his department had been undergoing intensive training for nearly two years under a training project (OAG-2000). The project, which had been largely financed by DFID, an aid agency of the United Kingdom, was partly manned by consultants secured from PriceWaterhouseCoopers. The training had been in the field of value for money audits, computer assisted audit, and improved skills in other audit fields. 

The project was supposed to be completed in July 2000. However, one component of the project was yet to be worked on. This relates to increased autonomy of the Office of the Auditor General. Even though the Government of Uganda gave a written undertaking before the start of the project to the effect that a law would be enacted to enhance the autonomy of the Office of the Auditor General, the Government had failed to do so. The report observed that Government seemed to be in the process of going back on its earlier commitment.  

The committee agrees with the Auditor General about the need for the Office of the Auditor General to get its budget, which is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund so that its work is not interrupted by frequent cuts by the Treasury.  

The committee also notes that the office should have the right to recruit its own staff and pay them attractive wages commensurate with their profession so that the department can attract and retain the services of well-qualified trained staff that do not have to abandon the department to join the audit profession in the private sector.   

The Public Accounts Committee had consultations with the Attorney General and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on this matter. The committee was informed of the provisions of Article 163 of the Constitution that the staff of the Auditor General are public officers and, therefore, the Office of the Auditor General does not have powers to recruit its staff.  All the recruitment is therefore subject to the Public Service Commission.  

The committee advised that although it is a constitutional matter there is need to look into it and find a way of making the Office of the Auditor General independent and establishing it by an Act of Parliament.  

Outstanding Advances:

During the financial year under review, the Auditor General reported that contrary to the regulations, advances totalling Shs 681,575,893 had not been accounted for. This affected the following ministries/departments. I will read only the departments, and the figures are shown on the right hand side: Public Service, Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Agriculture, Defence, Local Government, Gender, Labour and Social Development, Mbarara University, Electoral Commission, Health and Prisons.

The committee directed recoveries of these funds from the salaries of those officers who had been advanced these funds. By the time of writing this report all these funds had been recovered except Shs 24 million, which was advanced under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to Mr Johnson Kamya Wavamuno who is facing a death sentence in Luzira prison.  

The committee regrets the manner in which funds are being advanced to individuals some of whom do not even work in government. These funds are in most cases lent to these private individuals without security and not backed by any legal instrument. Lending is also done without clear procedure. This situation is mostly cited in the Office of the Administrator General.

The committee also noted that in some of these ministries accounting officers allow money to be advanced to their officers even before they have accounted for previous advances, contrary to the regulations. The accounting officers do not bother to follow up and impose sanctions on failure to account as provided for in the regulations and in the Standing Orders.  

The committee recommends strict compliance by the accounting officers with the established regulation on advances and in order to forestall any loss or misuse of public funds.

Losses:

The Auditor General reported major losses valued at Shs 812,747,678, and US $200.  

During discussions with accounting officers the Committee directed further investigations on losses that included Shs 38,825,989 under the Ministry of Defence and Shs 49,090,543 under the Ministry of Health. These cases are not yet concluded.  

Prosecutions on losses of Shs 42,148,216 under the Ministry of Defence, Shs 16,000,000 under the Ministry of Health and Shs 21,960,000 under the Ministry of Education were conducted and sentences served to the culprits. 

Losses amounting to Shs 22,895, 385 - that is the total of which Mbarara University lost Shs 3,500,000; Local Government Finance Commission, Shs 2,000,000 and Movement Secretariat Shs 17,395,385; in relation to smart money cards in the International Credit Bank that had been closed by the Bank of Uganda. The committee has directed the Minister of Finance to use the established procedures regarding such cases in order to settle these funds.

Losses relating to Shs 175,970,998 in the Public Service, Shs 1,488,631 in Health, Shs 21,344,575 in Finance, Shs 235,875,000 in Agriculture and Shs 108,846,000 in Tourism Trade and Industry related to promissory notes, bank drafts, cheques and cash releases that had either been misplaced or lost. It was reported and verified that the payments were stopped before any loss took place.  

The committee directed recovery of Shs 1,730,000 from staff under Ministry of Defence. The Ministry of Defence also failed to account for Shs 20,402,500. The committee insists that these funds be accounted for.  

The committee, however, recommends that Shs 14,447,216 for Works Transport and Communications, Shs 7,592,983 75 – honourable members will wonder - Health, Shs 290,000 in State House and US $200 in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be written off. The committee is recommending that those losses I have read above should be written off. If you went into the details under the ministries concerned you would find the reasons they are recommended to be written off.

Boards of Survey:

The Auditor General’s report pointed out that although according to treasury accounting instructions, Boards of Survey are supposed to be appointed at the end every financial year to examine cash, security, stores et cetera and submit their reports. The Auditor General did not receive reports from 15 ministries and department- namely, Trade, Lands, Defence, Energy and Minerals, Uganda Management Institute, Health Service Commission, Police, Prisons, Finance, Office of the Prime Minister, National Assembly, Mbarara University, Mulago Hospital, Butabika Hospital and Law Reform Commission.  These people did not conduct board of survey in time.

During discussions with the accounting officers on this matter it become apparent that there was a lot of laxity on the part of the Treasury to ensure that reports are submitted to the Auditor General after Boards of Surveys are done. As a result there was discrepancy between records in the Treasury and those of the Auditor General.

The committee recommends greater co-ordination between boards that are appointed to carry out the survey, the Treasury that appoints them and the Auditor General who should be satisfied with the status of cash and stores in ministries.

Treasury Accounts:  

Mr Speaker, there still exist a lot of problems in the management of the Consolidated Fund account. The Auditor General, in his report, has raised a number of issues that the committee wishes to bring to the attention of the House.

(1) The bank statement from the Bank of Uganda showed an overdraft of Shs 776,236,548,778 as at June 1999 whereas the general ledger had a figure of Shs 844,327,253,156. The bank reconciliation statement cannot, therefore, balance with a figure of Shs 68,090,704,378. The House will note that this difference has been carried forward over years.  

(2) Debts in the bank statement not credited in cashbook stated as Shs 108,542,962,336 was not supported by documentary evidence.

(3) The Auditor General discovered that a figure of Shs 2,651,914,392 referred to a weekly transfer of revenue, which should have been credited, but the bank had instead debited it on the account. No entry was made to reverse the original wrong entry.  

(4) The Government owns houses in Nairobi, New York and London. No mention was made of the balances on the accounts where these revenues are collected and kept. Furthermore, there were no records in the Treasury regarding the operations of the houses. 

In his submission to the committee, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that a consultant was contracted to carry out the reconciliation exercise on the Consolidated Fund. The committee will, however, want to report to the House that although the consultant carried out the reconciliation, the reconciliation difference, as noted above, still existed and this difference has been carried forward over a period and would be so until Parliament decides what to do. This is the difference of Shs 68,090,704,378. Unless Parliament does something, it would be carried forward ad infinito.   

The committee now recommends to the House to write off this difference of Shs 68,090,704,378 in order to allow the Treasury to improve on the management of records in the Consolidated Fund account. We are recommending this because it has been carried forward over years and it would be very difficult to pin down who is responsible for it. It has become a walking balance. It moves every accounting year and it will move on ad infinito. So, it seems now is the right time for this Parliament to consider that this amount of money be written off.

Conclusion:  

The main purpose of the work of PAC is to encourage the application and maintenance of high standards of financial control and sound financial management of both revenue collection and public expenditure by all public bodies audited by the Auditor General. PAC has highlighted a number of failings by the accounting officers and given the necessary remedy in most cases in this report. 

Mr Speaker, in view of these observations the committee requests the House to recommend to the Treasury the need to ensure that all ministries/departments comply with the existing laws and regulations that enforce sound financial management and controls. Internal audits within ministries/departments must be strengthened. The accounting officers who fail to comply with their terms of appointment should either be sanctioned or discontinued from performing such function, or both.  

Lastly, I wish to appreciate and recognize the dedication and sound capability of my colleagues who work together with me in the committee and on whose behalf I am presenting this report. You will find attached the list of Members of PAC and in the next sections details, department by department. Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this report be debated together with the minutes, or the details, herewith attached. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman to the committee, for the report.

4.05
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the chairman of the committee for a job well done. 

If the Sixth Parliament were vigilant enough and they were doing their job in time, maybe what has been mentioned in this report as far as losses and embezzlement are concerned, would have been checked by the year 2000. But here we are in 2004 going back to do a postmortem of the person who died in 1999!

I want to comment on the cases, which are referred to the CID and the Solicitor General by Parliament. Mr Speaker, recently I was chairing a Select Committee investigating the Baganda Bus Park. We found out a lot of irregularities especially in Kampala City Council and we referred these cases to CID, and up to-date -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Buganda or Baganda?

MR BYABAGAMBI: It is Baganda Bus Park; that is how it is and - ebyaffe maybe.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, all these cases were referred to CID and to-date we do not know how far the CID has gone. Nobody has reported back to Parliament and this puts the institution of Parliament to shame.  

I want also to comment on advances to officers. I do not know whether the Finance Act provides that accounting officers have got the powers to advance monies to the working officers within their ministries. As if that were not enough they even go ahead to advance the monies to the people who are not working in the Government but are in the private sector.  

Mr Speaker, I want the chairman of the committee to clarify why the committee did not recommend that this money should be recovered from Wavamuno to whom it was advanced, although he is on death row, and returned to the accounting officer who advanced it to him. And here you are recommending that it should be written off! I think we need to be serious. 

Mr Speaker, the losses in the ministries are one of the ways money is being eaten. It was published in the newspapers recently that in the Ministry of Education - I am happy the Minister of State for Primary Education is here - the security cheques, which were deposited by the publishers disappeared and the Permanent Secretary and his officers were nowhere to be seen by the time this was reported in the press. And this is a lot of money!

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY EDUCATION (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and the member for allowing me to give the information. The honourable colleague on the Floor is referring to a case that has already been contested. I would like to advise him and the House that the matter is being clarified and it is not true that the Under Secretary left the Ministry under mysterious conditions. The Under Secretary is there and the matter is being clarified. Very soon the truth will come out. So, the statement should wait for the clarification. I thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I will take her word; I respect her very much; I hope she will do the necessary job. But this shows what has been going in the ministries and this is only the tip of the iceberg. Other ministries are doing the same, I hope the accounting officers will wake up and do their job.

On Mbarara University, Mr Speaker, if you check properly in the report of yesterday, which we have just adopted today, Mbarara University is the biggest culprit of not accounting for government funds. The Vice Chancellor, Prof. Kayanja happens to be running the university as a private or his personal institution. We visited this university last year. The man welcomed the committee of Parliament with all the arrogance! The way he was answering our questions showed that really this man was above the law, doing things on his own. It is a shame! 

I am very concerned, Mr Speaker, because I come from Mbarara. This is my university, it is next door to me, but when it comes in the committee report and they do not account for the funds, I get concerned. It is high time this person is checked.

THE SPEAKER: But is the Vice-Chancellor the accounting officer of a university? 

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Prof. Kayanja is one of the best Vice-Chancellors Uganda has ever had, and I am very surprised that these remarks are being made when he cannot defend himself. I have no hesitation in calling upon the Minister of Education and Sports to respond to these very grave allegations. They have a consequence of de-motivating one of the most prominent servants of this country who has global credentials. I thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you, Mr Prime Minister. My comments come from the things, which were written in the paper. Money has been misappropriated in Mbarara University and I hope the commendable or highly trained professor will change his way of doing things and account for the taxpayers’ money.  

I will quickly go to treasury accounts. The committee has recommended to write-off Shs 68 billion. But, Mr Speaker, this is the second committee report to be presented to Parliament and we have never directed or done any report or presented it to the Ministry of Finance to clarify on this issue. Now that it has come out today, why do we say we should write it off? Why can we not direct the Ministry of Finance to give us an explanation on this and we debate whether it is right to write it off or not?  

Secondly, why should we hire consultants to balance the books in the Ministry of Finance? You have just told us that you have 2,000 trained accountants. You want to tell me that those accounts cannot balance these books? Is there any big problem in balancing the books? 

Having said that, you know the fish rots from the head. All these things bounce back to the Ministry of Finance; they are not doing their duty diligently, Mr Speaker.

MR KAJIMU KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Education. She has promised that she is going to issue a statement. I remember about eight months ago, hon. Mutuluuza raised an issue that there were people - Iguana was given Shs 200 million and they did shoddy work. The Minister came here on the Floor and she promised – “Oh, do not worry, Mr Speaker. This is very serious; we are going to investigate and it will be okay.” Up to today the honourable minister is still investigating. 

Hon. Mutuluuza came up again with a similar issue four month later and he raised another - I wish he were around - he raised another issue that the Ministry of Education was going to -(Interjections)- up to today -(Interruption)

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to mimic another member, who is also a minister, in innuendos, which reflect her gender? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had the occasion to appeal to you that you should not become personal when you are transacting business here. You talk about an office; do not address an individual. You may wish to, but you would rather address these issues to offices rather than individuals. But when you start - really we get problems.  It should not be repeated.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. What I was saying is that the information, which the Minister gave to the honourable member – is she not covering up again just as she covered up the other two issues? That is why I am worried. 

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. The information I want to give my colleague about the investigations to which I responded here is that there was no timeframe for them.  

Secondly, this is a highly sensitive matter where I, or the ministry does not have to come on the Floor without exhausting all sources of information. It would be wrong for an allegation of that nature to be hurried up before we come here with an answer. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that it is our duty as members of the Front Bench to defend a situation where we know an allegation is being made. So, I do not see the problem with my colleague. But what we are trying to do is to establish what the member brought on the Floor and which I understand he repeated, but where we still have to get concrete information before we can come up with a statement. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

4.19
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman and indeed the whole committee for their report. I agree almost entirely with it except that I have something to say about tax payment by the judges.  

The position of the committee seems to disagree with that of the Attorney General and the committee has gone ahead to recommend cautions as a punishment to the accounting officers. The details of the committee call for a number of interpretations of the Constitution, the Salaries and Allowances Act and the Income Tax Decree. I am of the opinion that this House does not benefit from the Attorney General’s interpretations. It would be wrong for us, Mr Speaker, to discuss this particular part of this report without the interpretations given by the Attorney General, especially when there is a little bit of disagreement with the committee. 

I would suggest, therefore, that this matter be referred back to a joint Committee of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Public Accounts Committee, together with the Attorney General so that they can come up with an harmonised position such that we debate from an informed position. Otherwise, for you to adopt this report as it is does not augur well for this House. I suggest, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Suppose we come to the end of the contributions from the members and the motion is to adopt the report, what would happen? Should we adopt or we wait until we get a harmonised position before we pronounce ourselves on the report? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think there is no problem minus that one. Alternatively, the Attorney General is here, he could advise us.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): I suppose if it is the proper way of concluding the debate, which has been going on following the submission of the accounting officer of the Judiciary, and also following the opinion of the Attorney General, if by causing this tripartite meeting to be held this issue is going to be resolved, I have no objection. But I would advise that in adopting this report, one of the recommendations, if the committee has no objections again, would be the one that the hon. Katuntu has proposed. The report can be adopted, but subject to the inclusion of this other recommendation regarding exemption of taxes for judges. Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I imagine when we adopt reports we adopt them including contributions from the Floor, which will be reflected in the Hansard. This particular recommendation is very substantial and when it is in the Hansard, we shall follow it up from there. It means, therefore, that the person to whom this matter was addressed, who is also the Attorney General - when the report is finally adopted, that is an area, which concerns him. He will be obliged to implement it. 

And with the additional recommendation by hon. Katuntu, I think we can adopt the report without even wasting time. We could do it without this particular recommendation because it is addressed to the same person. 

MR BEN WACHA: Mr Speaker, I am not comfortable with that arrangement. Under the Constitution, the Attorney General is the Chief Legal Adviser to Government. I understand that he has already given an opinion, which he has not retracted. If we now form ourselves into another committee, we would in effect be going against the advice of the Attorney General and would actually not be making it watertight. It would be redundant, unless the Attorney General is telling us that he has changed his mind; that he no longer honours the advice that he gave to us, the Government and the Judiciary Department. 

His advice must stand; that is the position, which I see in the Constitution. But if the Attorney General gives advice today, then he wobbles around and tomorrow he is not sure about that advice; we are not going to move anywhere.

MR AYUME: Mr Speaker, I gave legal opinion as the Principal Legal Adviser to Government and by this government - Government in capital letters - which includes Parliament. Therefore, I have never revisited my opinion; neither has anybody asked me to do so. 

Here is a recommendation, which has come from the Floor of the House, and this is the first time I am being asked to relate or interface with the committee. I am prepared to do that; that is really what I am saying and that is why I was saying, regarding the question of adopting this report, if it is the wisdom of the House, on the basis of the advice from the committee that such a recommendation forms part of their report for adoption, I have no objection. But the fact of the matter is that I did issue a legal opinion on behalf of the Government, but it does not stop me from interacting with this committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is that the Attorney General gave his legal advice to the committee, which has its own mandate to deal with the Auditor General’s report. Apparently there is a variance between the committee and the Attorney General. Maybe they have their reasons. I think the purpose of setting up the other arrangement is to examine why this variance is there. Do they have reasons? You examine, report to us and then we find a way out; I think that will be the purpose. 

It is not that the Attorney General is withdrawing or has withdrawn this, but they must have a reason why they disagreed. You examine those reasons, report back, then we decide.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, the committee is not challenging the decision of the Attorney General; that is out of question. The report says that that decision has the following implications, and it is those implications, which we think should be followed up. Actually, the Constitution talks of judges, and other judicial officers and the Attorney General’s directive do not cover those categories, and they have raised questions with the Public Accounts Committee. How do we deal with those who have been left out of this consideration?  

Secondly, there is Article 158, which deals with other categories of public officers; the provision is almost the same. Supposing tomorrow they also start claiming the same benefit, what is going to be the position? 
 
Thirdly, we are suggesting that the Act be amended. It should then be specific and enumerate the privileges to which these people will be entitled, because as it is now they are not clarified, so anybody can claim. It leaves room for asking for any privilege at any time. So, this is what the committee is saying. That arising from that, if we go by that omnibus thing then tomorrow somebody will come and claim another type of privilege. We are saying that this should be clarified or operationalised in the Act. There is no challenge of the Attorney General’s decision; we are only saying these are the consequences, and indeed consequences must be dealt with. Thank you.

4.30
MRS SINABULYA NAMABIDDE (Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this very good report. The chairperson of the committee and the minister have labored to talk about what is termed as classified expenditure, but what still disturbs me are the kind of things which are labeled as classified expenditure. For example on page 2 they talk about Shs 60 million, which was advanced to the housekeeper of the Vice President as classified expenditure! They also talk about utility bills in the office of ESO and ISO as classified expenditure. 

You wonder what kind of classified expenditure is spent by the housekeeper of the Vice President, because I believe the housekeeper would be dealing with things like laundry, food, spoons, toilet paper; what is classified about such things? What is classified about water, electricity, telephones in the office of ESO and ISO? I thought classified expenditure would be dealing with things like security matters. So, my request is that as we improve on the auditing of those departments, we should also put real security issues as classified expenditure other than any other thing as it appears in this report. 

Mr Speaker, I also share the view of the committee when they talk about prosecuting or making people who have embezzled public funds pay. We shall never defeat corruption in this country until we take serious punitive measures against people who embezzle public funds. For example, army officers being court martialled right now, but if they are not made to pay for what they took then we shall never defeat corruption in this country. So, I want to share the view of the committee that we should not just stop at prosecuting and imprisoning people. People who embezzle public funds should be made to pay for what they embezzled. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I am also concerned that these reports are coming out. We are looking at reports, which were audited in 1998/99 and yet so many things are going wrong in ministries and departments of government. For example, on page 27, I looked at war debt compensation and the comments of the committee and the Auditor General. The Auditor General had noted that people who are claiming compensation were on the increase and that the accounting officer, when asked, said that these compensations hinged on government’s policy and it was beyond his powers. 

Mr Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Government Assurances and when we wanted to find out about this war debt compensation, we were informed that many of the claimants who have been paid money are foreigners and have been paid in billions. The unfortunate thing about it is that by the time our Public Accounts Committee comes to scrutinise these things, so many things should have gone wrong. For example, here they make a recommendation that the payment of the claims must stop. But by the time they make the recommendation, so many claims, which are doubted and questionable, have been made. 

So, I urge that the Auditor General should submit the reports well on time and the Public Accounts Committee should act accordingly such that so many of these unfortunate things, which are happening, are stopped in time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
4.36
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for such a good report and I would like to note a few issues. I will start with the classified expenditure. 

According to the committee’s report, classified expenditure does not feature in any laws, which we have. But the problem I want to bring to the attention of the House, as the Chairperson of APNAC, Uganda Chapter, is the law of access to information. Article 41(2) is clear that; “Parliament shall make laws prescribing the classes of information referred to in clause (1) and the procedure for obtaining access to that information.”  

As we talk now, it is good the Leader of Government Business is here. I know the question has been put for oral answer, but hon. Prime Minister, it is high time the law on access to information is brought to this House so that we sort out these categories of information, which we need to look at.  

Secondly, I wish to share the view of the committee as my colleague, the Publicity Secretary of APNAC has just mentioned –(Interruption)  



PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am very happy to inform hon. Members of Parliament that this matter has been handled by hon. Nsaba Buturo and we have read the first draft. We are about to come here with a comprehensive Bill. So, I am very proud of the Front Bench.  

MRS NYOMBI: Thank you very much, hon. Prime Minister, but I wish it does not take too long, because I think you can see the problems, which arise out of not having that law in place. 

I share the view of the committee of – I do not know whether it should be a law, but we should come up with a law on recovering these funds. I am really strengthening the point of my Publicity Secretary, hon. Sinabulya, about getting - we seem to be like dogs, which bark but do not bite. We talk and expose, but we actually do nothing. We should come up clearly and strongly on recovery of funds embezzled, stolen and lost.  

Lastly, on page 6, I seek a clarification from the chairperson of the committee. He brought up a point in 1.10 - Treasury Accounts - that the Government owns houses wherever - it is a small section. But my concern is, where is this money? 

And you find in the minutes on page 31 that they had dropped the query! If you were satisfied and dropped this query, how then does it appear and raise all our eyebrows in this summary? That is the clarification I am seeking because you brought it here as outstanding, yet in your minutes, you were satisfied and dropped that query. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

4.39
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairman of the committee and his colleagues for having done this work exemplarily. I was surprised that hon. Dr Okulo Epak gave us a report, which appears to be very humble, yet I came in expecting it to be very biting and able to stimulate me to debate very strongly the ills of what is going on in the financial circles. But it appears he has put forward the case very smoothly and highlighted a number of failings by accounting officers and the necessary remedy for most cases in this report. 



I think this is the king pin of the work of the committee, that the difference between the Uganda Government, Tanzanian Government and the Kenyan Government is the thrust with which we organise ourselves as an economy or as a country to improve ourselves. I expected this committee to highlight issues of the failures of the money being used in UPE, in health centres and in the districts as an area of great sickness. But smartly enough as a professional, I think he is an engineer, he put it in one sentence that there are a number of failings. As to whether these failings are so bad that we need to take drastic actions, again it is nicely summarised that necessary remedies in most cases should be taken.  

There is something very serious, which the committee has done. In the actual details of the report, there are many irregularities, which have been highlighted. It is up to us as Parliament to come out clearly on what we should do. Actually we should re-orient the organisation of this economy, the organization of running business in government, so that it starts moving at a faster pace than Kenya or Tanzania because our friends seem to be ahead in terms of organising. 

It is quite serious when you find that teachers have not received two months’ arrears of salary when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister ruled here that teachers must get their money on the 26th of every month. The Minister for Primary Education visited my constituency and found several schools whose teachers had not received their money. This is the sort of situation, which is causing - I do not know whether hon. Musumba wants to drink water or to answer me –(Laughter)- the issue is, at the moment we must accept when we are disorganised.

The chairperson of this committee has put it very smoothly. As a Parliament we have to come out strongly and state what is causing this disorganisation to the extent that some teachers in primary schools are not receiving their salary in time. And some contractors have not received what they worked for. These are major irregularities when money has been voted for the grassroots and our constituents are not receiving value for money. 

These are issues, which I expected this report to come out clearly about. We need value for money. It was not quite highlighted; it has been scantily pointed at. But they are serious issues and this is the committee, which is going to change us. This Public Accounts Committee is the only committee, which we can use to analyse issues and tell the Minister of Finance that he is not well organised as far as allocating and disbursing money is concerned in this country. 

The committee’s report has come out clearly, we need to use it to bring out much more and point out recommendations of change, which is necessary to the Ministry of Finance because the disease really is in the Ministry of Finance.  

How do you expect the Ministry of Finance to also be allocated the same amount of money as a production ministry like Agriculture? The Ministry of Finance receives sometimes four, five times more than the Ministry of Agriculture, which is a production ministry. You go to the Minister of Agriculture and there is nothing in Bulamogi on cotton. He tells you, “Look, I cannot do this because the Ministry of Finance has ordered this”. I think there is total disorganization and anarchy in the Ministry of Finance, which must be addressed very carefully.

Mr Speaker, when I see two ministers standing up to drink water I get worried, but I think it is for their good health, so I must continue with my speech. The issue of organizing the economy -(Interruption)

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA:  Mr Speaker, the honourable member for Bulamogi, hon. Gagawala, has been telling this House that the Ministry of Finance is in total anarchy. He has been telling this House how the budget is lopsided; how we give so much money to Finance and give nothing to a productive ministry like Agriculture. But I believe that within the budgeting process there are enough provisions for any Member of Parliament to make the kind of presentation that is being made by hon. Gagawala so that together we can agree on how these allocations are to be made, And indeed that is what we do. 

We have a whole framework, we have a whole law in fact, which sets out when Parliament must come in; what it can do, what it should do and what is expected to be done in the budgeting process. May I propose, Sir, that other than an honourable member of the stature and experience in Parliamentary matters as hon. Eng. Gagawala Wambuzi, before he castigates the Ministry of Finance and says there is anarchy, takes advantage of the framework that is there for him to input into the budgeting process? I pray that the member takes heed. I thank you.

MR WAMBUZI: I thank the honourable minister for trying to derail me from my line of argument. I think on page 7, Mr Speaker, in its conclusion PAC has highlighted a number of failings by the accounting officers and the necessary remedy in most cases in this report. This is not the first year we have actually noticed that we are operating in a relatively disorganized economy. It has taken me seven years to stand on this Floor. I have not been always talking like this. 

I think it is the first time I have stood up, Mr Speaker, to say that we must put our House in order as far as organizing the economy is concerned. If we do not do it, the grassroots are not going to take it kindly. So, if we have failings and the committee does not tell us that these failings are very small or very big, the committee is being very tender in delivering the message. I must take courage and inform this House that this committee is much more serious than what appears to be put in the report. 

There is something, which is serious, which you must actually dig in and address to help you, honourable minister. I am not against what you are doing but I am saying that there are many things, which this committee has highlighted. If we are to dig into the failings of accounting officers, we would sack very many, but he has only said please, caution. 

We must thank the committee for actually controlling us at the other end that we must caution these officers. I would suggest that this Parliament today goes beyond caution and we start putting in our reports that if they do not heed our caution, we start taking much more sanctions. So this ministry, and indeed other departments of government, get organized and they start to match the standards of Tanzanians. They should also start to match the standards of Kenyans as far as finances are concerned. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.49
MR JOHN WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my other colleagues who have thanked the committee for a very well prepared report. 

However, my attention has been mainly taken up by the observations on page 6, under the treasury account. Mr Speaker, when they were attempting to reconcile the accounts, there were monies, which could not be accounted for and indeed the Auditor General found that a total of Shs 2.6 billion had been debited by the Bank of Uganda and was never credited back. This raises very serious concern given that the Bank of Uganda is the banker for the Government. Given that the Bank of Uganda is also the supervisor of all other financial institutions, I wonder why the committee did not take it as a very serious matter for the banker of government to behave like a Kifuufu bank where they can debit money from a government account and they fail to take it back? I really wonder!

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you my colleague for giving way. Even the committee has gone further to recommend that Parliament writes off Shs 107 billion, which was caused as a result of entrance entered in account by Bank of Uganda which has no evidence.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Yes, for the information of members, the details are on page 30 of the report. Actually what hon. Nandala has said is correct. There were payments, which were made to the Bank of Uganda but which are not being credited to the cashbook. And, Mr Speaker, the consultant who was hired to reconcile the books made a very serious observation that the situation is made worse by lack of trained manpower to carry out reconciliation both in the Bank of Uganda and at the Ministry of Finance headquarters. I think this is a very serious embarrassment for the top organs that are entrusted with keeping the taxpayers’ money. 

A figure of Shs 107 billion is a whooping figure by any estimate; it is not just loose change. And here we are being asked to write off Shs 107 billion of the taxpayers’ money and still we say we have a bank and a Ministry of Finance -(Interjection)- yes, of course, they are ministers and they are people who are paid to do the job. What is surprising is that reconciliation, which should be a routine function, has to wait for a consultant hired from PriceWaterhouseCoopers to come and do it posthumously, after the accounts have demised. I think this is sad and I hope that the Minister of Finance, in writing his Treasury Memorandum, will actually address these issues.  

He was talking of having passed out 1,000 accountants. Where are those accountants to write these books? Why do you have to import a consultant to help with just reconciling banking? This is routine book keeping and collecting bank statements regularly to ensure that the cashbook agrees with the bank statements. 

Mr Speaker, it is with a very heavy heart that I would allow the writing off of such monies. Even in simple company trading, writing off a debt is the last thing that a company would do, and this is only done when all efforts to recover the debt have proved futile. I have not yet heard what action the Ministry of Finance, as the supervising ministry, has taken against Bank of Uganda; first of all, for making wrong entries on government’s consolidated account, and for allowing such a situation to develop.  

Mr Chairman of the committee, while we are going to vote on this report, I would appreciate if you would throw more light on the steps that have been taken to find the whereabouts of this Shs 107 billion, and that such steps actually failed to yield the necessary results of recovery, and that now inevitably we have to write off Shs 107 billion, which would make a lot of difference in Buikwe North. We have roads, which are impassable; we have roads where we cannot even put culverts. We have children who are still sitting in the dust- (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am not an accountant, but I am getting concerned. This Shs 107 billion, who took the money and is there anything we can do other than making a blanket statement then we go home, when the person responsible could be at large? What are you talking about?

MR WAGONDA: I have tried to be helpful by referring my colleagues to page 30 of the report.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague. This is what the Auditor General reported. He said: “Debits in the bank statement not credited in the cashbook stated as Uganda Shs 108 billion is not supported by documentary evidence.” What he meant is that the Bank of Uganda debited the Consolidated Fund account with that amount without evidence. If a bank debits your account wrongly, it is supposed to replace it. So, it is from here that we as Parliament cannot write off this. We must demand for this from the Bank of Uganda. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA: Thank you very much, my colleague for enriching my debate. In fact, in proposing to write off this amount, we are trying to rewrite the ethics that all good operating financial institutions should abide by. Mainly, they make good a customer’s money once a wrong debit has been made.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to give this information. I also want to thank the honourable member for giving way, because if this matter is not clarified, people will get out of this House under the misconception that Shs 108 billion was lost in Bank of Uganda. 

I want us to read the entire paragraph 8.3 on page 30; “Verification of accounts maintained by the Treasury, made by the Auditor General revealed the following: 

(a) Bank reconciliation statement…” - and here let me clarify my understanding of a bank reconciliation statement. This is a statement that reconciles what you have credited onto the account and what has been taken out. It says: “The bank reconciliation statement presented had a number of anomalies as follows: (i) Debits in the bank statement that were not credited in the cashbook stated as Shs 108 billion is not supported by documentary evidence.”

Correspondingly, the accounting officer said that the reconciliation was done by a consultant and revealed that there is a difference, which the Auditor General has reported. He explained that there was a problem with bank reconciliation due to lack of skilled staff. This resulted in a difference of Shs 107 billion being carried forward over the years.

My understanding of this, and this is what I want the members to appreciate, is that on the account there was Shs 108 billion against Shs 107 billion, the documentary evidence was not there. But that does not mean the money was not there. This is a matter for reconciliation –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To understand this thing very well, it originates from 1998. This is the report of the Auditor General and this is the report of the Public Accounts Committee. On page 7 it is said; “The cashbook had a bank overdraft of Uganda Shs 563,037,187,914 whereas the bank statement has an overdraft of Uganda Shs 671,629,303,956. That meant that money had been overdrawn from the bank, giving a difference of Uganda Shs 108,592,196,042.”

The PAC report says: “However, there was no bank – on page 36, the difference again. You have to get the one of 1998. “… there was no bank reconciliatory statement to ascertain the causes of the difference of Shs 108,592,116,042. The accounting officer in his submission reported that at the time of carrying out the audit, the bank reconciliation had not been finalized.” He said it was then available and had been passed on to the auditors for verification. That was the PAC report of 1998.

We come to PAC report of 1999 the query comes up again, which says: “Debits in the bank statement not credited in the cash book stated as Shs 108,542,692,336 is not supported by documentary evidence.” -(Interjection)- Not debited. Debited means they draw money from our account in the Bank of Uganda. That means Shs 108 billion was taken and that is why you see this money was taken out.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank you my colleague and I thank the honourable minister. What I know is that we would definitely not be writing off money, which is on an account. Even a child in primary would not accept that we write off money, which is available on the account. We are being asked to write off that money because it is missing.

Sadly, honourable minister, if you do not know that the money is missing at least it cannot be accounted for. There was no evidence, but it was paid out. In otherwise, it was paid out without sufficient supporting document, which the auditors would call either un-vouched or semi-vouched payment. I am talking this authoritatively as a former accounting officer. 

As I was saying, with Shs 107 billion we could have done a lot of work in Buikwe. We have children who still sit in the dust. Actually, with that amount of money Buikwe would never be the same again. But now we have to write it off, it is very sad! I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:I have seen the attendance here, and I think it is a convenient time to adjourn. You go and study the report. There is an issue, which was raised by hon. Katuntu in respect of the judges’ taxes, this has to be studied because at the end of the day we have to adopt the report as one document. I hope within two or three days you will have reconciled this. We shall come back on Tuesday to continue with the debate. The House is adjourned –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: I am sorry Sir! We have a technical problem: I shall not be here on Tuesday nor will my deputy.

THE SPEAKER: Could you assign somebody in the committee, since it was teamwork? I will allow him to present the report. So, the House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 February 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)


