Thursday 17th February, 2000.

(Parliament met at 2.15 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala)
  
P R A Y E R S

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)
The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  I take this opportunity to welcome you back from recess.  I certainly hope that you had a good opportunity to interact with your constituents,  solved all their problems and are now ready to start Parliamentary business,  which you no doubt commenced last Thursday.  In a very special way,  I welcome back our colleague,  Member for Kwania County,  the hon. Adyebo,  who is here in our midst.  When I conclude the Communication from the Chair,  I will give him an opportunity to briefly say a word or two,  if he so wishes.  But before I do so,  I would like to inform you about how we are to proceed this afternoon.

Considering the order paper,  which I have no doubt was circulated to you,  we have a problem in that the report of the Committee considering the Community Services Bill, is not ready for circulation to each and every one of us.  Despite that,  the Bill looks fairly straight forward,  and considering that we want to catch up with time and that the Chairperson can easily deal with the situation by reading out the report,  we will proceed accordingly.  Before we get there,  I take this opportunity to recognise our colleague and friend,  the hon. Cosmas Adyebo,  Member for Kwania County.  Hon. Adyebo.


PERSONAL EXPALANATION

MR. ADYEBO COSMAS (Kwania County, Apac):  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  I am pleased to be here once more,  after a long spell of absence due to sickness.  I do not intend to give you a political discourse today;  mine will just be a thank you.  It is to centre around only 24 words,  which are paired.  These words are: to bear and to die; to plant and to uproot; to kill and to heal; to tear and to build; to weep and to laugh; to mourn and to dance; to scatter and to gather; to embrace and to refrain; to keep and to throw away; to tear and to mend; war and peace;  hatred and love;  and lastly,  silence and speeches.  If you connect these 24 words into sentences, you would arrive at none other than Ecclesiastis Chapter 3:1-8,  with the title; "there is a time for everything."

Yes, hon. Members, there is a time to be born and a time to die.  There is also a time to plant and a time to uproot,  especially when you are leaders,  you plant and it is up to you to decide when to uproot.  There is also a time to kill - but not always  - but there must be a time to heal.  We are told you can tear half of a construction down,  but please be ready to rebuild it.  Many people do weep during trouble,  during funeral rights,  but God gives you time to laugh.  And not always do you mourn,  you must have time to dance.  And when you scatter your opponents,  if you are a leader,  please gather them.  Always embrace as many people as possible and in search of more,  do not give up the old ones,  keep them,  do not throw them away.   


Lastly,  there are times when people are silent and there are times when they speak.  I have been for a long time unable to speak.  Today I am not going to speak much,  and I am about to wind up.  In winding up,  hon. Members,  I remember one thing.  When I was very sick and needed everybody's assistance,  there were two groups working on my case.  One team wanted me to live, the other team did not want me to live,  and it is human.  The team that wanted me to live was chaired by none other than God the Creator;  and the one that did not want me to live was chaired by none other than satan.  I am glad to report to you, Mr. Speaker,  that God won and this is why I am here.  I believe all of you belong to the side chaired by God,  including you,  Mr. Speaker.  I remember you visited me twice,  despite the schedule you have.  

This sickness taught,  alerted me and reminded me that it is very difficult for one to claim that one is a God fearing person,  when one does not even love one's neighbour.  Then one claims to love God whom one does not see!  Before I sit down,  I will give you advice.  You as the national political leaders,  stick to one thing and that is,  never say die.  Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999.

MR. ONAPITO-EKOMOLOIT  (Amuria County, Katakwi):  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Allow me to present a Bill entitled the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 1999 for First Reading.  I beg to move.  

I would also like to apologise for not having presented this Bill on Tuesday.  I was away,  for the burial of a former Deputy Speaker of this House,  the late Justice Mallinga.  I would also like to inform Members that I have been reliably informed that by the end of the day,  the Bill will be in your pigeon holes.  Although this does not mean that it is a pigeon hole Amendment Bill.  Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE COMMUNITY SERVICE BILL, 1998.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS  (Ms. Namusoke Sarah): Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move that the Community Service Bill,  1998 be read for the Second Time.  I beg to move.

This is a Bill with basically three objectives.  The main objective is to rehabilitate prisoners in their communities,  by doing productive work.  The second objective is to reduce congestion in prisons and the third objective is to prevent minor offenders from mixing with hard core criminals.  

Since May,  when I took office as Minister of State for Internal Affairs,  I have had the opportunity to visit over 10 prisons out of the 45 Government prisons.  I continue to visit more,  but I have found out,  and also the figures from prison records show,  that a lot of the prisoners in our prisons could be better Ugandans if they were kept out of prison,  to serve their sentences.  Therefore,  we would want those with minor offenses,  a list of which I have and will be passed on to this House,  to serve within their respective communities,  so that we do not lock them up.  Because of the congestion in prisons,  we cannot afford it any more,  it is very expensive to maintain these prisoners.  Some of these minor offenders come out worse,  because they are mixed with hard core criminals.  

We would also want to fulfil the original objective of prisons;  that when people commit a crime and they are put in prisons,  they should come out better people to our societies.  We cannot afford to do that any more,  because we do not have the resources.  Much of the infrastructure that was put in place to ensure that prisoners are rehabilitated is no longer active.  Our farms are no longer productive to their full capacity; the workshops are no longer active too.  And Government cannot afford to rehabilitate these prisoners in any way.  Therefore once this Bill is passed,  we intend to remove at least the minor offenders to come out and serve their sentences within the community in which they live.  

Right now,  we have about 2,500 people within our prisons today who,  if this Bill is passed today and implemented throughout the country,  would qualify to benefit from the community services programme,  other than being in prison cells.  Mr. Speaker,  if this Bill is passed,  it would especially help women prisoners.  This is because the majority of them have committed offenses that fall within categories that will be benefitting from this programme.  

Women offenders have special problems.  Apart from their physiological problems,  which are exaggerated within the prisons,  we have found out that once these women are in prison, they lose their husbands.  Even when they are locked up for only a month,  by the time they come back their husbands have married somebody else.  These are thrown out onto the streets.  We have for instance in Luzira,  a programme for them.  And quite a lot of these women do not go back home because they have no home to go back to.  We wish our husbands could hold on a little bit longer,  we would probably save a few of them;  but a lot of our men folk do not wait.  As soon as a woman is taken into prison for whatever offense,  she is abandoned for someone else.  So we really think that this Bill will be very beneficial to this category of prisoners.

The Ministry has held workshops,  with the help of well wishers and our donors,  whom we thank very much.  We have already put in enough preparations,  we have held sensitisation seminars in the three pilot districts namely Masaka, Mpigi and Mukono,  where we intend to implement this programme first.  There is also a Luganda sensitisation programme on Radio Star,  which is a live call-in programme every Sunday evening from 9.00 p.m to 10.00 p.m.  Through these programmes we have been able to tell the people about this programme.  We have heard their views,  we have heard their anxieties and recommendations.  So we are confident that they are ready to receive this programme in these districts,  and it is our intention that once we succeed in these three districts,  then the programme will be expanded to include all the districts of this country.

We have benefitted greatly from some of the countries that have carried out this programme before,  like Zimbabwe, Kenya and others within Africa,  as well as other countries outside Africa.  We are ready to implement this programme.  I request Members to support this Bill and pass it so that we can go ahead and implement it.  

I should perhaps mention that we have a lot of good will from the donor community,  who are prepared to assist in sponsoring it for the first three years,  and then it will be handed over to us;  in terms of a financial take over.  It will be handed over to Government to implement fully.  Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Lt. Col. Mudoola):  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  Before I read the report,  I wish to welcome the hon. Members back from recess,  and wish them a happy new year and millennium.  

I beg to present to the House the considered report of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Community Service Bill, 1998;  in conformity with rule 99 (6) of the rules of procedure of Parliament.

In March 1995, the African Commission on Human and People's Rights discussed prison conditions in Africa.  It expressed concern that the prisons and prisoners in many African countries are afflicted by severe inadequacies,  including high congestion, poor physical health and sanitary conditions.  Also cited were inadequacies of recreation, vocational and rehabilitation programs, restricted contact with the outside world, large percentages of persons awaiting trial,  among others.  It concluded that prison conditions in many African countries do not conform with the Articles of the African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights and the International norms and standards for the protection of human rights for prisoners.  This is exactly what is existing in Uganda.

The African Commission therefore decided to hold a seminar on the issue and asked Penal Reform International to help organise it.  Indeed,  the first Pan African seminar on prison conditions in Africa took place in Kampala, Uganda, between 19th to 21st September, 1996.  The seminar was organised by the PRI and the African Commission for Peoples Rights in partnership with the Uganda Prison Service Administration,  a local NGO, the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative,  as well as the ICRC and the Observatories International des Prisons (International Prisons Watch).  More than 130 delegates from 47 countries, 40 of them from Africa met in the Ugandan capital,  Kampala.  

The Minister of Internal Affairs,  Uganda was joined by the President of the ACHPR as well as Prison Commissioners and Judges together with international, regional and national Non Government Organisations from across the African continent,  to discuss the problems facing African prisons and put forward solutions.

The bottom line agreed on by all the delegates was that prison conditions in Africa had reached an intolerable level.  There was a greater need than ever to reform prison conditions and more importantly, to adopt positive approaches to imprisonment itself, including alternative sentencing.  This, it was recognised, requires continuous efforts to ensure sympathetic public opinion and firm political commitment.

It is upon this background that the interim committee held a number of meetings and seminars aimed at not only sensitization, but also getting ideas and views on the importance and applicability of community service orders.  A seminar for Members of Parliament was held on 23rd March, 1999 at the Nile Conference Centre, Kampala, a training workshop for stakeholders was held at Collin Hotel Mukono between 8th and 10th July, 1999 and another in Sheraton Hotel,  Kampala.

Establishment of Community Service:

The Community Service Bill introduces Community Service Orders as an option to imprisonment in the criminal justice system.  Community Service is a scheme in which carefully selected persons who have committed minor criminal offenses are ordered by Court to perform unpaid work of benefit to the community.  Many countries around the world have community service programmes,  because prison sentences,  especially for minor offenses,  have proved unhelpful in checking recidivism.  In addition,  the conditions in prisons are appalling and unhygienic.

On the other hand,  community service will be cheaper in the long run,  because the State does not pay for the prisoner's upkeep in prison.  The offender undertakes to repay society by doing unpaid work for the benefit of the community,  and the offender will not be in contact with hard core criminals.  The scheme is rehabilitative in nature,  as opposed to the punitive nature of a prison sentence that does more harm,  by making a first offender worse.

Objectives of the Community Service Scheme:

Community service as an alternative to jail sentences is intended to achieve the following:

(i)  To rehabilitate the offenders in their community and preserve their families as much as possible.

(ii)  To reduce the rate of recidivism.

(iii)  To minimise the contact between hard core criminals and minor offenders.

(iv)  To reduce expenditure on prisoners.

(v)  To promote the respect for human rights and dignity of offenders.

(vi)  To reduce the congestion of prisons by diverting deserving offenders to do community service.

(vii) To avail offenders opportunities to do productive work for the benefit of the community.

(viii)  To implement the United Nations Minimum Rules on the treatment of Offenders (Tokyo Rules).

Structure of the National Committee:

We are happy to report that an interim national steering committee is in place to spearhead the introduction of Community Service Orders as options for courts, when imposing penal sanctions.  At the apex is the national committee chaired by a Judge of the High Court,  with members representing institutions like the Judiciary, Police, Prisons, Law Reform Commission, human rights organisations and other NGOs.  Below the national committee are district committees, whose composition will reflect that of the national committee at district level.  Community service will be carried out by institutions under the supervision of a person from that institution.  

A district co-ordinator will be appointed from amongst the members of the district committee,  but generally  he or she will be the community development officer or his/her assistant.  It is hoped that the supervisor will be able to report to the court or district co-ordinator, and the report of the district co-ordinator will be sent to the secretariat of the national committee.  The Minister will give directions through the national committee.

Creation of public confidence:

Public acceptability is an essential component of the provision of alternatives.  Democratic Governments like Uganda,  will not be able to introduce such measures unless they are confident that the public will support them.  The public has a right to know what community service entails.  This can however only be done with the support of the media, organising regular seminars, workshops and conferences.  

These seminars should focus on Members of Parliament,  who are the law makers,  the Judiciary and prosecutors as implementers, probation officers, NGO representatives and civic leaders,  who will oversee the successful implementation of the scheme.  Particular interest should be given to Government and voluntary institutions like universities, schools, hospitals, roads for Ministry of Works, and NGOs,  because they are the potential placement areas (consumers) for community service.  These institutions are reeling under severe cash flow problems and the ban on civil service recruitment,  for group employees.  No doubt therefore that there will be immense benefit from the work of the officers serving community service.

The background to community service in Uganda has already been presented,  and the progress of the interim national committee on community service has equally been done.  It is important to highlight some efforts that have been made towards sensitising the community. 

Mukono, Masaka and Mpigi districts were randomly selected as pilot districts for preliminary inquiries and study of the possibility of implementing community service.  During visits to the districts,  members of the interim committee met with district leaders, that is RDCs, CAOs  and the ACAOs, the Chief Magistrate, the probation and welfare officer, education officers,  heads of departments and the local councillors.  Visits were also made to institutions where placements on community service would be made.  That is schools,  health centres and the office of the Town Clerks.  

Getting a feeling of the officers about community service was equally important.  To this effect, the research sub committee visited Mukono local administration prison.

The success of the Zimbabwe model has inspired many countries in the region, Uganda inclusive.  The Kampala Declaration on Prison conditions in Africa recommends the wider use of community service as a proven non custodial sanction.  Implementation of the scheme relieves pressure on over-burdened prison services and makes possible wider reforms and improvement in conditions of detention;  as well as changing the public attitude towards treatment of prisoners.

Through this scheme more institutions may open up meaningful projects using community service workers.  With the continuous threat to life by the cholera disease,  there is need for more pit latrines,  especially in schools forced to close.  And under Universal Primary Education (UPE),  more classroom blocks have to be constructed.  With this kind of work,  members of the public would appreciate the desired benefits of the scheme.  The offenders will equally benefit in that they might get employment in some of these institutions,  after successfully serving their sentences.

One significant feature to the success of the Zimbabwe model has been greatly attributed to the support it enjoys from the public. The scheme relies,  for its implementation, on members of the public. District committees comprise Magistrates and interested members of the public,  who provide their services on a voluntary basis and usually during their spare time.  The status it derives from being under control of Magistrates positively affects public perception.  And the co-operation that exists in the district committees between Magistrates and placement providers ensures that consistency is maintained,  standards of supervision are set and local difficulties dealt with.  While public scepticism was high in the initial stages,  the scheme now enjoys popular support in Zimbabwe and from the placement institutions in particular. We can use the same model design and implement community service orders in Uganda to much success.

The role of the community in implementation of community service:  
The community has a role to play in both the supervision and the monitoring of the scheme.  Public support is an integral component of community service.  Community service is largely dependent on work being provided for offenders by public and social agencies such as institutions of higher learning,  schools,  hospitals/health centres,  public roads et cetera.

Different social actors are involved and have a role to play in the implementation of the community service.  These include the relatives, local councillors, religious leaders, neighbours, probation officers, the supervisors at the site of work and the media that keep the public informed on a constant basis.  They should be totally involved in the rehabilitation of the offender and help them reconcile with the victims of their crimes.

Local councillors, relatives, neighbours and the victims of the offender should be associated with the exercise.  Their opinion on the rehabilitation of the offender is very vital and serves as a means for evaluating the success of the scheme.

Part IV of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for Non Custodial Measures (Tokyo Rules) makes clear the role of community in implementation of non-custodial measures.  Section 17(1) states;  "Public participation should be encouraged,  as it is a major resource and one of the most important factors in improving ties between offenders undergoing non custodial measures and the family and the community.  It should complement the efforts of the criminal justice administration."

17(2) states;  "Public participation should be regarded as an opportunity for members of the community to contribute to the protection of their society."

To inspire public understanding and co-operation in non custodial sentencing, the Tokyo Rules provide in 18(2), that;  "Conferences, seminars, symposia and other activities should be regularly organised to stimulate awareness of the need for public participation in the application of the non custodial measures."

Role of the media in community service:

All forms of mass media should be utilised to help create a constructive public attitude,  leading to activities conducive to a broad application of the non custodial treatments and the social integration of the offenders.  Every effort should be made to inform the public of the importance of its role in the implementation of non custodial measures.

The Committee recommends the promotion of community support through sensitisation campaigns,  which target public opinion,  and the development of statistical database,  to measure the effectiveness of the community service.

For the public to understand and embrace the concept,  it requires the support of the media.  Radio, television and newspaper coverage is needed to sensitise the masses.  However, not everyone has access to the media,  especially in the rural areas.  In such a situation it becomes imperative for the national committee to go out to the Community and meet the people and visit institutions of placement.  These visits and talks help to allay any fears or suspicions held about the programme.

The media should have good access to the scheme, so that they can assess what is going on,  and get information to explain the idea to their audience.  The media should follow the progress of the interim national steering committee on community service.  It is very important that the scheme receives the widest publicity to achieve the following:

1.	Create awareness.

2.	Enable the public realise that violent and serious offenders will not benefit from this option.

3.	Enable the society realise its responsibility to rehabilitate offenders within the community.

4.	It is equally healthy for the society to enter a debate about community service,  on who should be given this option, where and how it will be served.

5.	By the offender remaining in the community, he is repairing the torn social fabrics.

A regular publication is another means through which to reach members of the public.  There is need for seminars and meetings with different segments of the society.  Through this process, even those at village levels will be reached.  It is important to note that a lot of support has been expressed in the three districts so far visited by the interim committee,  that is Mukono, Mpigi and Masaka.  Scepticism by some members of the public cannot be completely ruled out.  This calls for continuous sensitization to reduce any possible resistance.

Conclusion: 

A call for prison reform and the diversion of offenders from custodial sentences is not a call to be lenient with criminals.  Reform of the criminal justice system is rather an essential element in the effort of Government to address crime and the social and economic crisis that fuels it.  Imprisonment should only be reserved for the exceptional,  the serious,  the violent,  the dangerous,  and those involved in organised crime.  An appendix of the crimes that qualify for community service has been attached to this report.  

The public need not fear that this programme is meant as a soft option for prisoners.  The offenders will be carefully selected.  The community is therefore called upon to take on its role to protect the society,  through participation in the rehabilitation process of offenders.  The media has a challenge to inform the public about what is going on. 

A programme of this nature has succeeded in Mauritius, Senegal and Zimbabwe.  In uganda,  it has so far gained full support of the Executive,  Government departments including Prisons, the Police,  Judiciary and NGOs,  just to mention a few.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  I beg you to support the motion.  I beg to move.

MR. RWABIITA DEO (Ibanda South, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support the motion.  First of all,  it is true that the prisons of Uganda leave a lot to be desired as regards the management of prisoners,  and even the space in these prisons.  Mr. Speaker,  I would invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to go to Mbarara and visit Kakiika Prison.  This is one of the prisons I have visited,  but it is a sad affair.  People sleep on top of each other,  virtually.  There is no room,  not even two feet between the blankets,  and there are no mattresses after all.

The health facilities there are also hazardous.  I do not know whether this was a colonial mentality that an African cannot be trusted,  that if he goes out he can run away.  So there is what we call mobile toilets in these prisons.  It is in one corner of the room,  no door, nothing.  There are no toilet papers - I do not know what these people use!  So you can imagine people easing themselves the whole night,  and you are sleeping next to that toilet facility.  The whole room is nothing but stinking.

Then the hygiene of these prisoners is in a mess.  They get scabies.  I do not know whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs cannot afford soap for these prisoners to wash.  The uniforms are not only dirty,  but also torn to pieces.  Heaping human beings in those small rooms is very unfair,  and to me it is against human rights.  So it is in order that a Bill of this type should alleviate that congestion in the prisons.  Those people with minor cases should go for community work.  This will be a very good measure in correcting the mistakes of some of our citizens.

What annoys me with the law is that the small man who steals a bunch of bananas is imprisoned for a year,  while someone who takes a half billion shillings - because he has got money to buy himself out of prison - is set free.  Where is the justice?  There is no question of naming any of the cases.  There are many examples,  I do not need to mention one;  there so many, Mr. Speaker.  This peasant cannot afford to pay a Police bond, therefore he rots in prison for months and years.  While somebody who he has got money to buy himself out is set free.  So for simple justice,  it is in order that a law of this type is made so that those who commit small offenses can be corrected within their society.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Rwabiita for giving me way to ask for this clarification.  The prison conditions that were described to us by the hon. Member are horrible,  particularly the use of buckets as a toilet,  in the same room that prisoners sleep!  The clarification I want is,  if you look at the appendix to the Community Service Bill,  which is at the back of the Committee's report,  you see number eleven, "fouling the air,"  mentioned as a misdemeanour to attract two years in prison.  The condition described in the prison,  definitely I imagine the air there can be very foul indeed.  Should the prison authorities not be taken to task under this section?

MR. RWABIITA:  Mr. Speaker,  that is my argument.  The prisoners should be treated as human beings,  not live in places that can make them sick and very unhappy.  The prison authorities should make sure that these prisons have got healthy conditions.  Even if one is a criminal,  one should enjoy his human rights and sleep in a decent place. 

Apart from the problem of hygiene,  there is one of starvation.  In many prisons there is not enough food.  But then it is interesting, and this must be charged against the authorities of prisons.  Here we may have 300 prisoners for free labour yet they cannot grow enough food for themselves?  And prison farms have got big pieces of land.  Either it is the officers who are lazy or the Government does not give them enough tools and seeds to cultivate enough food of themselves.  I do not see why prisoners should die of famine when there is a lot of land where they could grow enough food.  In many prisons you find they have only one meal a day,  which is very unfair,  Mr. Speaker.

Although I support this motion,  I insist that the offender should first go to a prison and test how bad it is.  That way when he is given the liberty,  he will know how he should behave.  What I saw down in Kakiika is not the best for a human being.  That will teach them the lesson that even with minor offenses,  one should be careful enough not to engage in them.  The community works are plenty,  especially now with out LC system we are talking of feeder roads, bulungi bwa nsi roads,  protecting water sources for the community, building dispensaries,  schools and even churches and mosques.  These people can contribute to the community they live in and learn a lesson from what they did.  Most of the time the offense does not only offend one individual but the whole village and community where these people are coming from.  

When we come to part II,  sub Article (5),  it talks of somebody in charge of these prisoners when they are doing this work,  and the duration and requirement of service orders.  Number two stipulates that the offender shall be under the supervision of the supervising officer named in the community service order.  My question is,  what authority has this officer got to make sure that this prisoner does not run away from him?  And if he does run away, will he be charged?  Mr. Speaker,  many prisoners run out of prisons and disappear into thin air.  If you are given charge of someone on community service,  what will happen if he runs away?  This is a question that must be answered.  We must find means of not penalizing this person, because it is not his fault.  People are very witty.  The prisoner can run away and come to Kampala for six months or one year,  and it will take the Magistrate's Court a lot of money to chase after this person.  I find a loophole there.  There is not much authority given to the supervisor of these people who are on community service. 

Another point is about the six months and then the five hours a day.  I would like the Minister, or the Chairperson of the Committee,  to tell us why they chose six months.  Why not more or less?  And the five hours a day;  why not more or less?  Are there any reasons behind this?  Suppose this offender was supposed to be imprisoned for two years, and you give him community service for only six months;  is that fair?  Is it commensurate to the two years in prison?  I would like to know the reason behind these limitations that have been given in this clause.  

With those few remarks,  I support the motion.  I hope the community will support it and not take these prisoners who are coming out as criminals but as people who are ready to correct themselves and be good citizens.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I seek clarification from the Minister,  the Chairperson of the Committee or the Attorney General,  on a number of words that appear in this report.  Number one;  on page four,  what does the last word mean? 

Number two;  look at the appendix and the number of offenses listed there.  Can I seek the guidance of the experts on the offenses listed there?  Take for instance item one;  what is affray?  Item four;  what is disturbing children?  Is it waking them up when it is too early;  what do you mean?  Is it neglecting them?  These are the issues,  Mr. Speaker.  It will be useful if the experts would first of all explain these words,  so that we know what we are debating.  Thank you.

MS. BABIHUGA WINNIE (Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to congratulate the Committee upon their report.  What could be conceived as a simple motion to me is quite complicated,  and I will not support the report for these reasons. 

Whereas it is good to decongest our prisons,  it is absolutely dangerous to infest our streets and villages with criminals.  Mr. Speaker,  while a reason is being given that our prisons are congested,  on the other hand I do not think that our Government has prioritised prison services enough to give them the adequate rehabilitation and revamping that other sectors have received.  If the IGG went for a physical audit in the prison officers' homes and saw the things they own,  this country would be ashamed.  The resources that would have otherwise gone to the welfare of the prisoners have ended up in the hands of individuals rather shamefully unabated.  We thus need a law that will attach individual's property,  where corruption has been ascertained.  

The other reason why I oppose this motion is that I would have been happy to start with fewer offenses that are clear in the minds of the majority of Ugandans.  These should then be spread all over the country.  I think the sample of three districts was rather hurried and too small.  In the long run,  a small section of districts in this country,  three out of 45,  will benefit.  The majority of Ugandans committing similar offenses in the other 42 districts will be languishing away in prisons.  Therefore I would rather they specified fewer offenses,  which will be enjoyed by all Ugandans at the same time.  

Looking at the section of offenses to be exempted,  hon. Members, you will agree with me that women will live to suffer more.  If elopement,  common nuisance,  disturbing of children,  adultery, are all going to be prison exempted,  that means that our women will go on to suffer in the homes.  Most of the offenses that are disturbing families fall under these categories.  Even domestic violence I think comes under common nuisance.  Therefore,  Mr. Speaker,  to say that for me to be given adulterated food and drink is an offense to be exempted,  I find it most unfair.  I find it most outrageous,  because even offenses of fraud and obtaining credit by false pretence,  which is rampant,  are considered minor offenses.  I would like to tell the expert that came out with this list that in our society,  these are very grave offenses.  I therefore move that this list be amended,  to contain what we would all call common and minor offenses,  and to benefit all Uganda at the same time. 

Lastly,  I would like to say that the moving of this motion is rather untimely,  in the economic environment we are.  If we are going to pass this Bill containing these that we call minor offenses,  we will have the majority of Ugandans harassing the ordinary person.  What do we have out there in the villages?  It is people who steal food at night,  who steal the chicken and utensils in homes.  If they are going to be at large,  life will be miserable,  and peace will be disturbed.  I am even shocked to see that a minor offense like tax evasion does not come under this list!  The poor who cannot even pay their graduated tax are going to languish in prisons while the thief who has disturbed that the ordinary person,  stealing their chicken,  their goats where they could have got some income to pay taxes,  is enjoying freedom!  


I move that this motion is rather shallow.  It is untimely,  it needs to be revised so that it benefits every Ugandan at the same time,  with the offenses that we all call minor.  I thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  in debating this motion,  I would like to draw your attention to what I consider very irrelevant in as far as your contributions are concerned.  I know we are discussing the general principles,  but this is a new concept.  In order for you to appreciate the spirit as well as the manner in which the courts are going to handle this particular law,  I draw your attention to clause 4 sub clause (2).  First of all, 4(1);  "Where a person is convicted of a minor offense,  the court may...", the word is "may"; "...instead of sentencing that person to prison,  make a community service order."  The second one;  "before passing a community service order,  the court shall consider the circumstances,  character of the offender and ask him or her whether he or she consents to the order."  The important point there is the, "court shall consider the circumstances, character and antecedents of the offender".  Before the court acts,  it considers certain circumstances.  I suggest that you bear all those in mind.

MR. PINTO MANUEL (Kakuuto County, Rakai):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Let me start by saying that I support the spirit of the motion and the report of the Committee,  with a few reservations.  First of all,  on pages two and three, the Committee clearly identifies that our prisons are in a horrid state.  And indeed the Minister,  who has visited ten out of the 45 prisons,  clearly stated that the prison conditions are unbearable.  This is an admission about which Government ought to have taken action,  instead of just coming here to lament!  This Community Service Bill, 1998 now debated in 2000,  carries observations as in the 1998 period,  which still prevail this year.  If anything they have become worse!  So you can see a condition that is classified as dehumanising,  left unattended to.

I think I better highlight the sentences in the report,  that I am talking about.  "Prison conditions;  many African countries do not conform with the Articles of the African Charter on Human and People's Rights,  and international norms and standards for the protection of human rights.  The bottom line agreed on by all the delegates was that prison conditions in Africa had reached intolerable levels."  The question is;  whose responsibility is it to maintain these prisons in reasonable state?  It is the State!  So, while we can accept the concept of reforming minor offenders, the main thing here is that the prisons are intolerable.  And there is admission on part of Government that they continue to be intolerable,  but there is no suggestion anywhere that there is going to be something done about it.  I appreciate the inadequacies in financing,  but at least one would like to see some presentation by the Committee or by the Minister,  indicating deliberate efforts or an assurance to the nation that Government recognises such a bad situation.  It should do something about it.  This is left hanging,  and I think it is a poor situation.  


Having said that,  which is repeated again on page four of the report,  I see on page five that among those who are going to popularise and assist in implementing this law are NGOs and community leaders.  I would like to implore the hon. Minister and Government at large,  since I know that there is a proposal to ammend the NGO Statute,  to be very mindful so that NGOs can operate effectively.  They can only operate effectively if they are allowed the liberty to do so.  Any attempt to include Government participation in the Non Governmental Organisations,  obviates the very concept of the organisations.  

In my experience,  these organisations have been very instrumental in community development.  They have done physical rehabilitation,  counselling,  and in the health area and in so many others,  poverty alleviation.  They have performed more effectively,  if I may say,  than Government programmes.  They are more cost effective,  more target focused and more result oriented.  This is a winning team;  this is a winning concept.  You do not want to interfere with it.  So be mindful,  when you introduce regulations that may take away what is a Non Governmental Organisation and make it quasi Government.  

Page seven indicates the type of community services that the minor offenders might engage in.  I would like to bring to mind the mentality of community based services and organisations,  I have been involved in many.  Often you are successful if you retain voluntarism.  People do a lot of work in bulungi bwa nsi,  as volunteers.  The schools we have built in my area,  and I am sure in many other areas,  get support from Non Governmental Organisations,  and we complement this service with what you get from the Government.  I would like us to be careful not to kill that spirit of voluntarism.  We are channelling it to the minor offenders.  If that is compared with volunteer services, they will say, 'you will get your minor offender to do it,  we shall not.'  It is a very delicate balance.  People volunteer because they want to,  they want their schools.  So be careful not to stigmatise what has otherwise been a successful mobilisation effort.  Local people who have been participating in development projects should not consider it as if that can be only done by the minor offenders,  and therefore withdraw their voluntary work.  

I have seen this manifest itself,  Mr. Speaker,  from my experience with community based organisations,  especially when we attract bigger Non Government Organisations.  These are well prepared and funded,  they start paying transport for the councillors to go for meetings and they give them allowances,  we have seen that the volunteer community workers withdraw saying, 'now depend on those NGOs that are paying.'  That is,  'if you want us to continue with community services,  pay us also.'  And many times we do not have funds for this so we lose out.  So you must be aware of this delicate balance so that when we go for mobilisation on community development projects,  the concept of voluntarism will remain.  Community development will continue to be done by the communities themselves so do not stigmatise it and say, 'minor offenders are going to dig pit latrines.'  It is a very delicate balance and you can easily lose it.  

Let me turn to the appendix to the Committee's report,  Sir.  I would like to recall what my colleague Winnie Babihuga has said.  I think we want to re-examine the appendix to the Community Service Bill as it stands now.  Possibly we should introduce phases.  As we go to implement this intervention,  some of these offenses that are considered minor should be clearly explained and how they apply.  The people should get conditioned in phases, as you go on to introduce others.  But if you implement whole sale,  we will have a problem.  Although,  Mr. Speaker,  you have kindly guided and said the Magistrates have to weigh and recommend community service,  there a stigma that is also brought out.  I would like this matter to be considered seriously,  and the Schedule amended.  If necessary we should introduce and implement a phased policy,  going by the severity and nature of the offense as perceived by the public.  

Theft does matter.  I think hon. Babihuga has clearly said so.  The people out in the villages are terrorised by petty thieves who steal their crops;  crops are harvested by thieves!  The chicken are taken at night from their houses and they are left with nothing;  their goats are slaughtered!  These are serious crimes in the villages.  So what is the measure of severity,  what procedure are you giving if theft is left out?  The community will be harassed,  so we should consider what impact this is going to have.  Already defilement is a very serious matter and requires re-consideration before it is included here.  Many people say that boys and girls join in this act,  but many times it is only the boys who are victimised.  

There is an outcry that these girls cry out that they have been defiled only on occasion,  when it suits them.  Otherwise they accept and go along.  Many cases have been sorted out on discovery that the girls participate willingly.  The mother would say, 'I know this boy has been cohabiting with my daughter for so long.'  So there is no forced engagement.  What message are you sending out when you talk about adultery,  when you talk about elopement,  when you talk about disturbing children?  I think we need to be a little more specific,  and therefore phase the implementation of these charges accordingly.  The appendix needs to be more clarified and possibly given progressional degrees of severity.  I beg to support,  Mr. Speaker.

MR. WANGUBO ABDALLATIF (Bunya West, Iganga):  While thanking the Committee and the Minister for the motion,  I wish to seek clarification on three issues.  One,  Mr. Speaker,  is about the custodial sentence.  When convicts are given a custodial sentence,  there should be a similar sentence,  having a similar consequence or effect in whichever prison one is kept.  But if we were to use community service orders,  I see a problem of one convicted for elopement in say Iganga getting a different sentence from one of the same crime in Rukungiri.  That imbalance repels me from the idea of the community service,  because the punishment will differ depending on who supervises.  So I want clarification on that from the Minister or the Chairman.

There is also likely to be a problem of people giving testimonies or evidence in areas where the culprit is known.  Habitual offenders who get convicted for minor offenses could threaten those that give evidence that lead to their conviction.  If such offenders are kept in the same community,  how do they behave and how would the community continue giving evidence in such cases?  
I am also worried about the message that we may be sending to schools.  The schools have what we call core curriculum activities,  which include agriculture and the vocational instructions.  If we are to use such examples for community service,  then the students would look at those as punishments.  How shall we tell these students that in schools they are not being punished but when they are out there it is different?  How shall we differentiate the two?  If these are answered then,  Mr. Speaker,  I will have no problem supporting the motion.  Thank you.

DR. MALLINGA STEVEN (Butebo County, Pallisa):  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the motion.  It is high time we did something about the prison system in this country.  We have already agreed that there is overcrowding.  I think this Bill seeks to relieve overcrowding and bring some modernity to the jail system in this country.  We all uphold that the system we have at present is a sadistic,  primitive system of imprisonment with no rehabilitation for the offender.  We are amazed by what is in the press about a prominent person in this country who after being imprisoned and rehabilitated abroad,  is so grateful that he has come back and is seeking the highest office in this country!  This is after thorough education and improvement of his attitude. I hope we could do the same here.

The purpose of imprisonment should be rehabilitation;  it should not be punishment and creation of an extremely bitter person,  who gets out of jail willing to commit more violent crimes.  That system had started in this country but in the confusion we had,  we lost it.  The prison system in this country,  under one of the Ministers called Baziriyo Bataringaya,  had gone onto the path of rehabilitation.  When I look on the other side I see some people who were prison officers then.  Prisoners were taught farming,  prisoners were taught carpentry and they came out with skills.  But we have slid back to torturing prisoners,  they live under unimaginable conditions,  and we are just making the situation worse by the day.  

I however take exception and would like to emphasize that we have to put offenders into categories.  There are those who need intensive educational rehabilitation especially those who have committed violent acts towards women and children,  those should stay in jail.  I am appalled to see,  on that list of people who would qualify for this kind of programmes,  things like adultery!  That person need mental rehabilitation and moral rehabilitation.  He does not qualify to be on this kind of programme.  

Disturbing children;  I do not know what that means.  It should be defined further,  we do not know what it means.  I would think that anything to do with harming children,  that person should not qualify for this kind of programme.  He should stay in jail and be rehabilitated.  Neglecting to provide for the family;  that person needs moral rehabilitation.  He should not just be let out.  Concealing the birth of a child;  that one needs moral rehabilitation and education.  Still on children,  this reminds me of our Naguru Prison for children.  That should be a major target in a programme like this.  Most of these children have committed minor offenses,  yet we gather them in a place where they are cultivated into criminals.  Naguru Remand Home is nothing but a breeding place for criminals!  It is through a programme like this that those children should be taken and educated,  and need better, future citizens of this country.  

Actual bodily harm;  that is a violent crime and it should not be here.  Assault;  I do not know what kind of assault this is.  We are faced in this country with a serious situation of corruption and embezzlement.  To even suggest that a thief should qualify for this programme,  is painful.  Thieves should serve hard labour in order to send a message to the community in this country that is embroiled in corruption and embezzlement,  that is it wrong.  

To end my contribution I say this.  Criminals are of two categories.  There are those who deserve rehabilitation.  Those should stay in jail for they have committed violent crimes for which they should stay in jail.  Then there are those who are non violent,  they have committed minor crimes.  Those are the people who qualify for community service.  Crimes against women and children should not be included on this list.  Thank you very much,  Sir.

MR. EKANYA GEOFREY (Youth Representative, Eastern):  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support this motion.  I had the chance to visit Luzira and other prisons,  and I have had time to study the criminal justice system in other parts of the world.  I have come to the conclusion that the judicial system is basically meant to reform,  to rehabilitate an individual,  and to improve society.  

I feel that this Bill is long overdue.  It should have come when Uganda got independence.  If you study the structure of our prisons, they were built in such a manner that when one is charged and convicted,  one would find an environment where one would reform,  repent and confess.  That way when one is introduce back into the community,  one is a better person.  That is why now 30 years down the road,  we are saying that our prisons are congested.  

If our prisons are congested, should we build more prisons?  I do not think the Movement should repeat that mistake.  History has it that during one regime,  a Minister from Tooro,  Babiiha by name,  gave to his people the gift of building prisons in Tooro.  What then happened was that UPC Government seriously lost votes there.  I therefore appeal to hon. Members and Government,  that we should not build more prisons.  This motion is timely,  we should make sure we pass it.  If there are some administrative clauses that need to be adjusted,  the Minister should be empowered to do that.

As we talk about community service,  it is paramount that we also talk about doing away with death penalty in the long run.  This is the same thing we are talking about.  Prison is meant to reform,  not to destroy.  If we still have the death sentences in this country,  we are therefore applying double standards.  I call it giving the cake with one hand and taking away with the other.  They call it the carrot and a stick,  Mr. Speaker.  I thus pray,  hon. Members,  that once this Bill comes into law,  the Minister of Internal Affairs should think of moving forward,  and we do away with the death sentence.

When you look at the objectives of this Bill,  you realise that number one on page four states that;  "to rehabilitate offenders in their community and preserve their families as much as possible."  If you take your time and visit the prisons,  you find young people who have stolen a piece of soap;  simple crimes.  Pick pockets on the streets,  these are the majority in Luzira.  You find very few of the "Ekanyas";  you may find only five "Ekanyas" in that place.  And he may come out on bail,  because he has money.  Therefore I believe this motion is timely. It will help Government to save money,  besides families will be able to reunite.

If for example my father was taken to Luzira today,  I would lose a lot.  Despite my father not being able to support me financially,  I get from him wisdom  and you cannot give that a monitory value.  Therefore it is paramount that hon. Members pass this Bill into law.  It will help families to be together.  It will help children learn a lot from their fathers,  and we shall thus build this country together. Because if you study the causes of criminality in society,  one of them is genetics.  Others are society,  so you find that doing away with somebody for two, three years,  maybe very dangerous.  Perhaps where we may require adjustment is if Kampala town has more young people involved in pick pocketing,  we may need to introduce those people to different environments,  where such kind of behaviour is less tolerated.  They might change that way.  

Another, very important,  aspect of this Bill is that it will solve what some of us have been praying for.  People have been convicted and served their sentences,  there is need for Government to come up with a programme of introducing them back into the community.  That programme needs to be entrenched such that even the hard core criminals,  after they have served their sentence of ten years,  can reintegrate with their families.  They should also regain their property.  Mr. Speaker, we normally face the problem that if one is convicted and stays in prison for five years,  they find their wives remarried and the houses without iron sheets.  Even the husband remarries;  to be gender sensitive.  The children sell the land too.  So alongside this Bill,  there is need to have a policy of integrating prisoners back into the community.  I do agree with the hon. Member who said that if somebody is convicted to five years,  he should serve two years in prison,  and for the remaining years he is given community service.

I also agree with objective number three, which reads; "to minimise contact between hard core criminals and minor offenders."  Hon. Members,  take time and visit prisons.  For example, visit Luzira prison,  which is so near.  You will find that what is happening there is quite pathetic.  I do not know the best word to use to describe it.  A young boy or a young girl of about 18 years  -(Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER:  Will you wind up please?

MR. EKANYA:  Yes.  Young people of 18 years share cubicles with men who may be smoking,  yet this young person may not be a smoker.  That old man could also be consuming other substances,  which may not be very good.  Mr. Speaker, therefore objective three is paramount.

Lastly,  objective seven reads; "to avail offenders opportunity to do productive work for the benefit of the community,"  is very paramount.  I do agree that we have a concept in this country,  Mr. Speaker,  of bulungi bwa nsi,  but that concept has really reduced.  Most schools that have been constructed, the wells and other community projects,  the local councillors have compelled people to contribute either chicken or money and at the end of the day these commodities are sold and then needed materials are bought.  To introduce this programme will discourage young people in schools from doing work.  We may need to debate it in depth,  because in these schools we have people who are paid to do work like slashing.  The young people need to be in class and therefore if somebody is doing this work,  he or she will not be paid.  

Finally,  I thank Government,  and appeal to hon. Members that this motion is timely,  it will reform the criminal justice system in this country.  Thank you very much.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Mr. Speaker, I rise to support this motion and to thank the Minister for having brought back this Bill,  which should have been discussed and disposed of in 1998.  When you look at the objectives of the Bill,  one would say it is long overdue.  When you visit prisons, particularly Murchison Bay and Upper Prisons - those are located in Kampala district - you see that there is a lot to be done.  Government should look up resources,  from donor agencies,  to improve our prisons conditions.  One needs to visit Murchison Bay and the Upper Prison,  which is for condemned people or people who are on high treason charges,  to see that there is a problem.  
On this note,  Mr. Speaker,  allow me to thank Minister of State for Internal Affairs for the effort she has made to visit the prisons and see for herself the state they are in.  I am sure after her visits,  the report she writes will be convincing enough for Government to do something about it.  But the other thing,  which is not included in this report and which the Minister could take note of,  is the number of children being born in prisons.  There are so many children being born in prisons!  You find a woman prisoner with three to four children in prison.  I do not know what the Ministry for Internal Affairs does about such cases,  because that is promoting adultery in prisons.  So -(Interruption). 

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI:  May I seek clarification from hon. Okumu-Ringa as to what he means by children being born in prison?  Possibly the mothers go there when they were pregnant,  that is one child.  But if there are two, three, four children,  who is responsible for these pregnancies?  Who is fathering the children?  Is it the prison officers or the inmates?  I would like to be clarified on that.  Thank you.  Or do the husbands sneak in and do the needful? 

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Kibaale Wambi for seeking that information.  I read in the press about the visits of hon. Sarah Kiyingi,  Minister of State for Internal Affairs.  In one of the prisons,  a mother with four children was introduced to her.  Perhaps she will be in position to explain further later on.  

Having said that,  Mr. Speaker,  I would like to support this motion because this Bill is going to help reduce -(Interruption). 
MS. NAMUSOKE:  Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to come in here,  although I know I will have an opportunity later.  I want to clear this.  The children that were introduced to me were of a lady who had been arrested and brought in with all her four children.  They were not conceived in prison.  I have not met any prisoner who has produced more than one child while in prison.  So my assumption is that these mothers come when they are pregnant and they produce while serving their sentences.  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Speaker,  I wish to reiterate my support for this motion because it will help reduce congestion.  It will also help to integrate the minor offenders back into society.  I would like to however appeal to Government,  through the Ministry of Internal Affairs, to standardise prison infrastructure such as houses and cells.  That way the Ministry of Internal Affairs can come up with plans for district prison infrastructure.  And now that we have decentralised districts, those plans can be adopted by districts so that they become institutions that reform rather than create more offenders.  

Law is meant to reduce crime,  law cannot eradicate crime.  But crime can be reduced if society adopts positive attitude towards what is criminal and condemns it and supports what is upright.  The tendency is to praise criminal acts in some societies;  they are considered courageous acts.  In other societies,  criminal and offensive acts are condemned by the law of that community, such acts are condemnable.  In this case law would be enforced to supplement the attitude of society towards what is right and what is wrong.  So this Bill will help to reduce congestion.

I would like to raise three questions.  One is that civil imprisonment,  according to the law and unless I am advised otherwise,  is normally paid for by the plaintiff.  In other words,  if a plaintiff wins the case against someone and the defendant is sentenced to jail,  then the plaintiff will be forced to pay for upkeep of that person in jail.  Is this law still applicable?  If it is, how much money is Government collecting from civil imprisonment?

The other issue I would like to raise,  Mr. Speaker,  is the categorisation of crimes.  It will help us see,  in the glossary or the appendix,  whether or not those who are being jailed as per the various crimes are numerous.  So when we adopt the crimes that should be accessible for community service,  we would be able to make proper judgement.  I am saying so because in the international media two days ago;  for those who either heard BBC,  Voice of America or read international papers,  it is stated that the United States of America has the highest number of people in jail;  two million.  That is almost a whole tribe by African standards.  And that is a very big number for a country as developed as that.  But of course that is minus one Ugandan who came back.  

So,  categorisation is important,  Mr. Speaker,  so that we are able to see how many people appear for each crime every year.  And if you grade it according to regions,  make it per district,  how many appear for example for fraud;  how many people are normally taken to court for that crime?  Or for elopement?  The statistics will help us decide on the kind of crimes to include here.

My last point is the need for sensitisation.  It is true that the media has come out to openly advocate for what is right and oppose what is wrong.  But we as leaders should also be assisted to advocate for this appeal, so that in our communities we are properly understood.  This is because in some communities,  once somebody has stolen a chicken or eloped with somebody's wife,  that person is an outcast.  If such a person is brought back into the community,  such a person would have a lot of problems.  So we shall have to do a lot to sell this Bill,  particularly when we adopt certain offenses that are not easily forgivable.  Seeing the person who wronged you pass by your house,  and imagining that the person may do the same thing again,  will not be easy to subscribe to.  We shall need support in that area.  With these remarks,  Mr. Speaker,  I would like to once again support this motion and thank the Committee for their report.

MR. ONGOM ABSOLOM (Omoro County, Gulu):  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I also rise to support the motion.  I have only three points to make.  The first is to get clarification from the Committee as to the purpose of the appendix.  Because I do not know, when we pass the Committee report,  will it form part of the Bill?  If so then we need to do more on that.  But I suppose they are just drawing our attention to examples of offenses that may be put under the Community Service Act when it is passed.

While I support the motion,  I hope that when it is passed into law it will now not be an excuse for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to continue neglecting Prison services.  Because you know,  the first objective is to reduce congestion in prisons, which is a big problem.  Once the Act comes into being,  let us hope that it will indeed reduce congestion in prisons.  I hope that the Ministry will not turn back and say, 'all is right with prisons, now that there is no congestion.'

We have consistently neglected Prison Services.  I am always worried,  when we are debating their budget.  Every year,  if you look at the Ministry's budget,  the Services get the least.  Yet the Minister continuously complains about poor services in the Services;  he does not give it the necessary priority.  As I said before,  I hope that when we pass this law,  they will not continue to neglect Prison Services. 

In the past we had two prison systems, one was run by the local Government and the other one by the central Government.  But these have recently been merged and we have only one central Prison Services.  The result is that even those facilities that were run by the local Governments have been allowed to waste.  No wonder therefore that we have serious congestion in prisons,  everywhere in the country.  Mr. Speaker, I hope that the Ministry will look into this,  to see whether they cannot rehabilitate some of the prisons that were previously run by the Local Governments.  can they not be put to use again?  

The second point I want to raise is with regard to section 4(2) of the Bill,  which says;  "before passing a community service order, the court shall consider the circumstances, character and dissidence of the offender,  and ask him or her whether he or she consents to the order."  I find this extremely odd.  Somebody has already been found guilty and when you are condemning him you ask him, 'should we confine you for two months or three;  which one do you prefer?'  Why should this be done?  I think it is enough for the judge to take all these circumstances and the character of the offender into account and charge him or her.  I do not see the need for asking for his permission.  I know we are trying to be innovative;  but I think it is innovation in the wrong direction.


In the administration of this law that is suggested,  the national community service committee is being emphasised,  with very high powered membership.  That is contained in section 11.  Mr. Speaker, I do not see the need for this national committee.  If we have service committees, they should be at district level or even lower down,  where the prisoners are likely to be doing the services.  I do not see the need for the national one.  These are just creating bodies that may do very little,  really.  I suggest that the Chairman and Minister see to it that we eliminate this level of the committee,  and start from the districts, down.  I am not convinced that it is necessary.  

The Committee also supports this in their report!  I do not know whether they really gave it a lot of thought.  What is it that this committee is going to do at the national level.  You know, the services are going to be down at community level.  So what will the committee at the national level do?  If there is any necessity of higher committees,  then the highest level should be the district,  in my view.  Mr. Speaker,  those are the three points I wanted to make.  Otherwise I support the motion.

MRS. BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support this motion,  but there are serious Amendments that I feel must be incorporated into it before it becomes very useful to us.

I support the motion because it is true there are minor offenses.  One could have stolen a bunch of matooke because one is hungry,  and it is not a habit.  If such a person is netted at home and given community service,  he or she will reform.  Therefore the offenses mentioned here should be uniform before being given this kind of punishment.  We must consider the habit,  and how many times such a kind of offense is committed,  to justify the criminal's serving of his sentence at home.  When we for example talk of adultery as a minor offense, I am completely at a loss.  What happens if we pass this Bill and we consider adultery as a minor offense?  You will see men and women misbehaving,  and you know very well that we have AIDS with us.  Are we promoting AIDS in our nation?

The Amendment that I feel must be included here is the title of the Bill.  It is very misleading.  If you say, "Community Service Bill",  I or even any common person,  would think that Government is going to mobilise the community to serve the nation.  In other countries we have national service,  which is done during a certain period of your life,  for the good of the nation.  I suggest that this title be changed,  because it is a kind of punishment to the criminals.  It could be called, "Minor Offenders' Bill",  because it is part of the punishment or the penalty given.

We are complaining that our prisons are congested.  What is the cause of this congestion?  It is the Judiciary.  The remand prisoners are not brought to court for years.  If you take the statistics in the Prison of Luzira,  you will find that there are more prisoners on remand than those sentenced.  The same with Upper Prison.  There are prisoners who have been sentenced to death,  but for 20 years they are there,  the President has not decided whether they should be killed or serve another punishment.  Why should we blame others when actually when it is Government and the Judiciary who are not doing their job?

The next issue is,  how can we control these minor offenders who are to be sent back to the village?  There are some who by nature do not want to work.  I have seen those prisoners who are moved to serve outside the prisons under control of warders.  The prison warders must have guns around them,  to force them to work,  and so that they do not escape.  If we solely leave them to committees,  which do not have arms and power to control these minor offenders,  it will be a problem.  Therefore I suggest that in each district or sub county,  depending on where the sentence is going to be served,  we have to attach a Policeman to control the offenders.  Mr. Speaker,  thank you very much.           

MR. MWESIGWA RUKUTANA (Rushenyi County, Mbarara):  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker,  for giving me the opportunity to raise my voice for the very first time in this august House.  Though I have not had the benefit of reading through the Bill,  I support it strongly and say that it is long overdue. 

Even though I support the Bill very strongly, I wish to warn that we must to move cautiously.  It may look a simple and desirable matter,  but there are so many things to be taken into consideration.  Mr. Speaker,  we have to be aware of the values and aspirations of our society.  We must not let this Bill undermine the confidence people have in the law.  The essence of this Bill is that a convict will be allowed to go back to society and work there as if it were a normal situation.  But you have seen how members of the public,  including Members of this august House,  outcast people who have been released on bail!  I anticipate a situation where after conviction,  somebody is sent back to the community to work,  people will say, 'the courts have been bribed,  this convict has been let free;  he has not been punished.'

We should be aware that law and sentencing are the cohesive arm of Government.  We should know that a convict is a convict - he has sinned against the society.  So we should expect that our people want convicts to be punished.  If you release a convict and the following day he is rubbing shoulders with the person he sinned against,  the sinned against will think that his wrong has not been punished.  Unless we do intensive education,  people are likely not to understand this.  The use of a sentence in every court can be many things,  but the most important uses of sentences are:

One;  a sentence must be punitive.  As already said, a  sentence of a court is some kind of revenge on behalf of society and on behalf of a person who has been wronged.  Though people may argue that revenge is outdated,  a person expects to be avenged once he is wronged.  The issue of revenge should not however blind our eyes.  In punishing somebody we should be able to deter not only that convict but society,  so that a person knows that if he commits an offense he is going to be punished.  So you deter a wrong doer and members of society who would have fallen in the same trap,  by committing similar offenses.  


What we are trying to do is to earn one respect in society.  That is,  we rehabilitate the wrong doers.  It is very good to rehabilitate the wrong doer so that when he comes back,  he is useful to the society.  But then there is a sophisticated balance to be made:

One;  you have to satisfy the society;  whoever wrongs them must be punished.

Two;  you want that person to be rehabilitated.

Three;  you want that person and others to be deterred from committing similar offenses.

So you see,  there is a sophisticated balance to be made.  To me,  this facility of allowing somebody who has been convicted by a court to go back to the community,  should not be a sentence.  I do not want the court to say, 'we have found you guilty of elopement and sentence you to two years of communal service,' no.  I want it to be a facility,  which a convict who has satisfied court that he is repentant applies for,  in mitigation of the sentence.  That way you do not reduce the strength of the law.  For when someone is convicted,  he always gives factors in his favour:  he is repentant,  he has children to look after or he is a first offender.  After giving all those and after court has satisfied itself that the convict is repentant,  only then should it consider giving him the chance of community service.  If we do not do that,  I am afraid our people may think that we are watering down the strength of the law.  Somebody who has not shown repentance and satisfied court to that effect,  should not benefit from this community service.

I beg to say that much as I love the Bill and want it to succeed,  we should be cautious.  We should give the courts guiding rules on how and when to apply it,  and what considerations it should take into account before a person is allowed to benefit from this facility.  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I welcome the motion, although I am thinking that something material has been left out.  I am of the view that the Schedule that has accompanied the report appears to be too short and has only followed the Penal Code.  I would have been happier if some other laws with similar gravity of punishment were also considered,  so that the society is properly catered for.  For that reason,  I beg the Chairman of the Committee to accept to add to this,  a provision allowing the Minister concerned,  on the advice of the Attorney General,  to amend the Schedule,  when the time is right.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I would like you to appreciate this.  I personally do not read what is in the report of the Committee to be a Schedule to the Bill,  neither does the Bill contain any such Schedule.  What I know is that the Bill defines what a minor offense,  is by the nature of the punishment.  I think that the Committee - unless I am advised otherwise - is trying to guide the Members about the kind of offenses they are talking about.  That is why the sub title of what you call the Schedule reads, "Charges on which community service orders may be given include ...".  This is by way of information,  in which they include "an offense whose maximum penalty is three years".  But of course that will be to the discretion of the court.  That is my understanding of this report.

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  What I have said is also my understanding.  Whatever the intention of the Chairman was,  I hope he will still take into consideration what I have observed.

Secondly,  reducing the crowding in the prisons,  particularly Luzira.  I am asking the Minister of Internal Affairs to make arrangements such that these minor offenses are tried within Luzira,  by the Grade II Magistrate.  Carrying them so many times from Luzira to Buganda Road, to Makindye;  it appears so cumbersome and expensive to the Government.  If these cases could be heard in Luzira itself,  it would faster reduce the crowding in the cells.  

The third point I want to raise is the imprisonment of tax defaulters.  It is very absurd;  is this is a civil debt or a criminal offense?  If it is a criminal offense,  then after the man has served his sentence,  he should be given a ticket to show that he is no longer liable for the taxes he defaulted.  Otherwise if you release the man who had no job prior to his arrest, without a ticket,  you will arrest him for the same a few says later.  So I do not think that this type of imprisonment is serving any good.  

In the past,  the man who failed to pay his poll tax used to either be imprisoned,  sent to work the roads or sent to another village to serve a month's job,  called luwalo.  After that,  he would be given a ticket and that would relieve him of any bother about the poll tax.  Presently,  both the Minister of Internal Affairs and of Justice,  must think about this matter,  which is causing unnecessary congestion in the prisons.  Thank you very much hon. Members and Mr. Speaker.

MR. NDEGE JOHN (Luuka County, Iganga):  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  I welcome everybody back from the recess.  I also join most of the Members in supporting this motion.  The situation in the prisons is appalling.  Not only are they over crowded,  I understand that in Luzira,  which was designed for 800 inmates,  there are over 1000;  but also feeding these people is a big problem.  They eat beans and posho 365 days of the year. Sometimes the food is not enough and they scramble for the little that is there.  So if we reduce the congestion,  it will improve these people's lives.  For other than punishing the offender,  you want him back in society rehabilitated and remodelled.  Even if he stays in prison for five years,  he is going to go back into the society one day.   

We should therefore not look at this Bill as a lenient one.  It is practical in solving minor problems.  Let people not think that when an old man commits adultery and he is to serve six months digging the roads,  it is not humiliating.  It is perhaps more humiliating than going to prison.  It teaches others not to misbehave,  because the people in the community are looking on.  Then the small boys will say, 'look, I will not do this again,  otherwise I will be seen doing community service.'  So we should not look at it as lenient.  We are trying to tame society.  We bring these minor offenders to do some productive work for them,  and after that they go back into society.  

That his has been successful in Mauritius, Zimbabwe and other African countries with similar conditions like Uganda,  I think Uganda is not different.  Even the States with so much money in their budgets cannot afford to look after all these prisoners.  They are encouraging more and more sentences to community services.  So it is not something that is unique to Africa.  It is taken up by all countries,  rich and poor.

When the woman was brought to Jesus Christ,  he said, 'let you who have not sinned throw the first stone.'  So he looked at it differently.  So I think my colleagues are overlooking the fact that adultery is between two consenting adults,  it is not raping.  I think 90 percent of the people commit adultery at one time or the other.  I was watching a programme where a Tutsi girl ran away with a Hutu man,  and the Tutsis wanted to kill him.  He had to run away.  I think such a situation can be accepted as a love affair -(Interruption).

MR. KIBAALE WAMBI:  Mr. Speaker,  I am rising on a point of order about the Member holding the Floor.  Is it in order for the Member to assert,  and to continue convincing the House,  that it is normal,  it is moral,  it is a right for people of our age to commit adultery?  That because it is said, 'whoever has not committed a sin, let him throw the stone first,'  so it is proper?  Is he in order still,  to impute that we are adulterous?

THE SPEAKER: Well,  if the hon. Member was making reference to the Bible,  that is beyond us.  Our rules of procedure do not cover the Bible.  I cannot therefore say whether he is in order or not.  Those are issues of morality,  which are best dealt with outside this Parliament.

MR. NDEGE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As I was concluding,  tribal differences can be a big problem,  forcing people to elope.  If these two people are in love,  society can look at it and say, 'you do not need to go to prison, let us give you a non custodian sentence.'  So circumstances should be left to the Judges.  The Judges will look at the situation and decide.

MR. ACHILE MANOAH:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise on a point of information in relation to your wise ruling that problems connected with the Bible are very deep and intricate.  In fact if there ever lived a great psychologist and sociologist,  that is the Lord Jesus Christ.  His duty was to handle issues in such a way that he brought humanity together,  to go about the business of spirituality without antagonizing society.  That is the information I wanted to give.  Thank you very much.

MR. NDEGE:  Thank you very much.  In conclusion I say we should leave it to the Judges to see how not to antagonize society.  Thank you.  I beg to support the motion.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister,  I am entirely in your hands.  If you are not ready you let me know so that I can take an appropriate decision.  

MS. NAMUSOKE:  Sir, I am ready.

THE SPEAKER:  Very good.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah):  Mr. Speaker,  I intend to give the clarifications that some Members were seeking.  I however seek your guidance on whether I should give the clarifications of also those Members who are not in the House.  

THE SPEAKER:  It is for the Hansard.

MS. NAMUSOKE:  Okay.  I will start with the hon. Member who has just left the Floor.  I wish to clarify that the list that appears as part of the report - the crimes that are on it - are not by the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  We have not created these and made them offenses.  These are offenses that are considered by the Ugandan law,  and they were picked merely as examples.  If an hon. Member - or any Ugandan for that matter - is caught eloping or committing adultery but the person believes that there is no big deal about it,  he or she can go to the courts of law and argue that out.  We are not creating the offenses.  These are offenses within the laws of this country.

MS. BABIHUGA:  Further clarification,  Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Why further?  The Minister is now responding.

MS. BABIHUGA:  Mr. Speaker,  further to the clarifications that were raised by this House,  I also need clarification from the Minister.  If indeed,  the Minister is telling us,  the annex is not conclusive in specifying offenses that will fall under consideration,  and the onus is left on the judiciary to decide  -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, it is defined.  Look at your Bill.  The offenses that qualify for community service or arrangement are defined on page four.  Minor offenses means an offense for which the court may pass a sentence of not more than two years' imprisonment.  What it simply means is that these are offenses where the court cannot go beyond imposing a two years' sentence.  It can be any offense,  including assault.  It is the penalty provision that categorises these offenses;  you can even ignore that list of the Committee.  That is my understanding of this Bill.

MS. BABIHUGA:  Mr. Speaker,  the clarification I seek is in regard to that.  In this country we have offenses as grave as defilement being given only one month's imprisonment or the culprits even go away scot free.  Considering the rampant corruption within the Judicial system,  what assurance does the Minister give us that the judgements to be given for offenses that qualify for community service will indeed be minor?  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

MS. NAMUSOKE:  Mr. Speaker,  I will go through the questions that were raised and hope that at the end of it all I will have cleared all the doubts in the minds of the hon. Members.  

Hon. Rwabiita decried the bad state of Kakiika prison.  I wish to tell this House that I visited Kakiika prison and I indeed agree with hon. Rwabiita and the majority of Members about the comments that he gave about this prison.  I am however glad that he is in support of this Bill.  The foul air that he talked about in this prison of Kakiika is due to the old style toilet system.  This system,  I wish to report to this House,  is under rehabilitation.  So we hope that the next time I visit that prison and the next time hon. Rwabiita visits,  the air there will be far better than what it was when he last visited.  

Hon. Awori asked for the meaning of offenses,  and the technical terms.  As far as I am concerned,  that list is not necessarily part of the Bill.  But I want to say that it is also the intention that these crimes are explained in a language that is understood by all concerned and they will be translated into local languages.  I am sure it will be translated into Samia.  So hon. Aggrey Awori will also be in a position to explain these offenses to his constituents.  

Hon. Winnie Babihuga commented that the prisons are congested because of misappropriation of resources.  To my understanding,  she was saying that the resources are taken by the officers and that this can be seen in their houses.  Mr. Speaker,  I have not had the opportunity to visit any of the prison officers' homes.  I have certainly not been invited and perhaps when I ever get that opportunity,  I will take note of that.  For now I can say that if somebody has misappropriated resources,  be they prison officers, Police or whoever,  they are supposed to be dealt with according to the law.  So whether we have community services or not,  we can still detect these people who take Government resources.  It is the intention of Government to continue apprehending them whenever they are found.  

There are three districts chosen.  Hon. Babihuga was talking about the districts that are chosen and she is of the view that we should pick only a few crimes and spread the scheme thus,  throughout the country.  Hon. Members, Mr. Speaker, we have chosen only three districts to begin with as pilot ones.  This is because it will be very difficult to administer all districts at once.  In the first place we would for example need to set up district committees in all the districts.  That is very difficult and I think it is very dangerous for a programme,  which we are just beginning.  We need to interpret these crimes for instance, we need to translate all the materials that we are using in educating and sensitising the people.  We cannot really start in all the districts at once.  We would rather go stage by stage;  we cannot start it at a national level.  We need to learn from the people in one district and see how we can adjust to the rest of the country.  

I think I have already said enough about the community service programme or interim committee not being the one that classified these offenses as minor ones.  It is the courts that classify these offenses.  In fact the community services programme comes in after the person has been sentenced.  The Judge or Magistrate then says, 'look,  you are sentenced to such and such a period, but you also have the option of community service.'  In fact if a person is found guilty and is sentenced to prison,  the community services programme does not touch that person;  if the Magistrate has already ruled that this person is to go to prison.  
Hon. Pinto asks, "who rehabilitates, who is responsible for rehabilitating prisons?"  This is because we are giving that as one of the reasons for having community services.  It is indeed the responsibility of Government to rehabilitate prisons and indeed,  even as we talk now,  some prisons are being rehabilitated throughout the country.  

Hon. Pinto also wants to know about the NGOs' operations and participation in this programme.  Mr. Speaker, it is not the intention of Government to ask an NGO to take over our role.  We however believe that NGOs are very much on the ground,  they know the people and communities,  perhaps even more than central Government does.  All Government is doing is to ask them to be on the district community services committee for advice,  as people who have information that might be vital in the good and successful implementation of this programme.  At the same time we appreciate the caution by the hon. Member that we should ensure that this programme does not kill the spirit of voluntarism.  Indeed we intend to take that into serious consideration. 

Hon. Wangubo wants to know about the differences between sentences,  in different regions.  He is concerned that sometimes what happens is that somebody is given two months of community service in Rukungiri,  and another in Kabale is given one month of the same!  Really that is indeed up to the presiding Judge or Magistrate.  These are constitutional offices that are given these powers.  We cannot stop anybody from passing a sentence that they feel fits the offense or the crime that has been committed.  And as I have already said,  as soon as we are told that this person should go for community service,  that is when the community services committee and programme comes in. 

Hon. Mallinga also decried the bad conditions within the prisons.  I have already said that we are rehabilitating them.  I would like to say that we are also overwhelmed by the criminals.  Mr. Speaker, I am sorry. I abandon this,  because I have lost the question.  

The nature of the offenses;  indeed we have already said that the offenses vary.  If you look at assault for example,  a slap is assault but then even beating is assault.  Again,  as in all cases, we trust that the presiding Judge will use his or her discretion to see who should be given community service.  And not everybody who commits any of these listed crimes will be given community service.  It is not automatic that one goes for community service as long as you have committed any of these offenses.  Indeed in clause 4(1) and (2) the Judge may,  as you have pointed out, Mr. Speaker,  give a person community service or not.  And then,  before a person is given community service,  the conditions and circumstances of the crime and the nature of this person, are all taken into consideration.  Then in sub clause (3),  this person is also asked if they indeed want to serve their sentence under the community service programme or go to prison.   

Somebody asked why we ask this person to decide.  To some people it seems like we are asking this person to chose between the punishments.  Indeed to some extent we are asking this person to choose;  but then that is also the only way we can register their co-operation.  We want them to serve that sentence with maximum co-operation and we are asking them to chose between the service and imprisonment.  And we indeed hope that many of them will chose the community services,  because even if somebody works for six months,  that is better than somebody we have to put in prison for two years and then feed him using Shs.60,000 per month or more.  I think it is better for this person to come and serve within the community for this period of time. 

Hon. Okumu-Ringa;  I can only appreciate his comments and perhaps say that I have not got the figures that he is asking for.  I can however assure hon. Members that as soon as these figures are got,  I will pas them on.  But the figures he was asking for,  of who has committed which offense,  are not necessarily the issue of this Bill.  Although we can still get you those figures.  But as a result of the studies we have carried out,  and also from the studies carried out in other countries,  we have the feeling that community service is very profitable to the society.  It saves us a lot of money.  And currently,  if we are to implement community service today in this country throughout all the districts,  we have 2,500 people who would benefit.  Therefore we would save a lot of money,  in addition to reducing the congestion in prisons. 

Reducing congestion.  I want to emphasize that this helps in availing the remaining prisoners space.  Those who do not qualify for community services also benefit indirectly,  by having the resources available divided among a few people.  If we have some people out,  it means that we can share the resources we get among fewer people than those we have now. 

I would like to assure hon. Ongom that if we pass this Bill,  we are not going to neglect prison services.  His worry was that Government is now going to sit back and ignore rehabilitation of prisons.  We are not going to do this.  And I have already said that there are massive rehabilitation programmes going on in many of our prisons.  Quite often these programmes have been carried out because we asked donors to assist us.  They gave us resources to rehabilitate roofs,  sanitary conditions, and various things within various prisons.

Hon. Ongom is also of the view that we do not need the -(Interruption).

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am seeking clarification on one of the issues raised.  I expected the hon. Minister to comment on the figures of civil imprisonment cases.  This is supposed to be paid for by the plaintiff.  Is this still the practice or it is not?  And if it is so,  how much money do we receive for this?  This can also be used as a gauge,  as we determine the number of people who may qualify for community service.  I thank you.

MS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way.  In as much as we are talking of reducing costs by introducing community service,  is the hon. Minister aware that Government is shifting the responsibility of maintaining offenders?  During the period that they will be on community service,  there are families - and they are the majority of them - that cannot sustain especially petty offenders.  They cannot make provisions to maintain those offenders.  In such cases,  the offenders will either die or flee the community due to lack of means for survival.  What safety net has Government got to improve the welfare of the poor people so that they can have the capacity to support this programme?  I thank you.

MS. NAMUSOKE: Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I really think that I have to the best of my ability answered hon. Okumu-Ringa's question.  I said that I do not have the figures that he is asking me to produce right now.  I would produce them if I had.  I will produce them at a later stage;  that is my answer. 

Hon. Babihuga's question;  the purpose of community service is indeed to reduce costs.  As far as we are concerned,  if a person does not commit a crime,  they live in their house,  they sleep in their house,  they bath their soap,  they eat their food.  Once a person commits a crime and comes to court,  we are saying, 'well,  you will stay and eat your food,  wash with your soap, you are going to walk on foot or use your bicycle,  but you are going to serve the community.'  They are going to remain within the communities.  There is no intention of moving a person from Lyantonde and bringing him to Masaka.  

A person who has been arrested in Masaka,  because these are minor offenses,  is going to be tried within his home area;  and then put under the supervision of an institution within the same area.  They will be coming to work and going back to their homes to sleep,  eat and bathe with their own resources.  We believe it is a waste of Government resources and taxpayers' money to get a chicken thief, somebody who got a visitor and felt that they could help themselves with the neighbour's chicken,  and spend Shs.600,000 a month on this person who is not even habitual thief!

Hon. Baba Diri said that she doe not wish to see habitual thieves benefitting from this scheme.  Indeed even Government does not wish to see habitual thieves benefit because they are a nuisance to the community.  But before hon. Babihuga stands up for further clarification on this,  may I say that I went to some of these prisons.  In Kumi prison I met a woman who had borrowed a dress from her friend and was brought to prison because according to her, 'this friend of mine came and asked for her dress back in the market place,  so I beat her up.'  She was then taken to court,  she pleaded guilty and was told to pay a fine of Shs.200,000.  I said, 'but if she had the Shs.200,000 she would have bought a dress in the first place.'  So she was put in prison for six months.  This lady could have served two or three months of community service,  serving the community and showing repentance and saving Government the money.  That is the purpose of this scheme.  

We do not intend to release habitual criminals,  certainly not people who are violent.  People who accept to go and work on community service and then later disobey the rules and guidelines of the service,  will be re-arrested on the recommendation of their supervisors,  and put in prison.  But we want to take this as an option to cater for all the objectives that hon. Members see in the memorandum.  We feel that these are very important objectives to be considered so that we as Government,  and the whole country,  benefits from the community service scheme.

Let me thank hon. Baba Diri for she amplified a lot on the nature of the offenses and the list that was given.  The hon. Member also felt that the title of community service is not good.  Mr. speaker and hon. Members,  the title qualifies because we are asking the prisoners to choose between imprisonment and community service.  We do not want to run a system of forced labour,  so we ask them to choose.  But hon. Baba Diri was talking about the other implications.  There may be other implications in the mind of the people,  but as long as we are asking people to choose,  it shall be transparent.  And through sensitisation we are going to bring this out that people are being given the option of either going to prison for so many years or serving on community service.  If a person does not want to work,  they go to prison.  And if they do not want to serve,  according to the guidelines as I have already said,  they will be re-arrested on the recommendation of the person supervising them and put in prison.  
Hon. Rukutana commented about the programme being misunderstood.  This is something that the programme implementors are taking seriously.  We have gone on serious sensitisation tours and made people understand that it is not Government's intention to unleash criminals onto them after they have been sentenced.  We intend to make this sensitization go on in every district before this programme is implemented.  There will be this kind of massive sensitization for people to understand how the programme will run.  If we get to a district that says, 'for us we do not want any prisoners to serve here',  perhaps that is something we shall take into consideration and not implement the programme in such a district.

Hon. Rukutana also raised the issue that imprisonment is meant to avenge.  We agree and it is the original colonial mentality.  But we are also saying that what better way of avenging than to have an offender work for you,  or work for the community?  And moreover at a low cost of the community and taxpayers in general. As I have already said,  these people will be staying in their own houses,  they will be sleeping on their own mattresses - we do not have many in our prisons anyway - they will be using their own soap and all that.  

We therefore feel that these people should not work for so many hours.  They should not work for more than eight hours.  We expect that if somebody is the bread earner,  he should still have the opportunity to work to take care of their families, homes and children.  And of course,  as I said,  it is also the intention that families remain intact.  We want the wife to remain with her husband,  other than coming home after one month in prison,  to find the husband remarried and she automatically thrown out.

I appreciate hon. Nsambu's.  I think they were general comments on prison conditions and services;  and definitely the Ministry will take them into consideration at their appropriate time.

Those were the comments directed towards me,  Mr. Speaker,  I thank you very much and I wish to request Members to support this Bill.  Thank you,  Sir.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you hon. Minister.  Mr. Chairman,  I do not know how long you propose to take;  I am entirely in your hands.  
LT.COL. MUDOOLA:  I intend to be very brief,  Mr. Speaker,  as usual.  I thank all the Members who have supported the motion.  Although the Minister has answered almost all the questions,  I will go through one or two points.  

Some Members have said that this Bill is long overdue.  I agree with them because you remember very well that this Parliament passed the recommendation of the Committee about non custodial sentences as far back as 1996.  It is good that it has come now;  better late than never.  

One Member said that there should not be food shortages in prisons.  It is true and we have recommended many a time that prison industries and farms be self accounting.  But up to now Government has not agreed on that.  We hope that at one time they make these prisons industries and farms independent and self accounting.  

Hon. Pinto asked for the recommendation of the Committee on these prisons that are in such a bad shape.  Many times we have recommended that Government gives more funding or finds a way of borrowing money to improve the situation of both the Police and Prisons.  The Minister of Finance is here;  I do not know what step they have taken but I hope they are considering that recommendation.

I agree completely with hon. Okumu-Ringa who says there are mothers in prison with children,  and yet the children are innocent.  Yes,  that is one of the reasons why we support this Bill.  It also applies to women who are pregnant.  

A lot has been said about adultery as a terrible offense.  This reminds me of a case in my village some time back.  Somebody committed adultery, and wanted to give the offended Shs.10,000 so that they settle out of court.  The offended insisted that they go to court.  When they went to court, the offender was fined only Shs.200!  So you can see how adultery is rated in courts of law.  It is a really minor offense.  The purpose of putting appendix of those offenses was however just for the information of Members.  They are not going to be part of the law,  and they are not the only offenses that will benefit from community service.

Hon. Ongom asked for the use of the national community service committee.  If you go to the Bill,  the national committee has a lot of duties to perform.  It has to co-ordinate all the operations of this scheme throughout the country.  You need a co-ordinator definitely,  to link districts and also to solicit for some funds.  As you have already heard,  there are some international organisations that are willing to assist us in this programme;  because it needs a lot of money.  So,  they are also going to solicit for funds and to see that the scheme is realised.

Those are the few comments that the Minister had not tackled and which were supposed to be answered by the Committee.  I wish to again thank the Members,  the Minister and the technocrats for their support.  Also for and the co-operation they have given us during the making of the report and in considering the Community Service Bill.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members.

(Question on the Bill put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  I think this is a convenient time to adjourn.  The House is adjourned until Tuesday the 22nd,  at 2.00 O'clock.

(The House rose at 5.23 p.m and adjourned till Tuesday 22nd February, 2000 at 2.00 p.m)
