Tuesday, 14 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do not know whether I did not inform Members about the time, but I hope they will join us. However, I just wanted to say that last week, we had an address from the President on the issues of oil. I had hoped that the refined text would be here today, but it is not. So, I want to call upon the Leader of Government Business to ensure that the fine text is here by the end of the week so that we can put it on the Order Paper for debate on Tuesday. I do not know whether the Minister of Education is standing in for the Prime Minister; please inform him that we want that refined text.

MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO: Madam Speaker, we will comply.

2.34
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. There is an outcry in my constituency, which is very serious. We have got veterans and they are about 1,000. The information I have is that most of them have never been paid. These are people who have widows and orphans and they have never been resettled. These people are very frustrated because they served the nation and they feel that they have never been paid by the Government.
 
It is very unfortunate to move around and be questioned by the veterans when you are not able to answer. I call upon the responsible minister at least to give an explanation as to why up to this moment the veterans have never been paid. This is an outcry that needs to be handled. I want the minister responsible to come and give an explanation.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, towards the general elections of February 2011, there were lots of promises to our veterans. This included those who had served under the King’s African Riffle; those old men from NRA and others. They were called to come and register. Indeed, many trekked the long distances to the districts and some proceeded to the general headquarters at Bombo. It is unfortunate that even when they were told to open up accounts and deposit some money on those very accounts, the banks kept eating away the deposits they had put to the extent that now the accounts are closed. 

Indeed, this is a big cry in Ssembabule; it was an exercise across the country. It is not specifically in Buwekula, but I would also add my voice that people down there served this country diligently; they gave the ultimate sacrifice, but it is so disappointing that they are wallowing in abject poverty and what was promised to them is not forthcoming.
 
THE SPEAKER: Just for the record, in the 8th Parliament, we had resolved here that the Minister of Defence should really respect senior people in this country, who have made a contribution. They are old, they are not very many, and I think he undertook to pay them. So, hon. Ssemmuli, the matter is really serious. The 90-year olds, 100-year olds, need their money. Please conclude.

MR SSEMMULI: Madam Speaker, I even have the list of veterans in my constituency. It is very unfortunate that wherever I go, they say that they have already paid the veterans in Buwekula. What is now happening is that the veterans are now grabbing land that belongs to National Forestry Authority and you cannot blame them.

What they want is just an assurance from Government that they are being thought about and there is a programme which is going to sustain them. 

I beg to lay this document on the Table with names of all the veterans in Buwekula Constituency.

2.36
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I will ask the Minister of Defence to come and respond to this matter.

THE SPEAKER: It should be about the whole country because we have them in Kamuli.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: He should come and address the problem facing the whole country about veterans, including West Nile, unless you want to remove West Nile from the rest of Uganda.

BILLS
FIRST READING 

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, 
TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Refining, Gas processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012” be read for the first time. It is accompanied with a certificate of financial implication. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, you also must speak to the Hansard.
 
MR LOKERIS: I have laid the Bill and the certificate of financial implication. The Bill is entitled, “The Petroleum (Refining, Gas processing and conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012.

THE SPEAKER: Bill remitted to the Committee of the Natural Resources for scrutiny and report back.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you may realise, this is a very important Bill to Parliament and this country. The procedure usually is that once a Bill is being read for the first time, Members are given copies so that we can have opportunity to follow. This is the first reading and not the other Bill that we had.
 
THE SPEAKER: I understand they are in the pigeonholes.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I have just been to my pigeon hole before I came here, it is not there.

THE SPEAKER: Can the clerk please confirm to me.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am also expressing concern about the same in my capacity as the shadow minister of water and environment. It is an environmental matter and we need to confirm whether the copies are there.

I have checked my pigeon hole; there is nothing like a copy of the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where is the Bill?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to confirm that I have picked documents from my pigeon hole; the Bill which is in the pigeonhole is the Petroleum, Exploration, Development and Production Bill, 2012.

The one you are laying is actually not there.

THE SPEAKER: That was read for the first time last week. Minister, I do not want to read a Bill which is not there. Did you bring 380 copies?

MR LOKERIS: We brought the copies Right Hon. Speaker and passed them through the normal channel of distribution.

THE SPEAKER: We have sent out the clerk to check.

MR LUKYAMUZI: In the event that there is no physical copy of the Bill that the minister is reading, I propose that he withdraws it.

THE SPEAKER: Can someone bring the Bill and I see it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have in my hand Bill supplement number two, Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012. We send it to the Committee on Natural Resources for scrutiny and report back.

Join me in welcoming children of Nsangi Primary and Nursery School Makerere Kavule; they are up there, represented by hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba, Member for Kawempe South and hon. Nabilah Naggayi.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

I. ON THE NODDING DISEASE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement was presented to the House last week, but yesterday, the Members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group informed me that they went to the North to evaluate the situation. So, I do not know whether we should really debate the issue in their absence, because it is about Kitgum, Pader and Agago. So, we defer that item. 

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Much obliged, Madam Speaker, however, there is contention as to whether there is a response plan and for that matter, I beg to lay the integrated response for the control of nodding disease syndrome in Acholi sub-region of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the clerk to reproduce it and ensure that every Member has a copy so that when we debate, they are able to speak from a point of knowledge.

II. ON THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO MISMANAGEMENT OF FUNDS UNDER UNIVERSAL PRIMARY EDUCATION AND UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION

2.53 
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, 7 February 2012 - may I request the ‘white’ people to distribute the copies. I am sure the ministry sent enough copies for Members.

THE SPEAKER: They are the ones putting the statement in the pigeon holes. Can we stand over it until they distribute because I also do not have a statement. Shall we stand over it and go to number 5, for a few minutes? Item 5

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

I.	PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO UA 40.0 MILLION FROM THE   AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE RURAL WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROGRAMME

	
THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance

 2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay on Table a proposal to borrow Units of Account 40 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Programme. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is committed to the Committee on National Economy. We shall ask the Committee on Natural Resources to support them in discussing that proposal.
 
II.	PROPOSAL TO BORROW SDR 65.9 MILLION (USD 100.0 M) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE NINTH POVERTY REDUCTION SUPPORT CREDIT (PRSC 9).


THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance 


2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I wish to present a proposal to borrow SDR 65,900,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) for financing the Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC 9). I beg to present.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is remitted to the Committee on National Economy and they will be supported by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they report back. I think we can go back to number 4 now; Minister of Education.
 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO MISMANAGEMENT OF FUNDS UNDER UNIVERSAL PRIMARY EDUCATION AND UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION

3.01
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, on Tuesday, the 7 of February 2011, in response to the concerns raised by hon. Alice Alaso, I undertook to make a statement to Parliament today on the work so far done by the Commission of Inquiry into the Mismanagement of Funds under Universal Secondary Education and Universal Primary Education.

It should be recalled that under Legal Notice No.15 of 2009, a copy of which is attached to this statement for ease of reference by Members, His Excellency the President of Uganda, established a commission of inquiry consisting of the following persons: 

•	Justice Muwanguzi, as the chairperson
•	Dr Nassali Lukwago, as the deputy 		chairperson
•	Mr Lawrence Mukiibi, as a member and
•	Engineer Batumbya, as a member. 

In addition to that, Ms Keturah Katunguka, as a secretary and counsel to the commission. 

Paragraph 7 of the Legal Notice states as follows, in terms of report of the findings and recommendation of the commission: 

“The commission shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations under paragraph 5, to the President of Uganda within six months after commencing its duties.”  

With regard to interim reports, the Legal Notice states as follows: “The commission may, at any time before the submission of the report referred to in paragraph 7, submit to the Minister of Education and Sports an interim report on any matter within its terms of reference.” 

Madam Speaker, since the commission has not yet completed its work, it can be stated with certainty that the President has not yet received a report of its findings and recommendations. The President said so, in his New Year speech, when he expressed his displeasure at the inordinate delay by the commission to complete its work. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports has not received a single interim report on any matter within the commission’s terms of reference. I am, therefore, unable to state whether or not the commission has made credible progress on any of its terms of reference. I, therefore, do not have a substantive report to tender to Parliament. All I am in position to share with Members of Parliament are outlines on the following:

•	The establishment of the commission 		and terms of reference;
•	Extensions of the commission’s mandate; and 
•	Income and expenditure of the commission.

Under the establishment of the commission and terms of reference, the commission was appointed by His Excellency the President, under Legal Instrument No.15 of 2009, and sworn in on 11 December 2009, for a period of six months up to 11 June 2012.

A copy of Legal Notice No.15 of 2009, specifying the members of the commission, terms of reference and reporting arrangements, is attached as Annex 1 for your ease of reference. 

The commission did not complete its work on schedule. Its terms were extended as follows: Its term has been extended four times by His Excellency the President, with a Legal Notice No.10 of 2012, from 12th June to 12th December 2010; Legal Notice No.18 of 2010, from 12th December 2010 to 13th June 2011; Legal Notice No. 11 of 2011, from 13th June 2011 to 14th February 2012; and most recently, under Legal Notice No.1 of 2012, from 14th February to 14th August 2012. 

Madam Speaker, a summary of the income and expenditure of the commission for the period of its entire duration, that is 11th December 2009 to January 2012, is attached as Annex 2 for your ease of reference.

You may wish to note that the ministry has made two disbursements totalling to Shs 6,381,493,900. The first disbursement of Shs 4,381,493,900 was by a supplementary budget approved by this Parliament. The second disbursement of Shs 2 billion was by borrowing from the funds meant for capitation grants to schools participating in the Universal Post ‘O’ Level Education and Training (UPOLET) on the express authorisation of the permanent secretary of the Ministry of Finance, who had promised that the grants budget line would be funded by a supplementary budget before term one of the school year 2012, and before the UPOLET programme starts.

The supplementary budget has not been passed as yet and the permanent secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports has been compelled to suspend payment of requisitions from the commission until Parliament approves its supplementary budget. That is clearly stated in Annex No.3.

In conclusion, I would like to restate that since the commission chose not to apply the provision of paragraph 8 of Legal Notice No.15 of 2009, my office has not received a single interim report of any of its terms of reference and, therefore, I am unable to provide a report on the substance of the commission’s work, nor comment on the adequacy of their work or the efficiency with which they have proceeded. 

I beg to present, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This matter was raised by hon. Alaso; any supplementaries hon. Alaso?

3.01
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister, hon. Alupo, for keeping her word and coming up. I think she has dared to be honest about what is going on and I really appreciate honest people.

Madam Speaker, what is crucial about this commission is the fact that Government has failed to see that this commission is a non-starter commission. It is a commission that has decided to be an avenue for siphoning taxpayers’ money. You can imagine a commission which has had four extensions without giving even a single interim report. I am forced to ask the honourable minister, What then is the value for money arising from this Shs 6 billion that the people of Uganda have so far received from this commission? We have given Shs 6 billion; they have run for three years, we have maintained them in offices and all we get is not even a quarter of a sentence. I think this is very bad.

Having failed completely, then we have a scenario where they even dare ask for another supplementary. As Parliament of Uganda, we have a supplementary proposal before us. I want to ask the minister, Could you be having an idea on what justified the extension? By the time you moved from six months in 2009 and you issued a series of legal notices – what justified the extension? They should have told you other than just giving legal notices.

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has not commented on the internal audit report of her own minister, which talks about this particular commission that draws fuel in millions of money on a daily basis. If it continues like that, then we know that these are a bunch of thieves covered under legal notices, taking fuel of Shs 2 million per day.

Finally, I do not know whether I will be asking too much by asking Government of Uganda to wind up the operations of this commission since it has failed, and try to get back our money since they have failed to deliver. Thank. 

3.04
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a general belief within the population of Uganda that if you want to kill an inquiry, set up a commission. And there is a series of commissions that have been set up and never reported back; their reports have never seen the light of day.

All of you are aware that even the attempt by the Ministry of Trade – the so-called Kanyeihamba Commission - even at the time of the publication of the report, the ministers came here to vehemently deny the contents of the report  which had been funded by Government -(Interruption)

MR KAMUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Dombo for giving me this opportunity to give him this information. Actually, it is the exact opposite of what has happened in this report that caused trouble to the commission of inquiry, PAMSU project. When I was appointed Minister in charge of Tourism, I found this commission should have finished its work. I came in July and I asked the commission to give me the status of their work. They instead asked for an extension. I gave them one-and-half months of extension. When the one-and-half month expired, they wanted more time and I said, “No.” when I said “No”, they recommended in their report that I had committed an economic crime –(Laughter)– for demanding that they complete their work because their work was hurting the industry and they seemed to be in no hurry to finish like this report. So, it is not that Government is not serious with commissions of inquiries. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, and I hope they will take that time into account. Madam Speaker, we are not here to discuss the contents of the commission report. But what I want to emphasise here is whether there is value for money from the various commissions that have been set up. 

Coming to this particular commission under the Minister of Education, the minister wants us to pass a supplementary in order for the commission to complete its work. But what is the basis for us to extend it as Parliament? If the President and the minister have been extending the commission without receiving a reason, do they also expect Parliament to approve a supplementary without being given a reason? That would definitely be failure on our part. In that case, we would rather suspend the entire exercise because there is no demonstrable value for money that has been exhibited. Otherwise, for us as Members of Parliament; it would be failure. I would rather we stop the commission until perhaps the next State of the Nation Address, when the President will come to meet Parliament and explain to us. Otherwise, it would be very imprudent of us as a Parliament to pass a supplementary for the commission without a legitimate reason; even the minister does not know the reason why an extension should be given. 

3.09
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am interested in 6(1): “The commission was appointed by His Excellency the President under Legal Notice No.15 of 2009, and sworn-in on 11 December 2009, for a period of six months up to 11 June 2012.” I do not know whether from 2009 to 2012 is a period of six months.

Secondly, we have decided to carry out our own investigations on UPE without this commission, and it has not taken me a month to discover that in Ssembabule, where hon. Ssekikubo comes from, there are 300 ghost teachers and we shall present it here on the Floor of Parliament. 

I also wonder – this is my perception and I am going to say it. Of all people, to carry out research about UPE, how can you use Mr Lawrence Mukiibi, a proprietor of schools? Within this period of the commission, he has established another school called Crown City along Masaka Road, and you wonder how his money comes about! We need to investigate these people. You cannot tell me that a person who is a proprietor of schools can do this work. Investigations of these schools must start with head teachers. That is the kind of commission that would give you the best results.

So, hon. Jessica Alupo, I thank you that you have prayers around your neck; with that Rosary in your neck, I trust you will tell us the truth as time goes by. (Laughter) 

This money is the kind that I am always complaining about; it is for the teachers’ welfare; Shs 6 billion and there is no report! Even this person who has been releasing this money should be investigated. When you are given a report saying that the commission is supposed to last six months – that is the Legal Notice here - how can you extend it up to this time and continue paying money? It is terrible! The Banyankore say, “Nekiterebura”. 

I would like to say that the type of people who were given the responsibility to carry out the investigations are not the right persons. We need to know who advised on these people because Parliament should have a role in this area. I beg to sit.

3.12
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): I thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amoding, let the young people speak then you will speak. Three minutes.

MR ATIKU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to appreciate my dear sister, hon. Alice Alaso, for putting this question to the minister and also in that line, I thank the minister for promptly responding. 

I happened to participate in one of the fact-finding missions of this commission when they came to Arua for the West Nile region, and from the interaction, you would actually know that these were tourists, and this was way before I became a Member of Parliament. By then, I was serving in the district council as the chairperson of social services. You would know that this is a raw deal and that money had been put to waste because one would actually tell that the commission would not serve the purpose it was set up for. 

I am not surprised when the minister says that the commission has requested for another extension that is taking off today. I am wondering how the commission requests for another extension when there is no draft report on the activities so far carried out, yet I am sure this commission has had the honour of reaching all regions. 

So, is there anything that the commission can really present to us through the minister to show that so far from 2009 to date, some work has been done so that it motivates us? Otherwise, if there is no evidence of that nature, Madam Speaker, this has been a raw deal and it is high time we actually rethought the essence of setting up commissions. As hon. Dombo said, commissions have turned out to be avenues for killing corruption culprits. 

We need as the august House to resolve here and now that no more money be advanced and that this commission be halted, and that this Parliament sets an internal commission of inquiry into the activities of this commission. I thank you.

3.14
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for Education for having the courage to tell us that ever since the commission was set up, it has done nothing and yet it has cost the taxpayer an average of Shs 230 million per month for the last 28 months, which is a lot of money! Given the way we are when we do not have enough to meet our other expenses there is no reason why this commission should continue.

This commission was set up - and if I refer you to the annexes on the statement - 28 months ago, to find ghosts as far as pupils and teachers are concerned, funding to districts, accountability, and capacity of teachers, and yet 28 months later, we are being asked to spend more money when they have produced nothing! 

Madam Speaker, I am not going to labour because I think everybody sees it. As the Baganda say, “It is in the glass.” It is very clear that we are wasting money and the people who have been given the responsibility to be on this commission have either been hampered by reasons we do not know or they are not competent. Therefore, we want to urge the rest of us as Members of Parliament to reject the supplementary.   

3.16
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the honourable minister for having courage to present this issue before the House. I am at pain to witness such amounts of money going almost into empty pockets of this commission, and yet we are witnessing a lot of problems with post-primary education issues in the country. 

I was in Kaabong with hon. Akello Rose Lilly just two weeks ago to launch a youth programme. But there was one particular school where Government is actually spending money and unfortunately, there was not even a single student. There was only one student when the First Lady went to visit that school; and the reason the students were giving us was that they were not at school because the teachers ask for money. If Government is here providing money as capitation grants to these students and they cannot even meet their needs - because you do not expect a student from Karamoja to have money, and even the parents cannot afford to send these students to school. It is not only in Karamoja, but the entire country. Money is being wasted – Shs 2 billion – extensions, extensions, extensions!!! 

Whereas it was a good idea that the commission was established – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Musasizi, information?

MR MUSASIZI: I thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I would like to also thank the Minister for Education for revealing all this. The information I would like to give to my colleague, hon. Monicah Amoding, is that these people have been given money – Shs 6 billion - and because they cannot justify where the money has been spent, they are only showing us the months and not detailing where the money has gone. I do not think it is logical to regard this as expenditure and we need to assume that we have not received the expenditure side of this money and, therefore, everything is a mess until they give us the details of where this money has actually gone. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS AMODING:  I thank you, hon. Musasizi, for that information. The point that I want to put across is that we are every now and then struggling to ensure that teachers have better pay and motivation to go to class for the good of our young Ugandans. Here we are; a commission is extended four times and paid billions of shillings and yet we cannot even raise that money to be put into the budget.

The second issue is about a lot of misuse of money. In as much as the commission was established with good interest, now the people investigating also need to be investigated. I was at pain when I was listening to hon. Dombo who said we should close, return or destroy the entire process. I am wondering about what will happen to the Shs 6 billion that has already been spent and yet such schools that have to be capitated cannot even have enough money to operate and ensure that students stay in school. 

Which kind of generation are we raising with these UPE and USE issues when we have been misusing – I mean, many people are looking at this money and misusing it! It is now becoming a docket of ‘eating’ for many people and so many other issues. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would also like to ask the minister what action she has taken because she is reporting to Parliament and it looks like there is nothing she has done so far to ensure that this commission returns the money or these people are arrested and they explain where the money has gone.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, after listening to the minister, I was asking myself who supervises this commission.

3.20
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I should thank the minister for taking a firm stand, but at the same time, I actually sympathise with her because this commission is older than her. The commission is more than two years old and yet she is hardly a year in office.

This is a very serious matter because when you look at the commission, it is composed of four commissioners
and one secretary, but they have so far used more than Shs 6.3 billion. Assuming, for example, Shs 1.3 billion has gone on administrative work, that would imply that each member on this commission has so far used Shs 1.0 billion – very ridiculous thing!

We have also noted that the term of this commission has been extended four times and it is about to be extended for the fifth time. I would like to think that there should be a basis upon which an extension should be made. I am saying this because this commission should be updating the minister by providing an interim report. In the circumstances where an interim report is not given, there should be no basis of extending its term. So, can we get to know the basis of extending the term of this commission? If they had provided anything they had done, it would be a basis for its term to be extended - to cover the remaining work.

Madam Speaker, I don’t want to say this commission looks to be incompetent, but anyone who knows English could use the same or right word. Anyway, personally, I would like to say that such a commission is worse than Ebola. I am saying this because we even allocated the money that was meant for a capitation grant – money that would be helping our kids, but is being used by some people. So, such a commission should be equated to that epidemic that finished our people.

As I conclude, I would like to propose that, the activities of this commission should be halted. And since this is a commission, I wouldn’t think that it is right for us to urge Government to set up another commission to investigate –(Member timed out.)

3.24
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alice Alaso for having raised this question –(Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I have been listening to the debate over this submission. I don’t know whether it is procedurally right for us to continue debating this matter when we don’t have any reasons that justified the extension of its term. I would like to think that the minister should have given us the reasons why the extensions were made and why the funding was actually given to this – this is a lot of money spent! Why can’t the minister tell us the reasons why the extensions were made?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I think those are the areas that the Members want to address. The Members want us to wind it up because no justification has been given.
 
MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to refer you to annex 2, which shows the expenditure that the commission made. According to the minister, the total amount spent is about Shs 6.3 billlion, but this annex gives details and when you look at it, you realise that there is a balance of unspent money to the tune of Shs 968 million.

I would like to recommend that this account be frozen since it still has unspent balances. I am saying this because the commission is a non-starter. Having spent that money with that balance, I am sure the next will be for them to spend it after receiving the next instrument that gives them the fourth term.

Secondly, I would like to recommend that the Committee on Social Services invites this commission to Parliament to answer some questions. We need to listen to them. Maybe they have become part of the team that has been stealing USE and UPE funds. Maybe they have been compromised. Maybe their lives are at risk if they release any report. I am saying this because the motive for this judicial commission was to investigate – I remember we debated this issue in the Eighth Parliament before this commission was set up. The intention was for it to investigate the rot - high expenditures without results in regard to UPE and USE. We need to meet these commissioners before we decide on what to do.

I also would like to recommend that this expenditure be treated as an advance until they account to the satisfaction of Parliament on how this money was spent. They should also provide a report on this. Otherwise, they must pay back this money.

In summary, we should treat that money as an advance. Two, let the accounts be frozen and the Shs 968 million must not be spent. Three, they must be summoned to Parliament; and four, all judicial commissions that are currently doing their work should justify their existence. If they cannot, yet they are taking a lot of time and spending money without any report, they should all be subjected to an investigation.

I would like to move that Parliament recommends that to the Executive. Finally, the Minister of Education should advise –(Member timed out.)

3.28
MR ABDI FADHIL KIKOS CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity –(Interruption)

MR SEMUJJU: From the statement of the minister, this commission of inquiry was set up by His Excellency the President. The minister who represents the President in this House is not complaining that the commission has delayed in doing its work. Neither is she complaining that the money has been too much. 

So, the guidance I am seeking from Madam Speaker, is about the basis for us to start complaining, especially about the extension of this commission’s term. Maybe that is how Government does its work. (Laughter) They set up their own commission and each time it asks for an extension, they have happily granted it. They have also disbursed money and are about to come and ask for a supplementary expenditure. Maybe those who set up the commission are very happy with its work.

So, is there any basis for a complaint, Madam Speaker, when this commission of inquiry wasn’t set up by Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, all the Members of this House are taxpayers and so they are concerned that the taxpayers’ money of which they are part is being misused. Yes, hon. Chemaswet.

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to believe that this commission of inquiry was not intended to look into the anomalies that occurred, but a commission of money eaters.

I need to be convinced by the responsible minister, who is not complaining as hon. Semujju Nganda has said – I do believe that these commissions are usually set up to investigate issues. But after sometime, they turn into businesses. I think the intentions of the minister could be very good, but the intentions of the technocrats are also very bad. That is why in this country we will not go far with the question of fighting corruption. The ministers could be willing to fight corruption but the technocrats within the ministries are not willing to do that. And it is the same problem we are now having with commissions of inquiries in this country. And I do believe that when the President set up this commission of inquiry, his intention was good. But where the problem emerged was with the terms of reference. The terms of reference were so huge; it is supposed to cover very many areas; you talk of the RDCs – and if you talk of the RDCs, they will say now they are coming to investigate our role in this matter. They now become a sabotaging force in this investigation. I believe that is the problem in these inquiries within the commissions. (Interruption)

MR SABILA: Thank you very much, Colleague, for giving way. The topic is very contentious. Why? A lot of money is being allocated every time in respective departments, not only in education. This is a commission of inquiry set up to check misuse of funds in USE and UPE. First time, no findings; second time, no findings; third time, no findings; fourth time, no findings! Now, when will this committee give their findings? When shall we come with the recommendations? And when shall we have a timeframe or framework for addressing the proposed recommendations? 

It means that if we can only take four extensions to come out with the findings, we can still multiply by the number of times that we shall take towards solving the problem. I think this is serious. Taxpayers’ money should not be jeopardized in this manner. We need service delivery, and we cannot have service delivery if we have questionable commissions. 

I am wondering whether this commission exists. This could be a ghost commission trying to investigate some ghost issues. I am not convinced. I would go by the resolution that one Member came up with. That possibly if this commission exists, which I am not sure of, they should come over and provide what they have done so far. They account for the money they have used, and others can proceed from there. Thank you.

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you very much, hon. Sabila. I do believe that this commission of inquiry now wishes to have seven years to finish its work. That means that when a child begins primary one up to primary seven, that is when the commission of inquiry will have completed its work. That is why in a district like Kween, our performance has been very bad. It is very shameful that my district was the last in UPE. I take this to be the role of this commission of inquiry. One proposal that I am making, Madam Speaker, is that the membership of this commission should be arrested and put in Luzira -(Member timed out.)

3.35
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, UPE and USE are grossly underfunded Government programmes. With Shs 41,000 per student per term, what do you expect! I am disturbed when I hear that Shs 2billion was borrowed from these very crucial but grossly underfunded programmes. Actually, it is not borrowing; this was diversion of funds from a crucial programme to a redundant commission, to enable people get ways of misappropriating and dividing amongst them this money. 

A budget of Shs 6 billion to a commission – when I made a calculation, Mbarara District gets Shs 400 million for UPE per year. That money would help Mbarara District run the UPE programme for 15 years. This is money given to the commission, to establish problems which are well known to every Ugandan. UPE money is too little. USE is grossly underfunded. Now, what are you going to investigate?

The commission has instead contributed to the recent massive failures in UPE and USE. When you are given money to do work and you don’t do it, the best alternative is for you to refund the money. And I don’t take the minister seriously. She appears to be lamenting. Why are you there? Instead of saying that I have done this, “I have asked them to return the money”, you are instead lamenting with us. Now, who is who? This is a very serious issue. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, may I ask the honourable minister this question: What was the rationale of diverting Shs 2 billion to a commission which had even failed to produce an interim report? Can you tell us? I thank you. 

3.37
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to bring out a very serious crisis in this country. This country, if we are not careful, is being controlled by very sophisticated vampires. (Laughter) The tricks which these sophisticated characters are using is that they want to drag each and every person into this game of corruption. Here comes a commission of inquiry; What do they have to do? First of all, they know very well what they have done. They know what is on the ground. Now, what trick will they use? Let us excessively – don’t think that they don’t see the weaknesses. But they just say, “Let this commission fall into a trap. Let us be as generous as possible, including even moving money from the capitation grant such that we keep these people happy until they become shameful and cannot produce a report.” This is a real fact that we can see -(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, at the beginning of 2002, I vowed that I would speak the truth and it would set us free. It is 2012 now. As I talk, there is information which we have that one of the members of this commission has been interdicted for having embezzled money -(Interjection)- Dr Nassali Lukwago. I wanted this Parliament to be very vigilant and we fight corruption up to the bone marrow. Why should somebody steal this money and we keep quiet. It is very painful!

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, what we are dealing with is not simple. The Members have a strong conviction that whoever stands to talk against corruption has to be compromised. Even with all these billions we have seen change hands just like that. These people believe that they can compromise each and every person in this country. They have a conviction that they can buy any Member of Parliament. They have a conviction that they can buy anyone who is fighting corruption. This is how the sickness is. It is a very serious matter, Madam Speaker. 

The public out there has faith in us. I have talked to the technocrats of Government; I have talked with the Auditor General’s Office and I have talked to the activists out there. They only think that it is this Parliament in Uganda that can save the situation, but the Parliament is invaded as well. As we speak, many of our outspoken people are being hijacked and this is a very serious matter. 

3.42
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This report presented to us hides a lot of rot that is happening in the Ministry of Education. Much as some of my colleagues have appreciated the statement presented by the minister this afternoon, I think it is full of lamentations. The minister, in her concluding paragraph, is throwing her arms in the air and saying, “I am, therefore, unable to provide neither a report on the substance of the commission’s work nor comment on the adequacy of their work, nor the efficiency with which they have proceeded.” I appreciate the fact that this minister is new in office, but I also know that the permanent secretary is almost a permanent secretary of the Ministry of Education. He has been there longer than this commission and, therefore, I would like to ask questions: One, is the commission in this alone? I want to say, No; there must be somebody in the ministry colluding with this money-guzzling machine called the commission to rip taxpayers of their money. 

In paragraph 8 of the Legal Notice, the Minister of Education is empowered and I would like to read verbatim: “Interim reports; the commission may, at any time before the submission of a report referred to in paragraph 7 …” - and paragraph 7 talks about the final reports – “…submit to the Minister of Education an interim report on any matter within its terms of reference.” So, the minister has powers. Hon. Bitamazire had powers; hon. Alupo has powers. Why then would you continue to remit money into the account of this commission without asking for accountability? Accountability is not just in terms of money, it is also judged in terms of output. Where is the output that these people gave? I think there is more than meets the eye in this and we, as Members of Parliament, need to take these matters seriously by referring this matter to an appropriate committee of the House – 

THE SPEAKER: I just want to say something on what hon. Amuriat said. Who actually does the extension? Is it the President or is it the minister?

MAJ (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO: Madam Speaker, there is an attachment to this statement which clearly states the instrument under which His Excellency the President, set up the commission. It is His Excellency the President who supervises the commission and he is the one who extends –(Interjections)- the extension -

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to give information. 

3.46
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank hon. Alice Alaso for having raised this issue and for the minister to have come and told us the truth. This brings the question, which I have always raised on the Floor, that surely, does Government and this country require three ministers in a ministry? You can see clearly that some of these ministers don’t know what they are doing in their ministries. I say so because even the present Minister of Education is saying that it is the President to supervise a commission in her ministry. It is very surprising. What is the use of these three ministers in a ministry if they don’t know what they are doing? 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank the permanent secretary, Ministry of Education, for having stopped the disbursement of more money to this commission. He has stopped disbursing the money which was for capitation grants to the UPE schools; otherwise, we would have gone ahead to disburse this money to this commission which was formed as a political reward. This was another type of employment, honourable members. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, hon. Wamanga-Wamai, for giving way. The information I want to give is that out of the Shs 6 billion that was expected to be paid to this commission before the issue of capitation grants came into the picture, there was already Shs 4 billion paid to the commission and this disbursement was done through the PS and so, I think it is improper for us to even congratulate the PS for giving away our money just like that. 

MS NEBANDA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Recently, we received a report from PAC and one of the recommendations was that the current minister for Gender, hon. Syda Bbumba, should resign because she did not advise the President on the Shs 142 billion. We have the Minister in charge of Education, hon. Alupo, and she is telling us that it is the President in charge. I want her to help me and also guide the House, and get the Constitution and read for us what her role is as a minister. What are her functions as a minister? What is she supposed to do? If she doesn’t know what she is supposed to do, then she is informing this august House that she is in the wrong place and she is not supposed to be there. So, let her stand up and tell us what her role is. If she has no work like she has said that everything is for the President, then I would like the Prime Minister to come and tell us what the role of the minister is. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you Members for the information that you have given to me. What I was saying is that, this commission was set up as a political reward, because surely, if the terms of reference were six months and they elapsed and these people had not given a report and the ministers in that ministry could not even question why they were releasing more money, if there was no interim report produced at all - but they kept disbursing and disbursing Shs 6 billion! So, this was a political reward; employment that was given to these people.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Education is asking this Parliament to approve a supplementary for this commission. I request Members in this august House never to accept because Shs 6 billion is so much and it would have done a lot in our schools.
  
If you look at the PLE results, they really leave a lot to be desired. The children who passed the PLE examinations were only the ones in private schools -(Member timed out_)
  
3.52
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is a session for supplementary questions to the minister. Madam Minister, in light of the fact that the President is supervising such a small commission under your docket, what then is your work there?
  
Two, honourable minister, I invite you to look at Annex III, which is a letter from the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Education; if the President is directly supervising  this commission and its work, then who gave the PS the powers to write this letter? 

Three, -(Interjections)  I don’t need information for now - Madam Minister, was time of the essence at the time of appointing this commission?
 
Four, honourable minister, have you ever requested for this interim report as envisaged in No.7 here? Where is the letter you wrote to the commission asking for this update? We may be looking at the incompetence of other people when our own has never asked for an interim report even when she is empowered.
 
Finally, honourable minister, you are accountable to Parliament. Is it your opinion that we need another commission of inquiry to inquire into the operations of this commission before we wind it up?
 
THE SPEAKER: You know, we are supposed to take only one hour and we have almost taken it up. 

MR BESISIRA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  When this commission was being set up - the Legal Notice is quoting the Commission of Inquiry Act, which I believe was passed by this august House. This Act I believe is very conclusive on all the issues we are raising. With your guidance, Madam Speaker, because I am not privy to this commission and this thing was given to us in this House, but I would have found out and come when I am very well armed, but if there are some colleagues who are legally well versed or you, Madam Speaker, what does the Act say on: (i) Who supervises the commission? (ii) How many extensions, if they have got to be made, are made?  (iii) When the commission doesn’t give what it is expected to give in a particular time, what are the penalties?  Do we just give it even ten more years and continue? I think all this should have been answered in this Commission of Inquiry Act.
  
So, I just wanted your guidance, Madam Speaker, because I can see we are splitting our hairs, but this can be very easily answered by this Act because when something happens once, it is an accident; twice, it is a coincidence; thrice, it is a habit.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have sent for the Act so that we can look at it.
 
MR BESISIRA:  Let us look at it because we are being taken for a ride. You know, the taste of the pudding is in the eating. It is because the majority of the Frontbench do not have children in USE and UPE schools, therefore, whatever rot goes on there is not their concern.  Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: I have sent for the Act. We shall read it and find out. Maybe we are caning the minister for nothing.
 
3.56
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am tempted to believe that now UPE means “Ugandans Prefer Eating.” (Laughter) Why? Instead of addressing it as Universal Primary Education, let us basically put it that: “Ugandans Prefer Eating,” why? I tend to believe that the President has very serious political inadequacies in the Ministry of Education. Why do I say this?  Because once you are sworn into that elegant office, it is not about the pride that comes with that office; it is about the commitment to work in that office.
  
The three ministers have all the technical capacity within the ministry to work and this shouldn’t even have been something that would take ages. But here we are and before I go any further, let me tell you how the honourable minister has admitted that she is incapable of running the ministry, “I am, therefore, unable to provide a report on the substance of the commission’s work nor comment on the adequacy of their work.” Simply commenting is even a problem; how can you be in charge?
 
Madam Speaker, if you just looked at the disbursement in my basic understanding of management, all these releases were supposed to be pegged to the programmes on work. There must be an activity for which a release is authorised. And for the minister to admit that she is not able to comment on even the basics of the releases, shows you that she is not in charge. It is a shame to this country. How do we pride in ourselves?  

We say, “Okay, we have placed the women there; they will do something about it,” and in the end you cannot even comment on the basics of activities that you released money for. It is very frustrating to me as a mother and a teacher and seeing that the honourable minister in charge is a woman. 

This is a clear sign of fraud. If this commission was appointed in 2009, we are talking about 2009, 2010, 2011 and now 2012 and basic progress reports are not in the ministry. So, what do we have to tell the nation? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Katuntu comes, join me in welcoming from Kiboga District, the chairman of the district council and the executive committee represented by hon. Kabajjo Kyewalabye and hon. Nankabirwa. You are welcome! (Applause)
 
4.00
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Education for this report. Actually, personally, I am very happy that the minister has been truthful as she should be. That should be a lesson to all ministers that when something is wrong, you don’t try to hide it, because you will not find a solution to it, from people who would have assisted you.
 
I am looking at the statement: “The Commission of Inquiry into the Mismanagement of Funds under UPE and USE.” The operating word here is “mismanagement” and what the Legal Notice envisaged is that within six months there would be a report to the President. But it also realised that there may be actions that the minister may, in the interim, make to sort out a problem. For example, on issues of corruption or inspection as provided for under the notes. That is why, in my view, the commission may, at any time before the submission of the report referred to in paragraph seven, submit to the Minister of Education and Sports, an interim report on any matter within its terms of reference.

What we are realising now is that not only did they fail to do their work within six months, but for the last three years, they have not done anything; not even to bring anything to the attention of the minister. It looks like the commission thinks everything is okay and there is nothing the minister can do in the interim.

But the reason why this commission was set up was because there has been a public outcry that there is a problem within USE and UPE. So, this is a total lack of the reasons why they were appointed. They just do not know why they were appointed, and they do not know their job.

But this also brings to mind one thing; having busy people being appointed on this commission. For instance, a high court judge who should be adjudicating on cases. Now, look at the mess he has found himself in. Nobody can explain Shs 6 billion for no work done and even borrowing money, which should be going to build classrooms and it is now being used to pay lodges for them to sleep. So, we are looking at the problem of mismanagement being extended to other areas, including the commission itself.

Really, I think what we have to do is to cut our losses. There is nothing we can do. This commission is useless; they have looked at this as a joke and the longer they stay, the better for them. It is a good job from the money they are spending. It is a well-paying job; nobody would want to wind up this job. So, to them, this is a job, which they want to do in perpetuity as long as money can come, but to the extent that the PS is now borrowing money from the Capitation Grant. I think that is not correct.

I am not so sure, honourable minister, that you will convince anybody to pass a supplementary for this expenditure. We are happy with you, but on this one, I will not support you. I will not support any further expenditure on this. This has been a still-birth, let us look at other ways.

Concerning the legal issue being raised about who supervises this commission, it cannot be the minister. Nobody should say the minister is responsible, no. This is a commission set up by His Excellency the President. It is his commission -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Hon. Katuntu, hononourable minister, Mugole Alupo, is not only new in the ministry, but the commission of inquiry by the President can actually investigate the minister. So, when we are really putting all the fire on her, apart from being new, she could be a suspect, assuming she had stayed long in the ministry.

That is why hon. Prof. Kamuntu has problems with Kanyeihamba; because in an event that the commission is looking at the minister as suspect, then the minister is not competent to supervise the commission. She can only advise and I want to agree with hon. Katuntu that if the commission had given preliminary recommendations - because you do not have to wait for the final output - these preliminary recommendations could help the new minister at least administer, meet challenges with early releases and other administrative matters. I thought I would share this information.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, but the point here is that let us not pass on the buck to somebody who is not responsible. I think the person who should take up this matter is the Minister for the Presidency or the Prime Minister. Of course, the minister could have – obviously, since it is within her area of supervision, she could write reports to the President and say, “look here, the commission you set up is not doing its work.”

But before the President can renew this commission’s tenure, he should ask the minister and consult Cabinet. From what I gather though, it looks like the minister does not know anything about it and she is just waiting for the report and yet there is nothing.

So, the President does not seem to be communicating with his minister or the minister is not communicating with the President. So, this is a matter, which the Leader of Government Business should take up. 

Lastly, I think that we should cut our losses. It was a bad deal; let these people go where they belong; to adjudicate cases. Others are businessmen according to hon. Ssewungu. They should go; otherwise, they are wasting our public resources. I thank you.

4.07
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start from where hon. Katuntu ended, that actually, if the PS, Ministry of Finance, had not released what he had promised, then the ministry would continue paying the non-functioning commission, and what does that mean? Are the Ministry of Education representatives interested in what the commission is doing? Do they think that the work of the commission would help them in their performance, and maybe if they are not appreciating that, that is why they are not even bothered to continue monitoring what the commission is doing. 

When you look at the tasks, they are specific and are supposed to be performed within six months, after which, you are supposed to produce something. It is the responsibility of the Ministry of Education who are supposed to be monitoring the commissioners to ask them, “how far have you gone?”

I do not usually like personalising issues but among these commissioners, I can see Dr Nassali Lukwago, who used to be the Director, Education Standards Agency. I thought this one would be a very good respondent or witness to the commission, but being a commissioner, what interest does she have? Because when you are talking of Education Standards Agency, she would be among those people who would be seeing that education is doing well in this country, but she is on the commission.

In addition to that, sometimes I really wonder whether this commission offered itself a full-time job and that is why they keep on delaying and dilly dallying on matters that they give them. But I do not exonerate them because they are supposed to perform within the limited time that they get. We usually hold people for non or poor performance; we hold teachers for performing poorly when they are teaching and the students fail; we hold civil servants for not performing according to their contracts. Therefore, how do we hold this commission accountable for failure to perform the duties, which were clearly specified in their terms of reference?

I think Ugandans have taken it far such that things happen and they just keep quiet. This happens, you keep quiet; another thing happens, you keep quiet; and it has become a routine. I suggest that we do not need another commission of inquiry. This commission should be liable for all these monies that have been spent on them. In addition, maybe they have vested interests in the UPE funds that have been embezzled. Are they conniving with the ministry officials and the implementers of the UPE programme? These are some of the things that we should be asking ourselves. 

Madam Speaker, sometimes I wonder when we come here and debate and come up with resolutions which we refer to different sectors. Who monitors the implementation or how they are being handled? I believe that as Parliament, we should, once in a while, have a report from the Leader of Government Business telling us how the resolutions have been implemented. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to read out what is in the Commissions of Inquiry Act – which is not very helpful – please, listen. Section 6: “The commissioners shall, after taking oath or making the affirmation as provided in Section 4, make a full, faithful and impartial inquiry into the matter specified in the commission, conduct the inquiry in accordance to the direction, if any, in the commission in due course, report to the President in writing, the result of the inquiry, and also when required, furnish the President with a full statement of the proceedings of the commission and of the reasons leading to the conclusion arrived at or reported.” So, you are caning the minister for nothing. (Laughter) I think the problem is in the law.

4.13
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first point on the way forward starts from what you have read. Maybe, there is a lacuna in the Act, but as a point of procedure or as a moral point, commissions of inquiry should never be funded by agencies they are investigating. That should be a principle to be taken note of because this has two implications: Either the financing entity can withhold the funds with the intention of frustrating the commission; or it can be so generous that it oversupplies the funds in order to compromise the commission. If this is not captured in the law, we can have an amendment or have it as an administrative measure by Government. The Public Finance and Accountability Act and the Constitution are very clear. The accounting officer is responsible for those expended funds much as the other recipients are also held responsible. If I am spending money over the user whose control I do not have – so, I think we need to sort out that. 

For example, if it is the President asking the commission of inquiry to give him information, maybe funds should come from the Presidency. This leads me to another point; we need to build capacity in the Office of the Auditor General. The investigations that have guided this House through the reports – the CHOGM report, the current one that hon. Wadri is about to present – all these have been competently done by the Office of the Auditor General. If that office had been given Shs 6 billion, it would have carried out audits in all the primary and secondary schools in this country. You remember in the last budgeting process, I was pleading here for a mere Shs 1 billion to enable the Auditor General carry out audit in at least 800 secondary schools. We must separate the procedure of how commissions of inquiry carry out their work if they are to be of use – and I believe they can be of use because if the report is produced at the end, it does not matter if it is ignored, it will remain as a living testimony for any agency or future generations to look at.

Finally, hon. Rose Akol raises an important point. I think the social services committee should pick up this matter and we hear why the commissioners were getting money and yet not doing work. Why was the ministry paying out money for no work? We should ask the Auditor General to carry out an audit into the commission’s expenditures. He should also carry out the remaining part of the work which the commission was going to do because what these commissions do is to attempt to do value-for-money investigations and yet this is what the Auditor General can competently do. Let us increase –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Tumwebaze, for giving way. Incidentally, the law is very clear; the Auditor General audits everything, including the air we breathe. There is nothing which would have barred him from auditing the mismanagement of funds in the UPE and USE. If he has not done so, you are telling us that he has not done his work.

MR TUMWEBAZE: The Auditor General is not incapacitated by law. I am aware that he is much allowed and empowered, but he has no money. Auditing 1000-plus schools requires money – as an auditor you know that.  So, let us empower him since the law allows him to do that.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Tumwebaze for yielding the Floor. In the last Parliament, I was privileged to chair the Local Government Accounts Committee and most of these funds actually go through local governments. And perusing through all those reports, you will find that in many districts, those queries have been raised by the Auditor General. So, the Auditor General has been doing his job and it is possible, because of his report, that the President was forced to set up this commission. 

So, he has been doing his work and cannot now go and re-audit things he has been doing every year, since he audits all expenditures of local governments annually, including the UPE funds that are sent from the centre to the local governments. The commission was a good idea, but it was mismanaged.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you for the information. The Auditor General has done a great job, but over the years, he has been concentrating on financial auditing. And yet value-for-money is a new concept that is emerging – and these inquiries are not on anything else but value-for-money. I do not mind whether this value-for-money function can be –(Hon. Mukitale rose_)– just a moment, I will yield the Floor – enhanced in the Office of the Auditor General or even in our own Parliament because the question is: How do we carry out value-for-money investigations at the least cost? The concern here is a commission of inquiry engaged in wasteful expenditure to the extent of even saying it should be disbanded. But this does not also take away the need to look at the rot in the sector. 

Do we set up another commission of inquiry? No, I believe we can build or ask the Auditor General to carry out and give us a specific special investigation into UPE and USE. This can greatly help Government and this Parliament to do its work. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to wind up on this matter.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the point hon. Tumwebaze is raising should not be lost. In the last Parliament, we had lamentations several times of parallel investigations and parallel funding competing for resources yet the line sectors – for example, the Auditor General, is starved of resources. If the Shs 6 billion had been given to the Office of the Auditor General to do a value-for-money audit, we would have got better results with time limits, compared to this commission which has taken several years. The point we should not lose is that Parliament should not support Government in creating parallel, competing institutions for resources that are even lacking, yet these resources would have created bigger capacities within the line ministries and existing institutions. 

4.21
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I vividly recall that this commission was put in place because a whistle-blower had given information about mismanagement of funds in the Ministry of Education. That is why the President came up with this commission. But it is disheartening to learn that a commission which was put in place to investigate the mismanagement of funds in the Ministry of Education is the very commission which has actually mismanaged the funds more than what one would expect. 

I want to ask one or two questions. The minister has told us that it is the President who is supervising this commission. I wonder whether the minister has taken trouble to inform the President or to advise him on the problems that she has or probably the ministry has encountered in as far as this report is concerned. How can the President keep on renewing the terms of this commission without any information - it is failing to actually deliver? It is so disheartening and I want to thank the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, because if it was not for him to compel and stop the Ministry of Education to release these funds, I believe more funds would have been lost. It was not the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education, as hon. Wamanga-Wamai said. It was the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance. 

It is really sad, but I want to propose that let this commission be suspended. I propose that let it be suspended and let the IGG investigate. (Laughter) Yes. The reason I propose this is because even if we said that we form another commission to investigate them that will be loss of money. So, I propose that let these people be investigated and the commission be suspended. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.23
MS CHRISTINE HELLEN AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to commend all those who have contributed to this topic, but my worry and what is really disturbing me is; how could we spend all this money for the last three years? Actually, in the minister’s report, all she was able to present to us was the income and the expenditure of the commission. I would pay someone based on what he or she has done, but to come to this House and tell us that they do not have any report from the commission, I think is very disturbing for us. 

Even in the attachment here, in the terms of reference, it is very clear that the interim report must be submitted to the minister - not necessarily the sitting Minister of Education, even the former Minister of Education. So, what has this commission been doing for the last three years? I think it should be very disturbing to all the Members of this august House.

And then, Madam Speaker, related to this matter, a lot of money - Shs 6 billion, is definitely a big amount of money.  I came from Ngora last week and I met teachers from both primary and secondary schools. Over 73 teachers have gone without salary for the last three months. They went through the festive season without anything. Most of them have totally - no one is communicating to them on the way forward. Most of the primary school teachers in my district have actually laid down their tools and if this is happening to all the other districts in the country, then we are in a crisis. So, this is very perturbing. 

When we are talking about misusing Shs 6 billion - people on this commission of inquiry look to be people of outstanding record and I would recommend, for the sake and for the good of Uganda that let these people be brought to book. Let them account for the money that has been spent on the commission because I know that if they are supposed to do investigations, for example, inquiry, someone must go up to Ngora, for example, in primary school X. So, that means that money that has been paid to these commissioners should be accounted for. 

We cannot just let this go unnoticed. We cannot just throw this to the IGG. I think something must be done. We need a very clear report. These people must be put on record that they accounted for the millions of money that we pay taxes for. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.27
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank hon. Alaso for the wonderful work done for this country and for causing this report today. In this Parliament, if someone does commendable work, whether it is the Opposition or whoever, we are all working for one thing, which is development. I would like to thank you.

Madam Speaker, I think before the President decided to create this commission there was someone - either Parliament or the Executive, I do not know - who blew the whistle to cause this commission to be put in place, and when the commission was put in place, that was the time they would have put in place a committee to monitor the performance of the commission, but since it was not there and the minister is telling us that she has no information, and when you read the heading, “Mismanagement of USE and UPE Funds” then it seems it should be the Ministry of Education which is a direct victim and which is being investigated because this money lies solely in that ministry. So, we do not expect a lot that the commission would report to the people they are investigating. So, we do not expect a lot from the Ministry of Education. My humble request is that this Parliament requests the Ministry of the Presidency, since the supervision is directly from the President, to go and contact the President and come up with a statement to this Parliament because this is a statement - we want an explanation on how far the commission has gone. If we do not do that, the Ministry of Education will not report because they have not given them information, and since it is the ministry they are investigating. 

And my question is,  “How much money has been mismanaged under USE and UPE?” Because by the time that query came up, there must have been an estimate of maybe how much money had been misused because the situation down there in the schools is very bad. Everybody at least knows that and that is why they are blaming the President. USE is not working well; UPE is not working well; because the people who are handling the funds of these programmes are not really doing the work and are not being supervised. They have ghost teachers, they have –(Member timed out.)

4.30
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank everybody who has contributed to this ministerial statement. Members, I want to thank Parliament that during the oil debate we had wanted to propose that a commission of inquiry be set up to investigate the matter and we want to thank hon. Seninde for having proposed that an ad hoc committee be put in place. Otherwise, we would have gone in the same way our government runs these things. 

It is very clear that commissions of inquiry should be public. I have been in Uganda for many years; I have not heard of this commission of inquiry apart from reading in the papers of the one of mismanagement of public funds. I do not know where they hold their meetings. In fact, to echo the issue of hon. Frank Tumwebaze, it is true it is the Auditor-General who was the first person who raised this after the School Facilitation Grant - classrooms were breaking and there was a value-for-money audit and it came up - the issue of the mismanagement of public funds.

I think if UPE is for all of us, it is high time we all came up with a serious decision on this matter. Under Article 163(3) (b), the Auditor-General has the powers to carry out value-for-money for any project in Uganda which uses public resources. The only thing is, I am not sure whether this commission of inquiry into mismanagement of funds was to carry out value-for-money or was it just for public hearing and no value-for-money comes out or what. The competent body to do value-for-money should have been the Office of the Auditor-General as hon. Tumwebaze said.

Having said that, mismanagement of public funds is a crime and if up to now no person has been arrested, then it confirms there has been no mismanagement. If there is mismanagement, then they should have arrested somebody by now and that is why the commission is very comfortable to be paid all these big amounts of money and do no work. 

The Judge of the High Court or of whichever court gets his salary there with allowances, then here, he gets allowances. How will he complain? He has two payments doing half a job. He would prefer the job to continue to that extent. 

That brings me to the minister. I am sure - well, we want to forgive the former minister; maybe, because of age, she could not see very well. But the current one; on 13th June 2011, there was an extension. I am sure she is aware of this extension and I am sure she is the one who recommended that the extension should be granted. Otherwise, I want to be educated. Who recommended the extension? Today, the 14th February, you came to present the paper and you have extended again from today to August. On what basis did you recommend this extension? (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I just want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The information I want to give is; while on the one hand they are denying funds by the letter written on 3rd February 2012 by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education, on the other hand, they are extending the tenure of the commission to do work even when the facilitation has been suspended. So, which means, what they are doing is actually creating employment of a permanent nature on extendable contracts.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the moment the extension comes in place, they can work on credit and they will be paid. (Laughter) Yes, and I can tell you they will demand for it. You know, when you want water in your house; you buy a pipe to get the water in the house. I am sure, this commission must be a pipe for someone who is drinking the water and we need to find out who is a beneficiary of this water. Or even “ajono”, you buy a tube, you put in your “ajono” and you suck, but the tube does not suck. It is you the owner of the tube who swallows it, but the tube helps you to bring the liquid. So, we must find out what is this conduit? 

If you look at the figures, you will cry. You just look at 2010 and I will explain one of them. Go to June, it started with Shs 823,000,000 and do you know the reason? Under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Section 18, “Any funds which remain unspent, must be returned to the Consolidated Fund”. They knew that if they did not remove it, it would be returned. These are the things which Prof. Kamuntu knows because he was one of the ministers in Finance; he knows all this -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you Leader of Opposition, for giving way. In fact, when you come to annex 3, the last paragraph, the PS says, “We will restart transactions once the PS releases to my vote - Vote 013 - Shs 2 billion already referred to above. Once he does so, I will recover at source the funds lent to the Commission, which is Shs 1.1 billion, to refund to the UPOLET account. The Commission will then have about Shs 900 million to use”.

What I want to add on is, when the honourable minister was grading secondary schools, more attention was paid to private schools. St. Lawrence School is diamond, and it is among these very people whom I suspect - because there is no other Lawrence Mukiibi I know who is a proprietor of schools - who was a beneficiary of marketing his schools at the cost of Government schools. 

So, you can imagine a situation when you are seated in a plane, and they advise you; “Please once the plane gets problems and you are not breathing and once the masks come down, put on your nose and start breathing, but do not handle your son before handling yourself. First handle yourself, start breathing and then place it on your child or you baby.” 

Here, we have a ministry where we are having Shs 6 billion, but the government through the minister in front of us, is giving attention to marketing private schools in gold when Government schools like Lubiri and Nabbingo are seated aside. That is the information I want to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you cannot study from morning to evening or you cannot dig from morning to evening without eating food and nobody should lie to us that our UPE kids can study without eating food and they perform very well. I think we are being unfair. Now, you can see; in addition to the money they have been stealing under the UPE, they get an extra Shs 6 billion and add on. Assuming the Shs 6 billion was carried out as a project in Kalangala and given to schools there, wouldn’t performance have improved rather than giving a High Court Judge who already has a salary to get more money? I recall one of the former judges said, “You are bringing me tilapia, but you are leaving crocodiles”. I can see a huge crocodile -(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Members, we need to close this matter really. Final information.

MR KWIZERA: Thank you for giving way. I know Dr Nassali was interdicted from the Ministry of Education. I do not know if the minister expects a balanced report if Dr Nassali who was interdicted before she was even appointed a commissioner, is a member of the commission and the chairperson. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that if the Justice of the High Court can behave like this, I do not believe that we shall ever get any justice in this country because I want to be on record that this Justice has done injustice to us and should be held responsible. I agree with Members who are saying that these people should go to Luzira. (Interjections) They should really go to Luzira. (Applause) But as they are walking to Luzira, those who are recommending them to have extensions should be the lead people to Luzira -(Interjections)- because, they are the ones who are telling them, “Go and steal.” So, these ones who are recommending should be the first in line, then they follow them because they should have got the report for us. (Interjections) This country belongs to all of us, not a few individuals. None of you should steal our public money and assume we shall leave you. It is very serious. They should not bash us on issues of cars, but let us deal with this problem, now and not tomorrow. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.42
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion without notice. That is Rule 46 if you will allow me. 

“Having received the report by the Minister of Education on the Commission of Inquiry into the Mismanagement of UPE and USE Funds;

Noting that the commission, has hitherto had four extensions of its term; 

And further noting that no interim reports have been submitted or presented to the President;
 
Aware that Shs 6 billion has already been disbursed to the commission;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That Government winds up the activities of this commission and withholds further extension of its mandate.

That Government does not extend any additional funding to the commission.

That the Auditor General conducts a special audit of the activities of the commission of inquiry into UPE and USE.

That any unspent money in the commission’s account be frozen until investigations are complete.

That the Committee on Social Services pursues this matter further and reports to Parliament in two months’ time.”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a motion on the Floor as proposed by hon. Alaso. I put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services, report to us in two months. 

4.45
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (MAJ. (RTD) JESSICA ALUPO): Madam Speaker, I just had one clarification to make. But I can say that I have benefited from the contributions of Members and I want to thank them very much for joining His Excellency the President, in demanding for value-for-money -(Interjections)-  because -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order Members, please.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, it was very clear from the presentations of Members that the commission of inquiry was put in place because His Excellency the President, wanted value-for-money in our education institutions. (Interjections) I just wanted to share with Members a little experience I had with the commission of inquiry.  (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House has made a resolution. If there is additional information you want to give, take it to the Committee on Social Services. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF 
THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION ON THE 126TH IPU ASSEMBLY
 AND RELATED MEETINGS TO TAKE PLACE IN UGANDA

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek guidance from you on a matter which I think is of national importance and in fact, a matter of national security. This House was recalled from recess on the issue of oil, and last week, His Excellency the President, addressed this House on a matter which I believe is of urgency; is of importance and is of a security nature. When I look at the Order Paper, I do not see this Parliament treating that subject matter with any form of urgency, yet I believe that after the President’s address; this Parliament should not let that issue lose steam. That issue, in my view, should be reflected on the Order Paper, for immediate discussion before it is overtaken by events. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you came late. In my communication, I addressed that issue and directed the Leader of Government Business to bring the reprinted copies and we debate it on Tuesday. I have already addressed it.

MR OTADA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much. 

4.49
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much. This is a report to the Parliament of Uganda on the preparations for the hosting of the 126th Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly meeting due in Kampala from March 27th to April 5th of this year. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you may be aware that the governing council selected the Parliament of Uganda to host the 126th IPU session. (Interjections) Since that time, substantive work on the preparations for hosting has been undertaken and all this was kicked off when the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda on behalf of Uganda, formally submitted to the IPU Secretariat, Uganda’s bid to host this meeting.

In pursuit of the above objective, the Parliament of Uganda commenced the preparations by setting up an interim organising committee. Allow me, at this time, to pay tribute to the members of the interim organising committee, which undertook the responsibility of preparing the bid documents, the preparations, the defence, the harnessing and also canvassing for support from other members to ensure that the Parliament of Uganda was selected.

The interim organising committee was set up under the chairpersonship of the then, Deputy Speaker, now Speaker of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Kadaga. She was assisted by hon. Paula Turyahikayo, hon. Nabilah Naggayi, hon. John Kawanga, hon. John Kigyagi, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Emmanuel Dombo and also other members of staff, including Mr Kagoro, Ms Mariam Nassali and Mr Bakwega.

Madam Speaker, allow me at this time to recognise the contribution made by our ambassador and his team in the secretariat in Geneva, Ambassador Kagimu and his team. This is the team – this information, is off-cuff, but I wanted to bring it because this is an abridged version.

Subsequently, the committee of experts from IPU Secretariat led by the Director Conference Management, visited Uganda to verify the availability of the necessary infrastructure for the smooth organisation of this meeting. 

What I want to say next is not part of my committee, but I want to mention that for Uganda to have been selected to host this meeting, it went through a competitive process. At that time we competed with Canada, which we beat hands down in order to be selected. And this is because of the good bid document that we presented, and also the supporting reasons that we had. 

Members may want to know that this conference will coincide with the celebrations to mark our 50 years of Independence, and as a Parliament, this will be our climax in the contribution we shall make to our golden jubilee celebrations.

The committee of experts presented the report of their findings, which was considered by the governing council during the 123rd IPU Assembly which was held in Geneva, and approved Uganda’s request to host the 126th IPU meeting. 

Consequently, the Secretary General of the IPU visited Uganda on 18th February, 2010 and an agreement between Parliament of Uganda and the Inter Parliamentary Union was signed by the Rt Hon. Speaker on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and the Secretary General on behalf of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. 

The signing of the above agreement was witnessed by the Prime Minister, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Minister of Tourism and wildlife. The agreement clearly states the responsibility of the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the host Parliament. 

For ease of reference on this matter, a copy of the agreement between the Parliament of Uganda and the IPU concerning this meeting has been attached for Members to understand the details of the meeting.

Allow me also to give the Members an abridged version on how far the preparations have gone. Following the signing of the agreement, between Parliament of Uganda and the IPU concerning this assembly, the following actions have so far been taken:

The national organising committee has been formalised and expanded in order to undertake the necessary preparations. This has been responsible for the formulation of the budget and supervising its implementation. Out of this budget, vehicles and equipment to facilitate the conference have been procured and many Members of Parliament have been wondering why we have a fleet of buses which are hardly being used and a number of vehicles being parked at the Bauman House. These are vehicles that were bought specifically for this conference, but which also Parliament will have the opportunity to use in its day-to-day activities when the conference is finished. The venues of the meetings have been secured in accordance to the additional protocol agreement between Parliament and IPU.

On the venues, I wish to inform the Members that the main venue of this meeting is going to be the Serena conference Centre and the Imperial Royal Hotel. But the opening ceremony is going to take place at Munyonyo Conference Centre. 

Appropriate accommodation for the assembly staff has also been procured and also accommodation for the President and the Secretary General of IPU has been procured. These are requirements in the additional protocol, that the host Parliament must provide accommodation for the IPU President, the Secretary General and the Secretariat Staff, who will be coming in from Geneva. 

Allow me to add - all of you are conversant with what happened during CHOGM. Government committed a lot of money and paid some of the hotels that were never used. I want to report here that most of the hotels, if not all designated hotels in Kampala, are all fully booked by the delegates who are going to pay for their own accommodation and this has been contributed by Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)

I also want to add that recently, you should have seen that Uganda was voted as one of the biggest tourist destinations during this current year of 2012. This IPU Conference is going to be a major contributing factor towards that movement of people. And at this time, honourable members, I want you to pay tribute to the Rt Hon. Speaker –(Applause)– she took it upon herself to promote the tourism industry of Uganda and invited delegates to stay a little bit longer after the conference had ended. This has been demonstrated by the booking that the organising committee has received. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the members of the organising committee. (Applause) 

The procurement of other key items necessary for the smooth-running of the assembly such as computers, photocopying machines, plasma screens and the kind, has also been done.  An official website has also been set up and Members can access it to find out what exactly is happening on the website. This is regularly updated to ensure that whatever is taking place in Uganda attracts people to come and stay.

This is off cuff. I think it is because of this that you made a statement appealing to our friends on the Opposition side, especially the A4C Coordinator, that at the time when this conference is taking place, it is not in the interest of Ugandans that this Walk-to-Work should take place because it will distract the people coming into Uganda. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, I believe there is no way our Members would wish to interrupt the working of Parliament. 

Also, know that this is a big meeting that is going to bring together about 160 countries with all their presiding officers and delegates and including the association of secretaries of Parliament. These are clerks and staff of Parliament. Together, we expect over 2000 delegates combined with their accompanying spouses and observers, this meeting could as well go up to 4000 people when they all turn-up. 

A special package has been developed to encourage delegates and their spouses to visit various parts of our country during and after the conference. Invitations to the IPU member countries have all been dispatched and so far, over 100 countries have confirmed participation. But we know the deadline has not yet been reached. 

The sub-committees headed by Members of Parliament have been established to provide supervision and guidance to the technical staff charged with the responsibilities of the conference. 

Madam Speaker, allow me at this moment to mention who the leaders of these committees are so that at an appropriate time, when you expand these committees, the Members will know which people they will be working with for the organisation of this meeting. 

There is the Security and Accreditation Committee headed by hon. Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta. There is the Committee on Conference Management, Documentation and Publication which is headed by hon. Jalia Bintu – this is just information which is not part of the report directly.

Then there is the Committee on Accommodation headed by hon. Ronald Reagan Okumu and assisted by hon. Ronah Ninsiima and Mr Ignatius Kasirye, who is the secretary of the committee.

The health sub-committee is headed by hon. Paula Turyahikayo assisted by hon. Sulaiman Balyejusa, hon. Lokii Abraham and Ms Mariam Nassali, who is the secretary to the committee. There is Media and Publicity sub-committee which is headed by hon. Dr Michael Lulume Bayiga, and is assisted by hon. William Nokrach and the secretary is Ms Hellen Kaweesa as the technical person on the committee. 

There is the Budget sub-committee headed by Dr Chris Baryomunsi as Commissioner and the secretary is Obabaru-Okello. It is a two-member committee which I know the Speaker will be expanding at an appropriate time. The entertainment committee is headed by hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala and the secretary is Ms Ranny Ismail.

The IPU Secretariat is being coordinated by Mr Emmanuel Bakwega, who has been the Liaison Officer of this conference from its inception when we started the bidding process.

The Transport sub-committee is headed by Emmanuel Lumala Dombo. I am assisted by hon. Stephen Baka, hon. Joy Kariisa and Mr Henry Waiswa, who is the technical person on this committee as secretary and the Transport Officer of the Parliament of Uganda.

We have the Invitation and Protocol sub-committee. This one according to the membership here, is one of the committees that is fully constituted and has done a tremendous job because all invitations have been delivered, all protocol guidelines have been developed and are under print, and all immigration issues are being handled by this committee. It is headed by hon. Elijah Okupa who is assisted by hon. Lydia Wanyoto, hon. Joy Ruth Acheng, hon. Anne Awuru, hon. Ekwau Ibi Florence, hon. Abdul Latiff Ssebagala, hon. Dennis-Hamson Obua, hon. Hussein Kyanjo, hon. Byarugaba Alex, hon. Sanjay Tanna, hon. Nalubega Mariam, hon. Kawooya Hanifa, hon. Balikuddembe Joseph, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Nansubuga Seninde, hon. Sylivia Ssinabulya and Mr Peter Odeke as the technical officer. 

I wish to inform this House that so far the preparations have been going according to schedule. There are a few issues that have to be done and the relevant committees are handling them, and incase of any challenges, they are going to be sorted out soon. 

This is not part of this committee, but allow me mention that the Rt Hon. Speaker, in her wisdom, suggested that as we celebrate the 50 years, the children of Uganda should take and own the IPU preparations. Therefore, a decision has been taken that during the opening ceremony, children from various schools around Uganda are going to be invited so that they make presentations during the opening ceremony so that in 50 years to come, they should know that we are moving into the next golden jubilee and the children of Uganda should be part of that movement. This is something that was initiated by the Rt Hon. Speaker and is in the final stages of implementation.

In conclusion, I beg to report that Parliament of Uganda is yet to satisfy the requirements of Article 6 of the Statute of the Inter Parliamentary Union, which states as follows, “All Members or Associate Members of the Union shall have their own rules governing their participation in the Union’s work. They shall make all structural, administrative and financial provisions required to ensure effectively their representation in the Union, the implementation of the decisions taken and to maintain a regular liaison with the Secretariat of the Union to which they shall send, before the end of January of each year, a report of their activities, including the names of their officers and the list or the total number of their members.” 

Honourable members, you will recall that before adjournment last time, the proposed rules governing the IPU were circulated to the Members. There was also an intention to move the motion then, but because the House had to close, we did not do it. I would, therefore, strongly recommend that this House considers and adopts this report and at an appropriate time, allow me to move a motion for the formulation of the National Group of the IPU and adoption of the rules governing its operations. I beg to move. 

5.08
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I thank you. I really want to thank hon. Dombo for a very well detailed presentation although I have a problem as a medical doctor in this Parliament because when it came to the selection of people who are going to handle health, I was looking at the Members of Parliament today who are present; there is Dr Lulume Bayiga, Dr Okuonzi with a PhD in Medicine; and Dr Chris Baryomunsi. I am not saying that we are left out, but we are saying that when it comes to life of human beings, please give it to those ones who have taken years and years to read about human beings. (Applause) That is why we are saying it is very difficult for Dr Bitekyerezo to become chairman of rules because it becomes a problem as it is a contradiction. (Laughter)

With a very honest submission to you, Madam Speaker and to this House, I was at least requesting that we include one or two doctors for purposes of making sure that we deliver a very wonderful medical service to the people who are going to be here. I thank you so much. 

5.10
Mr MAGYEZI RAPHAEL (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Dombo for this report and the entire committee and once again to also thank you, our Speaker, for submitting the bid, fighting hard to get it and securing this conference to come here. An international conference of this magnitude is important for us because it projects us and we must put up the best we can of ourselves.

I would like to make the following observations; I was expecting a presentation on the resource implications of this conference, but I do not see the budget breakdown or progress made in securing resources required to run this conference.

Secondly, on the committee composition, hon. Dombo has only given us the chairs and he did not go into the details of the committees.

My observation is that we need to very quickly fill up these committees. A conference that is scheduled for March this year and now we are already in February, I think we need to do a lot in terms of human resource, practice and training on how duties are going to be carried out and so on.

The other observation I would like to make is that there seems to be a raw deal for the new Members of Parliament on these committees. (Applause) So, Madam Speaker, through you, we request that as the gaps are being filled up, please consider the new members too; I am sure they have a lot of resources to put into these committees.

Thirdly, let me talk about the invitations to the IPU member parliaments. I observe that we seem to have been given a deadline of 30 November. Much as hon. Emanuel Dombo says that the committee has done a lot of good work, on page five, he says that the invitations are yet to go out. It seems we may be doing not so well in terms of time management on this, yet it is important for us to know the key speakers among those invited. I thought this would come out on the detailed programme. I notice that what you have presented to us is simply a skeleton.

My sense is that the committee needs to very quickly meet in order to come out with a detailed package that will be sent to all the invited guests and Members of Parliament of Uganda. I do not see that coming out already. I think there is still a lot that needs to be done although the committee has done some work so far. Many of those important cornerstones for such a good conference, that are missing, worry me.

THE SPEAKER: Let me just confirm that I sent out the invitations before the 30 of November in both English and French. So, there is nothing pending. You know this report was written last year, and I think they did not amend it. Otherwise, I can confirm that all the invitations have been sent and we already have all the confirmations.

5.14
MR GEORGE STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just like my colleague already alluded, I would like to raise my concern in regard to the participation of the new Members of Parliament. I notice that our commissioners who have so far done a good job – I am a little touched because I thought that our commissioners would have delegated some of these responsibilities to other Members of Parliament. For example, I do not know what competence the commissioner who has been presenting this report has in issues of transport. We have many Members who have been in the transport industry for a long time. I believe such Members should have been utilised.

When you talk about Commissioner hon. Elijah Okupa, I believe he should be doing only supervisory duties with other Members left to participate. This would allow us to prepare for transition. What I am saying is that we do not prepare leaders for succession. With time, there will be need for us to take over your positions. So, why don’t you prepare us at this time? (Laughter)

I am not trying to accuse my commissioners. I only believe this is the opportunity that I have to convey such a message to them. Please, involve us in these activities so that we can own them as real stakeholders. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe not to mislead the debate, I would like to say that one of the problems we had is that up to now, we do not have a directory of the Members of Parliament. (Interjections)  Yes. I am telling you. So, other than the doctor whom I know, I cannot be able to tell the professions of the other Members. 

But let me also say that the core group that has been working on this project since the Eighth Parliaments form the major parts of those committees. It is not because we do not want you to be part of those committees; the old group was already handling some activities. But we take your point; that was not done for discrimination.

5.17
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to record my appreciations to you, Rt Hon. Speaker and the IPU delegates who did their best to win the bid for Uganda to host the next IPU Conference in March this year. This will be a great chance for us to market Uganda. I hope that the Ministry of Tourism is taking note. I am saying this because we have been named the best tourist destination for the year 2012; we should be able to prove that we are indeed what we claim to be.

As my colleague has said before, there is only one month left to the conference. I would like to thank those who have been involved in the preparations for the great work so far done. But I think we need a meeting outside this Chamber in which the committee will give us the details on what they have done so far. This will help us to make our contributions while there is still time. Thank you.

5.18
MR SAM AMOOTI OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join my colleagues in congratulating Parliament for putting up a winning bid that is going to see this country host a high profile conference such as this one. Let me also thank hon. Emmanuel Dombo for presenting this report.

On page five, Commissioner hon. Emmanuel Dombo tells us about the theme that has been coined and approved, but he does not mention or tell us that theme. My other observation is in regard to what hon. Raphael Magyezi raised in regard to the invitations. I was actually worried that we would be in breach of the agreement that we signed – see section three, but Madam Speaker, you have clarified on that matter.

Finally, let me say that for avoidance of doubt, honourable colleagues, this conference is bigger than CHOGM. So, I do not think this country has yet recovered from the CHOGM situation of about five years ago. Its pains are just still as fresh.

Therefore, I would like to agree with hon. Raphael Magyezi’s issue in regard to the budget. What are we going to deal with, as Members of Parliament, in terms of diagnosing the cost-benefit analysis at the end of this conference, if we do not have a budget to look at? 

Hon. Emmanuel Dombo and others are asking us to be excited about what seems to be benefits in terms of rooms that have been booked, but the picture cannot be complete if we do not get to know the cost. This will help us arrive at a more comprehensive analysis. Thank you.

MR MUGUME: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Dombo has talked about accommodation and I am comfortable with it. But there is the issue of electricity in this country and it is a big problem; and we are going to host many delegates. So, I don’t know how we are going to deal with this problem of electricity. You know where most of these delegates are coming from; they have electricity full-time. I don’t know whether we shall have load shedding that week. Otherwise, as a country, we might get into problems. We were told that Bujagali was switched on, but we still have the same problems. I don’t know whether it was a political statement, but if it was really switched on, it is important to have this problem solved. 

Secondly, on the issue of accommodation. He has told us that accommodation is in Kampala. However, it is high time we considered people upcountry who have come up with accommodation facilities. The other time I was in Kyenjojo district. I saw a very nice hotel. These people have used a lot of money to set up such facilities, but they are not considered. It is just a few people in this big city who are considered. It is high time we considered those areas. We have airfields. They can sleep there and attend the meetings the next day. That is what we have been doing. But to concentrate here in Kampala will only make those people upcountry lose morale. Thank you very much.

5.23
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two brief observations to make. I listened carefully to hon. Dombo listing the committees and their leadership. I was concerned particularly on the committee on security, headed by none other than the General in this House. I have no problem with the General heading this committee, but like other committees, we have staff of Parliament. I am aware that Parliament has the Parliamentary Police. We should be the best institution to handle security, perhaps advising the Army General, because we are not going to war. So, I would like to strongly advice that the work of securing the conference and the delegates should be the work of the Police because I know Army Generals best appreciate war times. I know Madam Speaker and her team shall look into this matter seriously. 

Madam, I am not going to talk about A4C because it has nothing to do with my work as an MP. But with your indulgence and permission, I could present a paper on A4C in the august House, if deemed right. But for this submission, I would like to advise that the issue of security be handed to those trained to handle civilian or civil security and not Army Generals. We are not going to war. I submit.

5.26
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much. I received a letter signed by the Speaker of this House nominating me to be a member of the protocol sub-committee. I did not hear my name and that of hon. Ekanya being mentioned. Were these letters smuggled in and forged for your signature or not? 

Secondly, you mentioned that while selecting these committees, you looked at the professionalism of Members of Parliament. I don’t want to say much, but if there is a professional in that field – I was a Deputy Chief of Protocol of this country and I was a consultant during CHOGM. I spent 25 years in that ministry. So, if it was professionalism -[Hon. Member: “You should have been the Chairman.”]- (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I don’t know whether you signed that letter or it was smuggled or it was forged because hon. Dombo did not read our names, Ekanya and I. 

THE SPEAKER: There was a slight error in them, but both you and hon. Ekanya are members of the committee. Don’t worry. The Speaker has said you are a member of the committee. 

5.27
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you. I want to thank the committee for the work so far done. I rise on the point of entertainment and the schools of the children who are going to perform. I thought that in the spirit of inclusion, we should identify one school of children with special needs, and since we have this short time, we prepare them with the theme. I know that around Kampala, we have them; we have them in Iganga. At least those ones are near; so that we can have an inclusive approach. We need to demonstrate that Uganda, in the 50 years, has brought up disabled people and I think within the celebration, we need to celebrate that. Thank you.

5.28
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you. I just have a few things to talk about. Four thousand visitors are coming to Uganda, and somebody has already mentioned that the Minister of Tourism should prepare himself. 

I just want to make my observation and recommendation that since this would be a big opportunity for us to market Uganda and especially market the tourist destinations, the tour operators of Uganda be organised and an exhibition on tourism be performed. So that in the evening, as these guests go for entertainment, they could pass the stalls of tourism or tour operators in Uganda. That is my submission and request. Thank you. 

5.29
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you. My concern is in two areas. The first area is about the children who are going to perform. I am very passionate about school children, especially so with children from rural areas. They have interesting drama to show to guests. Secondly, they also get excited if they ever happen to stay in the city, especially Kampala, on such a day.

During these years that we are celebrating and to commemorate the IPU, I think organisers should think mainly about rural children who have never had a chance to participate in such events.

The other issue, which has been mentioned, but I would want to add my voice to, is that you should have heard when the minister mentioned that it is the President, whether by error or not, who is supervising the commission of inquiry. You should have heard the sneers from the Members. Likewise, if members of the commission are heading sub-committees, let alone if there is a failure, who would check them. I would be of the view that these commissioners be good leaders and delegate and then they supervise. Thank you.

5.31
MS VICTORIA BUSINGE-RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point of concern as an educationist is children. In every district, there is one good school. I know the Members of Parliament are fit to identify at least a school per region and Kampala has always had a golden opportunity. While UPE is called all names such as bonna bakome, bonna badome, there are some very unique UPE schools. It would be my pleasure that we indentify one school per region and the MPs would take charge, if possible, to let these people be motivated. 

It is very frustrating. These people are called villagers but there are very good schools and good children upcountry, and it would be their pleasure to come and get exposure and make their districts proud. These people should be given a chance to talk. These children can talk. Let us not be afraid that they will speak of their challenges. I know they can give very good exposure to please the guests. 

Secondly, is there any special opportunity given to the women; and I think women can make a good presentation of their needs, of their challenges. It would be most pleasing if members do pass that women also be given a chance to address –(Interruption)

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to allay the fears of the Member of Parliament from Kabarole District. In fact, this IPU meeting has a very important item to discuss, the issue of maternal and child health among many others. 

I also want to take this opportunity to let the Members of Parliament know that the media and publicity committee is organising an expo for the whole of Parliament within the next two weeks, and it will be presided over by the Speaker. Media houses are going to be invited, including civil society organisations. We will extend a good reception for you and we shall have an in-depth discussion about what is going on, including previous resolutions of the last IPU meeting, so that people come on board and follow while we are hosting this one. 

In respect to security, members also need to know that we are handling not only the security of persons within Uganda but majorly, and most importantly, the security of our delegates. In regard to the internal workings, I have been speaking to members of the military and security forces within so that there is moderation as well without necessarily curtailing the right of individuals to do their thing, including demonstrations. 

Madam Speaker, we already have a meeting of the gay community which is going on within the hotels. I think they are also preparing to ensure that their case is put forward when it comes to this IPU –(Interjections)– Well, I hope they are not going to be a security threat but also their rights and their security must be looked into. These are matters that are being discussed to ensure that the publicity towards the IPU is not marred by other happenings within and that takes a lot of control. I can assure the House that we are in charge. Thank you.

MS RUSOKE: I am asking that the House recommends that these children are included in the budget maybe for T-shirts and very good presentable kilts and socks. It is not very expensive. I do not know if the youth are included. We are talking about what we do not know because we are not informed. I suggest that something also is included for the youth. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.37
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Island County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether I got you right, that the membership of the committees depends on professionalism. I request that we draw our attention to the minimum requirements for someone to be a Member of Parliament. If we go with professionalism, with all due respect, I am convinced that there are members who will never qualify to be on any committee. 

Also, I would have been very happy to look at the budget. Almost for every big event we have organised, we have had a commission of inquiry into the event after. So, my humble request is that it would be good if we also get to look at the budget because we do not want to have an inquiry into the IPU Conference like we had for CHOGM. Thank you very much.

5.38
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to take this opportunity to thank you as the person who spearheaded the bringing of this important conference to Uganda. We all agree that this conference will be very important in selling the image of Uganda. It will also be very important in bringing in foreign exchange to the country. I am sure the KACITA traders will be very happy because during that period, the shilling will appreciate and it will be easier for them to import products with their shillings. 

I just want to find out whether there is some liaison going on with the KCCA. Of course, we are asking some of these questions because we have not been involved. It would be very good if, for example, using the liaison with the KCCA, they could work on improving the lighting especially on the streets around the hotels where most of our delegates will be staying and the conference areas, and they do repairs of potholes. Also, other bodies like the National Water and Sewerage Corporation and Umeme could be looked at to ensure that during that period, they ensure that there is no load-shedding in the areas where most of our guests and delegates will be staying, since we already know where most of those people will be staying.

My other concern is to do with security. When we have important conferences, we have people who use that opportunity to steal from our delegates. Those ones need to be looked at. Also, the night workers who may want to provide their services to the delegates; some of them pose a security risk to the delegates and end up stealing from their clients. So, those are some of the issues which need to be looked at. 

I have seen in the document that the conference is fairly hi-tech - it requires internet facilities, a lot of communication facilities and other things. In that vein, being an IT specialist, if there is a committee dealing with communications and ICT and so on, I volunteer to be a member. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.41
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to join colleagues in thanking you for being one of the best lobbyists in this country for the good of this country. I also want to thank hon. Dombo for the report presented, but I have one or two issues to add. 

One, in line with what one of the members has just said about tourism, the efforts you took to mobilise this IPU conference to come here was to sell the image of this country. So, I believe one of the committees should be on tourism, specifically to coordinate with the tourism sector as to which areas to take our visitors to and also to publicise what we have for them. If we do this, they can be able to choose where they would like to go. 

I am aware there is a committee on media and publicity. This is the time for that committee to do most of its work because this is a high level conference, which is even bigger than CHOGM. Unfortunately, I do not see the publicity. Even Members of Parliament here seem not to be aware of the conference. So, we need to highly publicise this conference - go on radio and in all other forms of media - so as to effectively reach the people. We also need to publicise the tourism attractions we have here so that when these people come, they have an idea of where they want to go especially since you have requested them to stay longer.  

I would like to concur with hon. Kameteka that whether it will be here or in the Conference Hall, the committee needs to present in detail what they are going to do. I heard from hon. Dombo that some of the committees are not fully subscribed to and yet members here would like to participate in this conference. So, that will be an opportunity for members to know what these committees are all about and to choose where they can provide support in making this conference a success. 

That is what I wanted to say. Perhaps I will have other issues to share with you later, taking into account that I attended one of the joint parliamentary assemblies of the ACP-EU, on how the activities move and how you provide the health sector with ambulances etc. We also need to provide forex services in all the hotels where our visitors will be. 

Finally, we need a coordination committee that will coordinate the activities of all the committees. It would be best if we had the Commission coordinating all the activities of the sub-committees especially to get to know whether they are ready to provide what is required in those committees during the conference and to know who the committees have to contact in case of anything. So, there should be a coordinating body at the highest level, which should be the Commission, for the success of this conference. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.44
MR MUKITALE BIRAAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much. I congratulate you, Madam Speaker, the Parliament and the Republic of Uganda upon this big achievement, which coincides with the 50th anniversary of the independence of Uganda and Uganda having been chosen as the number one world tourism destination, 2012. So, I would like us to seize this opportunity more than we used CHOGM to market Uganda as a tourism destination. 

I come from the Albertine region, which most people are talking about in line with oil, but the future of Uganda and that of the Albertine region is really based on tourism. I would like to request the Ministry of Tourism to give us a comprehensive presentation as to how they intend, as a new ministry, to use this opportunity to position Uganda during this big opportunity. 

The kind of supplementary budget I would want to see in the Ninth Parliament would be of this nature. If we can have a supplementary budget to make sure that the Ministry of Tourism, which I know is lagging behind, can partner with Parliament to market Uganda. 

On inclusion and participation, I am the representative of the IPU LDC programme because I worked on the report for Uganda in the last Parliament and we have been interfacing with IPU. Even one time, we accompanied you with hon. Akol to Switzerland, among these others. This is a very big opportunity; I think inclusion is still possible to make sure that there is participation of more expertise and professionalism. But please, tourism, I am waiting for your presentation. What do you intend to do as a ministry to seize this opportunity so that we can gain more than what we gained in CHOGM? I thank you.    

5.47
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We are proud of you for this programme because, sincerely, choosing Uganda has been a very important thing for us. As you know, one of the sources of income for a country, more especially Uganda, is tourism. We have been looking for a way of advertising the variety of things that we have in Uganda so that we can be able to compete with other countries in as far as tourism is concerned. Now here comes a chance where we have a lot to exhibit. 

You have always heard of the pygmies in Uganda. (Laughter) The pygmies are interpreted in various ways. Some say they are animals. The other time you remember there was a session in either the Eighth or Seventh Parliament where they said when you take electricity to Bundibugyo, the pygmies will climb the poles and touch the live wires. Well, I was not here but hon. Wadri will bear witness because he was here. All this was because they did not know what a pygmy looks like and how they behave. 

I wish this to be the right moment to bring these pygmies here. They behave like human beings and they have their cultural dances; they can perform here since we are tired of these usual dancers. Let us bring something unique to this international function. I think I have a very important point to make here. Thank you. (Laughter)
 
THE SPEAKER: You have really spoken for the pygmies. 

5.49
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate you and all colleagues who have lobbied for this conference. 

I would like to request hon. Dombo to prepare a cost benefit budget analysis; for example, how many guests do you expect to come? How much money do you anticipate that they will leave in the country? What do you deem their expenditure to be? That will help us.

Secondly, when we travel, we at times get stranded in Nairobi. So, I think the Minister of Tourism needs to discuss with Kenya Airways and get the travel schedule of our guests so that they do not get stranded in Nairobi and then they are told, “You know, Uganda has no airline.”   

Another issue is that tour operators in Kenya, under the current arrangement of the East African Community, are allowed to enter Uganda with food and their vehicles without being taxed. But if the tour operators of Uganda want to cross to Rwanda and Tanzania, they are taxed and not allowed to carry their food. Can this be sorted out so that our tour operators do not make losses?

On the issue of taking guests upcountry, they would take people to places like Doho Rice Scheme and Tororo Rock. We need to know what is going to happen under this arrangement. They can do this without increasing costs because that is what caused CHOGM a problem; they had unnecessary costs that would not be managed. 

I would like to propose that all the MPs become members of the organising committee. Let us create a committee in charge of beautification and decoration so that we all voluntarily clean Kampala one week prior to the IPU conference. This will mean that no MP will be left out and we shall all put on our gumboots and clean the city. 

MR WADRI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to inform my colleague, hon. Ekanya, that it is not possible for all of us to be members of that committee especially members who subscribe to the Public Accounts Committee. We must have our hands off though with our eyes on, so that at the end of the day we are able to scrutinise the usage of the resources. It will be difficult for us to do that when we are also players and you are playing the role of a referee at the same time. So, PAC members will not want to be associated with running those committees. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I think the chairperson of PAC did not get me because even as a shadow Minister of Finance, my hands and eyes must be on. I am proposing a voluntary beautification committee of one week to keep Kampala clean; all of us with our gumboots to clean Kampala so that we show a difference. 

Unlike CHOGM where money was spent for planting flowers and cleaning, each MP plants flowers and we clean the city for one week. All of us would have participated and nobody will have been left out. Hon. Wadri will not query anything because we are going to do it free of charge. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.52
MS JOY ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable who has presented these documents to us. I have a few comments. First of all, on page 2 it says the organising committee has developed a project proposal, which was submitted to the Executive Committee of IPU for consideration and approval. I do not know what this project proposal entails, what the vision and mission were and what exactly they wish to present in their project proposal. I think at an appropriate time, you will give us the details.

Another issue is that I am glad we are hosting IPU but in the Committee of Foreign Affairs we have realised that much as we have integrated in the East African Community, and this time we are hosting IPU, most of our people, Ugandans, are not employed in these big hotels. In fact, you will find that they have nationals maybe from Kenya, Tanzania and the rest. We were questioning what the problem could be and we realised that our people do not have that hospitality, their reception is bad. I would wish that you inform the hotel owners that our people need to be employed but at the same time, they need to be educated. We are hosting big people and dignitaries; how are we going to receive them and be hospitable?

Another issue is, what shall we have - the rest of the honourable members have already said this - to present as Ugandans in terms of art? We have a number of people and cultures like the Langi. We want these people to see not only the western and Baganda dances but allow us to also present the traditional dances that we have, the food, dress and the rest. It will really be exciting. Thank you.

5.52
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also wish to extend thanks to the committee for a job well done. My area of concern basically goes to the role of each Member of Parliament vis-à-vis this Assembly. It will be very nice if we get to know what is expected of each Member of Parliament come the conference. This will be very good to guide us. 

Also, what do the Ugandans expect after this Assembly? Believe me, the people that sent us to Parliament are expecting a lot from this conference. We need to have this in mind and be prepared to address all the issues during the conference and after.

Lastly, it is high time that we, Members of Parliament, put our lobbying skills to test when we have our colleagues from IPU coming. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.56
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hosting IPU is of great importance not only to Uganda but also to the entire East African region. My areas of concern are two. One is publicity. We have not done enough in as far as publicity is concerned. Given the fact that we have barely a month, by this time everybody, from Members of Parliament to the entire nation, should be in the know about this conference.

I am of the view that since this conference is going to give us an opportunity to sell our country in terms of culture and other things that are very important to our country, can’t our budget allow us to use international media like CNN to inform those who are going to come on what they expect to find in Kampala? They can then come loaded with money and by the time they leave this place, Ugandans are gaining. When we advertise locally, they will not get the message. It is better that we move an extra mile and advertise in international media like Al Jazeera and CNN that there is an IPU meeting in Uganda, these are the expectations, and we show them our cultural and heritage sites so that they come to Uganda when they are prepared to leave some money in our country.

Finally, we need -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable. The clarification I wish to obtain in regard to IPU is just two small issues but I think they are important to me. 

First of all, I would like to find out whether the security arrangements that are in place ensure that our visitors get the same comfort that we get when we go to their countries. When we visit those countries for such important meetings, we do not see soldiers and policemen that are wielding guns around conference venues. It is important, so I want to know. We get security people who are armed but you do not see their guns yet they are part of the venue. It is not so intimidating. They are in suits. What arrangements are there in this country so that you do not rub shoulders with an AK47 and get a little bit scared?

Secondly, I also wish to get clarification on whether, in the spirit of being very inclusive and since this is parliamentary business, leaders of political parties in this country are invited to the opening ceremony. Thank you, honourable, for giving way.

MR SSEBAGALA: Finally, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of working together. The IPU conference cannot be successful unless we have worked together as Members of Parliament and all stakeholders. It is my humble appeal to all those who are serving on the different committees that what we want and need from you is extra commitment. It is only through commitment that we are going to have a successful IPU. Thank you very much.

6.00
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend you for the work and for having won the bid so that the IPU conference is held in Uganda. We applaud your leadership.

I would like to contribute to this topic especially in regard to committees. Most of the members have been talking about publicity. I am actually looking at us setting up a pre-events committee, which can dramatise this whole programme not necessarily as a Kampala project but even upcountry.

We could also set up side events leading to the IPU, like the civil society events because what interests me most is the topic on maternal health. We could also do a sports campaign in particular districts; for example, in eastern Uganda we could take Kamuli; in western, we could take Kanungu so that the people know what is going on and hence be able to influence what the parliamentarians are going to discuss in the IPU.

Madam Speaker, this is a very interesting forum that brings together legislators from across the world. My interest is the communiqué that will come out of IPU - what we are going to legislate on and what the various African countries are going to implement. If we held a side event, for example the youth pre-IPU event, it will influence the communiqué in the IPU. If we held a civil society organisations’ event, it will influence the final communiqué that the main IPU will come up with. Otherwise, it is a very good opportunity for Uganda and Africa as a whole to host this event.

Finally, I was out of the country a few weeks ago and met Action Aid organisation people and they asked me about Uganda’s holding of the IPU. I did not want to talk much because I was not informed. I imagine most of my colleagues are equally not informed about this conference and this is very important. Hon. Dombo presented a report, but it is not detailed enough to empower me since all of us are supposed to be spokespersons for this conference. At the end of it all, tourists are going to flock into Uganda and the country stands to benefit. Thank you.

6.04
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank colleagues who have contributed to this presentation. I concur with my sister from Mitooma that we may need another day to discuss the IPU conference in detail. However, I want to make some clarifications. 

My sister from Kabarole raised an issue on how the women and other disadvantaged groups will get involved. The organising committee in its work plan has organised an exhibition where we shall gazette a place from where all the local products will be exhibited. We are encouraging the women, people with disabilities and youths who have got local products to come and take part in the exhibition. We shall inform the public at a later stage after the procurement process – 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, Commissioner, we have requested KCCA to allow us use the CHOGM Garden out there; I hope they will accept.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is the point I wanted to make a clarification on. 

Another one concerns the budget. Many members have contributed asking to know about the budget. I want to inform this House that when Uganda was selected to host the IPU, immediately Parliament started incorporating the budget of these activities in its MTEF process. We have got the policy statement of the Parliamentary Commission where we have the IPU budget incorporated. I urge my colleagues when they go back, to make sure that they pick out that policy statement and look at the item where IPU is included. Thank you.

6.06
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Dombo for the report and I am happy to have learnt much about IPU. However, I have one observation and maybe those who have been going for other IPU conferences can clarify. As a proud Etesot, will I be allowed to come dressed in the traditional Teso attire to market my culture? [HON. MEMBER: “Emorimor.”] Yes, in Emorimor style. I would have loved other tribes to do the same so that we make Uganda proud. Thank you.

6.07
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Dombo for his report to Parliament on the preparation to host the 126th IPU Assembly in Kampala. I thank you, Madam Speaker, because when Uganda was announced as the next host of the Assembly, you were there with a group of Ugandans and you enjoyed it. Some of us who saw on television just wished we were part of the group. It was colourful and we thank you very much. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, we are Members of Parliament because we have a country and the moment you are promoting it, in this effort you should count on every arm of Government for support – Parliament, Judiciary and Executive. On promoting Uganda – which you are doing very well – we are one and we thank you very much. We also take lessons. [HON. MEMBER: “Corruption.”] Stealing is not a monopoly of one side, but I should not be distracted. What I am really saying is that when it comes to promoting this country, we are one.

The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) should provide lessons on avoiding emergencies, particularly when it comes to procurement. It is something I saw causing trouble, which should have been avoided, just because we waited for very long and towards the end there was a rush. In doing so, a lot of mistakes were made, which have turned out to be costly. The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting was something very good and the country has reaped benefits which were only diluted by these mistakes, which we should avoid this time. 

When it comes to marketing - classification of hotels, beautification of Kampala, debates, sensitisation and the role of Uganda in world affairs – all these should now become a household activity so that the country is with you as we near the Assembly. Today is February 14th and March 27th is the start of the Assembly; that is about one and a half months to go. With all the activities of Parliament going on, it requires a lot of effort. 

Madam Speaker, I want to assure you that as far as the Ministry of Tourism is concerned, we are one with you and you must have realised. Only last week, you flagged off the Parliamentary Tourism Week. This was done as part of preparations for this conference, and we are going to be coming for more. Honourable members, we need to share with you that this ministry was created in June when the budget was almost framed –(Interjections)­– No, it was a department and not a ministry. I think I know what I am talking about, Madam Speaker. It is just that the Leader of the Opposition always wants to pick a bone for no reason. 

The point is, the full fledged ministry was created in June and the budget was already framed. So, in a way, we are operating as a ministry with a budget of a department. That really does not leave us much. However, with whatever you have given us as Parliament, we will do the best we can to support this effort. Hon. Dombo has already mentioned it to you that Uganda has been voted the number one tourism destination this year. In New York, Uganda is ranked one of the 33 countries you must visit. I can add the hiking in Rwenzori, the variety of birds and mammals and so on. Uganda is really gifted by nature and we need to make it known in the world. 

Members, let me share with you because part of our difficulty is when you say, “I come from Uganda”, they will say, “Oh, the last King of Scotland.” They still remember Uganda as if it was still in Amin’s time. This must change through promotion and marketing. This is a unique opportunity for us to change this so that Uganda regains its status as one of the influential countries in the world, countries that must be visited. 

May I add that Uganda is now becoming a conference destination. Not only are we going to host the Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly but in May we shall be hosting the International Military Council Assembly here of 134 countries -[MR EKANYA: “Because of Somalia.”]- Well, Somalia or no Somalia, Uganda is becoming a major player in world affairs and we should really make it known. 

Already 100 countries have accepted to come to this Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly. One hundred countries are about twice the number of Commonwealth countries which we sang about for days. This is a huge assembly but the voices are not being heard to that magnitude. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, just to -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Clearly, Madam Speaker, the professor in charge of the newborn ministry is telling us that whereas we are expecting a lot from them, they are resource constrained and we should not expect much from them. Can’t we request Government, at least the ministry, to bring what is achievable and what is measurable within the remaining six weeks so that we do not fall into the CHOGM panic with billions? 

What is that lean budget we must find to make sure that we posture the country, to make sure that this country is really marketed? To just lament and say, “We are newborn; the ministry is still having a department budget”, you are telling us we do not expect anything from you and I think it would be unfortunate to lose that opportunity.

PROF. KAMUNTU: It was clarification so I thought you were seeking clarification from the Speaker. I was - (Ms Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Are you through?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Not quite. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall respond. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much. I am being asked something which he knows, if you ask for budgetary support; I can only say that the Ministry of Finance has released money to the Commission and hopefully the Commission will incorporate - (Interjections)- No, the Parliamentary Commission. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I hear the honourable minister in charge of tourism saying he is presiding over a newly born ministry which has very little money. I think I also heard him say, if my ears did not let me down, that we, Parliament, gave him very little money. Initially, I meant to seek clarification, but now I stood on a point of order. 

He was a minister of finance -(Interjections)- and they are the ones who set the budget ceilings for these ministries. Is he therefore in order to come to this Parliament and lament when he should have considered tourism as a very serious sector that would have generated money for him to appropriate when he was a minister of finance? Now he comes here to blame us. Madam Speaker, is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what happened when you were in the Ministry of Finance? (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I know hon. Alaso knows the difference between a minister of state and a full-fledged minister.(Laughter) She must know who the substantive minister was when I was Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance. 

Madam Speaker, on a more serious note, you know Uganda is becoming an influential country in world affairs and consequently, when we host these meetings, I would agree with hon. Ekanya completely, we should define our expectations. We should go out and get what we expect at any rate. We should put a benchmark and say, “We are going to host these conferences and we expect the following.” When these meetings are finished, we can then look back and see whether we achieved what we set out to do. In doing so, let us do it together. If we have disagreements of any kind, we should resolve these disagreements on the Floor of the House. 

I am saying this because I have seen it hurts, and I am quoting facts; whenever there is a riot, there is Police, there is tear gas and occupancy in hotels is reduced by almost 70 percent - (Interjections) - This is true. I am telling you the facts as I know them. Just like I am talking to you; when you have encroachers on protected areas and you plead with the encroachers to voluntarily leave these areas and they refuse and Police is forced to force them out, this thing really hurts us. 

Like now as I am talking to you - I was in East Madi Game Reserve and it is an unfortunate incident. During the conflict in the North, people settled in the game reserves and when the war ended, we pleaded with them to go back as others have done. They refused and you plead and plead and plead and finally you are forced to use tear gas to evict them. It is not good. Nobody wants this to happen and sometimes people are hurt. Why should this happen? When it happens - and this is the connection which sometimes is lost - when all these riots happen, they discourage tourists from coming. By doing so, they rob this country of foreign exchange and your balance of payment position is not very good and you know it only too well - [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “Order.”]

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members; can we have hon. Dombo.

PROF. KAMUNTU: As your balance of payment position is reduced, the price of dollars becomes very high and people begin to complain about prices of imports when they are the ones who have caused it. That includes Walk to Work as well. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us not get into that debate. Let us have hon. Dombo respond. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) 

PROF. KAMUNTU: When the Speaker is speaking, you sit down. (Laughter)

6.20
MR EMANNUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the members for their contributions and observations. You are the chairperson of the organising committee. I think Members of Parliament have raised very important issues for consideration in the subsequent meetings. 

Allow me to say that I have been in this Parliament for 16 years now and the Parliament of Uganda has hosted very many meetings of a similar nature. This is the first time this Parliament is debating the organisation of a meeting on the Floor of the House. This is unprecedented. Madam Speaker, this is because of your wise leadership and the support of the Commission, which shows that this must be a level of transparency. This is something I want to note.

Secondly, I want to let the members know that we chose, as a Parliamentary Commission, to adopt a corporate structure of arrangement. Assuming it was a Cabinet setting up this arrangement, you would have a sub-committee of the Cabinet incorporating other members who are able to report directly to Cabinet. When the Commission sits, somebody should be able to make a presentation to the Commission about what exactly is happening. That is why, for supervision purposes, I want to repeat that members of the Commission and other members in other committees have been incorporated to be able to supervise what is going on. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, if a member has something to say, they should do so through the chair. That is a prudent way of debate and it is also a civilised way of conducting Parliamentary affairs. 

I also want to note that by you setting up the organising committee, you demonstrated that capability is not limited on the government side. You demonstrated that all Members of Parliament, irrespective of their political affiliation, are capable of heading whichever committee as long as we are promoting our dear country, Uganda. This is something that has been very good, and I want to tell you that it has given us bonus results. You have seen here hon. Lulume Bayigga talking on the security of the country, - ordinarily, people would have expected this from me as a Member of Parliament on the government side - and the arrangements have really been going on. 

Allow me also, Madam Speaker, to say that the members of the committees are not technical in their respective committees. However, there could be situations where, for instance, this was the case. The member from the ICT committee has volunteered and I know that in the initial stages of the preparations we had challenges on ICT. These are issues which, Madam Speaker, you have taken note of and which will be taken into consideration. However, this was done specifically for committees like the health committee. 

I did not want to read all the members of the organising committee who are not part of Parliament. Here with me I have an extract from the minutes of the health committee, which has membership of 35 people. I have had an opportunity to share it with hon. Bitekyerezo who was raising an issue of health. We have a number of doctors. 

The members of the health committee sit to discuss policy issues and we leave implementation to the technical people. There is no member of the organising committee at any one time that is going to touch money in the arrangements or get involved in handling or administering money. We sit and make decisions, take minutes and all the implementation is done by the technical people of Parliament through the contracts committee of Parliament, which should be supervised by the relevant organs - the Auditor-General and the Public Accounts Committee. 

We do this because of the experience of CHOGM. We are very keen. Madam Speaker, you have been repeating every time that members of the committee should ensure that what happened during CHOGM does not come to us as Members of Parliament because we are supposed to monitor and be an example to the rest. How will it be if hon. Dombo is investigated because he was a chairperson of the transport committee and he put in his buses to benefit squarely from this? 

If the Members of Parliament have taken keen interest, they should have seen adverts running. Many members who heard that I am the chairperson of the transport committee have come to me confidentially to say, “I also have my bus. I also have my two Benzes. I also have this”. However, I have to be polite and say, “Thank you very much; they could be considered but would you want to pick the tender documents from the Clerk to Parliament? Would you want to participate in the procurement process? If you have a firm and it is competently selected, then you will provide the service”. That is all that members of this committee are doing.

Hon. Magyezi did raise issues of the resource implications. I want to note that the block budget has been reflected within the policy statements and the budget of Parliament. I think at an appropriate time, Members of Parliament deserve an opportunity to look at the full budget. There is nothing to conceal. It is a full budget and it has been implemented for two years. The vehicles we are looking at now were procured in the last financial year. They have not been procured now. This was strategically done so that we could split the budget and avoid the mistakes of the CHOGM, which rushed to do the procurement at the last hour and committed mistakes. Parliament has tried to avoid that.

The other one is the theme. First and foremost, in this IT era, I want to invite Members of Parliament to get interested in the IPU website, www.ipu.org/conference-e/126.

THE SPEAKER: It is in the report.

MR DOMBO: It is in the report. In front of me is the agenda of the entire Assembly, giving the various meetings, the themes that are going to be discussed and the issues that are going to be discussed in the various standing committees. I wish to lay this on the Table so that it can be reproduced for members to have an opportunity to look at in detail. 

I also want to inform the members that the theme of the 126th Assembly of the IPU and related meetings will be, “Parliament and People: Bridging the Gap”. There are a lot of expectations from the population and there is a lot in what we are doing, but how do we bridge the gap and what is the missing link? 

There are also going to be sub-topics in various standing committees. I wish to note that the agenda of the assembly will include the following, among others:

•	Promoting and protecting good governance as a means of advancing peace and security: drawing lessons from the recent events in the Middle East and North Africa.

•	Redistribution of power not just wealth: ownership of the international agendas.

•	Access to health as a basic right: the role of Parliament in addressing key challenges to securing the health of women and children.

I want to tell you that in the previous conferences, Uganda competed in bringing up an item for presentation in this meeting and this issue of maternal health was selected. One of our own, who is one of the international rapporteurs, hon. Paula Turyahikayo, is going to make a presentation.

What do we expect Members of Parliament to do? There are those who are going to have an opportunity to participate in the arrangement directly on the committees. Not everybody can be a member of the organising committee but all Members of Parliament are going to play an active role. 

These are guests who are coming to Uganda. Many of them will have an opportunity to visit the Parliament of Uganda and some may have linguistic limitations. In case you have an opportunity to interact with our guests, please show them the usual hospitality that we extend to such people when they come in. 

Secondly, there is the opening ceremony, which is going to be a key function; a decision has been taken by the organising committee that all Members of Parliament are going to be invited for the opening ceremony. 

Uganda is going to be represented officially in this meeting and conferences by a number of delegates - the same number of delegates who have been representing us in various meetings outside because it is change of venue but the slots remain the same. The Speaker will be selecting those who will be representing us in this meeting. She has not done so yet and when she does it, she will be communicating to the members.

There are also selected special venues for meetings and dinners. Various members are going to be invited so that they can have an opportunity to interact and share with delegates in their respective capacities. We also have a cultural gala, which has been prepared in Namboole, to show the real culture of Uganda in food, entertainment and any other aspect. 

The entertainment committee is working out modalities on what is going to be in the cultural gala so that while in Namboole, all Members of Parliament are going to be invited to witness what exactly happens. Most importantly, we are going to have a rehearsal. There is going to be a rehearsal here in Kampala, where all Members of Parliament are going to be invited so that they can witness what our children are going to present.

A decision was taken on the schools. Initially, at the early stages of preparation, we had decided to run a competition within Uganda to select the schools that would participate in this activity. It progressively became difficult as we did not have the competence as a Parliament to run such a competition. So, a strategic decision was taken and we said we are going to select the best schools in the previous music competitions in the various regions. That is a decision that has been taken. From every region, we are going to pick the best schools that were selected and empower them so that they can participate at an international level; just primary schools.

This morning, we were discussing with the ministry officials the budget of the children. Although Parliament is going to provide the resources and supervise them, the administration and supervision of this exercise is going to be undertaken by officers from the Ministry of Education because we do not have the competence as Members of Parliament. We can only oversee. If we have said Shs 200,000 is going to the school, we must monitor and find out whether the person who draws the money from here actually delivers the money to the students in the schools. 

There is a specific budget that has been provided to enable the children get good costumes to enable them participate at an international level. That is going to be met by Parliament. This has been done because at the end of the meeting, this is what these children will remain with and they will say, “During our trip to Kampala, the school benefited with this and we as participating children ALSO benefited.” All this was done with the wise counsel of the Speaker.

Electricity; this has been a challenge. The people from Geneva have visited the Parliament of Uganda on two occasions to find out about the preparations. One of the specific issues they raised was the stability of power, especially during the conference activities and the opening ceremony. What Munyonyo has told us in our negotiations with them is that they have decided that for the duration of the conference - it will be about eight hours during the opening ceremony - they have decided not to use Umeme. They have decided to put direct consumption on their standby generator for the duration of that conference, basically to guard against the possibility of interruptions. This could be a challenge - (Interjections) - It is expensive but it is a decision that has been taken. 

Also in our last meeting, the organising committee took a decision that for the main venue of the meeting, we interact with Umeme so that all the entire feeders - Somebody was talking about three feeders. I do not understand which feeders those are but this is what was reported in the meeting. We are going to interact with Umeme to see whether we could at least have three feeders into the venue of the meeting so that even if one feeder goes off, the activities keep running. 

Also, we are negotiating with the owners of the conference venue facilities like the hall and Royale so that we can have a standby generator with capability to have automatic -(Interjections)- so that when power goes off, it must automatically change over. At times they have many commitments and it has not happened, but for us we are negotiating for it to be part of the agreement so that we try as much as possible to avoid the challenges that we have had before. 

Hotels -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Dombo, the information I want to give is that during CHOGM, one of the expenditures we had, especially for Imperial Royale, was that we provided them with our generators which they still have now and they are functioning, unless they sold them. So, we advise you that they should not lie that they do not have generators; we have our generators there.

MR DOMBO: I have not said those hotels do not have generators. What I am saying is that the Parliament of Uganda is negotiating with them so that we can have constant power supply. Whether those were provided by Parliament or not, that will be another issue. We did not want to mix the two issues because we could easily be derailed from what we intend to do. 

Somebody raised the issue of security concerns. I want to tell this Parliament that the President himself has picked specific interest and is monitoring the activities. He is overseeing the security arrangements of IPU. I cannot go into details. I want to tell you that it is difficult to run a country. My friend, hon. Wafula-Oguttu, is wondering why the President should be involved and yet hon. Ekanya is saying as Commander-in-Chief, that is his work. That is the challenge that we go through in these processes -(Interjections)- but I want to tell you that one of the things the President told us is that the amount of security depends on the level of threat. 

There is our proximity to the Horn of Africa and what is happening there. Do not forget that recently, during World Cup we lost about 80 Ugandans because of terrorism. That threat has not gone away. You know that Uganda is actively participating in peace keeping in Somalia. That alone makes it a threat. By the way, the level of the conference itself is attractive to the people who would want to show that they exist. So, I think the President and the security apparatus of this country are handling this. But allow me to inform Parliament that the Sergeant-at-Arms is the secretary of the security committee. This is because he is our contact person from the parliamentary side and he has given us relevant information whenever it has been required. 

We are also working with other agencies of Government. Recently, we had a meeting with the Civil Aviation Authority, the airport management. We also had meetings with Kampala City Council Authority to raise areas where we would want them to participate. Just recently, it has also been proposed that the Uganda Revenue Authority should be brought on board, basically because of the amount of equipment that is going to be imported in the country and re-exported at the end of the conference. This is over six or so tonnes and they must get a tax waiver because this is an international meeting. These are things that must be brought in and taken out. 

Tour operators; right from the inception of this meeting when we were doing the bidding process, I want to tell you that for most of the promotion outside, although Uganda has participated, we participated more by facilitating officers of the Ministry of Trade. We have provided air tickets for officials from the Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Industry to go and do exhibitions outside. In the budget that has been prepared by Parliament, Parliament did facilitate but the technical capacity has been coming from the different organs of Government.

Publicity; unfortunately, my dear colleague, hon. Lulume Bayigga, has left. He is the one who has – although he is a medical doctor, many of us were surprised in the committee that he made a very wonderful presentation on how he will publicize this meeting.

I think those were most of the challenges and issues they raised. We have taken note as the organising committee and as I did mention, the Speaker is still in the process of composing a number of committees. The Speaker also did give us power in the respective areas to co-opt members in our respective committees but also not to make them unnecessarily many in a way that would bog down the work but in a manner that would enhance service delivery and effective interaction.

I know that after this meeting, the Speaker is going to look at the various committees and to expand them. I hope that when you are called upon to make a contribution, we shall all put our heads together for the benefit of this Parliament, the benefit of this country and above all, for the integrity of this institution and its leadership. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to compliment what hon. Dombo has said, I want to answer the question of hon. Ogwang. One of the things we have told the delegates is that, after the meetings, spend Easter in Uganda, not in Kampala. So we expect that they will move to the countryside and go to our national parks like Queen Elizabeth and others. They are all being marketed on our website. 

We are also working with Uganda Hotel Owners Association. They are part of the organising committee so that they can help with the bookings. On arrival here, we have appointed SN Brussels and Air Uganda as official airlines of IPU and they are using the Star Alliance. They have their network of Star Alliance which they are using to market. For the last six months, SN Brussels has been playing a recording of the tourist sites of Uganda from Kampala to Kigali through to Brussels. 

The cultural evening has been explained. Uganda Wildlife Authority has also been with us. The marketing heavily began in Panama before you were sworn in but his ministry, Wildlife Authority etcetera have been with us; each time we have been going, they go with us and do marketing and so on. So some work has been done. 

What remains for me to do now is to call the ambassadors resident here for a breakfast meeting and ask them to encourage their delegates to remain in Uganda after the meeting. But also, we have been requested by the ambassadors accredited to Uganda who are resident in Nairobi to send a team there to speak to them there so that they can convince their people.

Overall, there is a lot of excitement and I want to say that we have benefited from this interaction with you, honourable members, including exciting ideas that we should play netball as one of the activities after planting the trees, which hon. Ekanya was talking about. So, we call upon your support and we are going to expand the committee. 

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank Parliament for having organised this conference but I wanted to hear from the government side. It is as if they are bystanders. We need assurance on things that are outside the jurisdiction of Parliament. For instance, we cannot clean Kampala yet at present Kampala is so dirty. So we need assurance from the government that they will be part of this conference especially with regard to those things that we do not have control over including electricity and the flow of traffic.

THE SPEAKER: One of the reasons why the Commission is in charge of this arrangement is because the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance are members of the Commission. When the committee was handing over to the Commission, we told the Government, represented that day by Gen. Ali, that we want a clean city, a secure city and we want to ensure that all the services are available. So I hope that they are also meeting. If they are not, we shall find out. Thank you very much.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Can we skip that item and do the other loan? Let us move to the other item and we do that tomorrow early in the morning.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST TO BORROW UNITS OF ACCOUNT 46 MILLION AND ANOTHER UNITS OF ACCOUNT 10 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK AND NIGERIA TRUST FUND RESPECTIVELY FOR FINANCING THE IMPROVEMENT OF HEALTH SERVICE DELIVERY, MULAGO HOSPITAL AND THE CITY OF KAMPALA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are not ready –(Interjections) – Are you tired?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, this loan request was presented to this Parliament and the issue was that we could not debate and complete the motion because of quorum. So, the clarification I want to seek is that, are we in position this time round to debate and complete this in time?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I do not want to endanger the loan. I think we will do it first item tomorrow at 2 O’clock. We will use 45 minutes, finish it and then go to the rules. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, that was exactly my first prayer, to have this item come first because it was last year’s business. Secondly, the state of the economy report is almost becoming stale. The data we used was December, September data; the report was ready in November and only read in December. So I pray that in the business to follow, the two items - the minister’s response and the report debate - be the next business tomorrow because we are now due for another report but we cannot present the next quota because the other one is still in the way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I expect that the Minister of Finance will be handling this on Thursday.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, we did indicate that the Government will be able to report ably on Thursday. We contacted your Office and you agreed to that. So, we shall be ready on Thursday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 6.50 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 15 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)

