Tuesday, 13 February 2007 

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m.  in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is my pleasure to welcome you from the weekend and thank you for what you have been able to do in your constituencies. 

However, with much regret, I would like to announce the unfortunate demise of Mrs Winfred Karungi Otafiire who passed away in South Africa while undergoing treatment. The details of the burial will be communicated to you later. I am informed by Prof. Kamuntu that the Bushenyi Parliamentary Group will be holding a meeting in respect of this death after the plenary in the Members’ Lounge. Let us observe a minute of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Omwony-Ojwok): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Bill was to have been discussed today as a second reading and we proceed. However, there are one or two issues which we really needed to discuss and put our heads together again with the committee. After further consultations with them, I am requesting that you kindly allow us a little more time to put our heads together with the committee and finalise. This is because some of the issues are very sensitive and important. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is only to point out that maybe the Order Paper did not properly head this item because as far as I know, last week we dealt with the second reading and the Bill moved to the committee stage. But because there was a doubt about suing or not suing the Commissioner General, that is why we could not proceed with the committee stage.

However, if that is the view of the owner of the Bill, and I think of the committee that you need more time, you can be given that time. Will you be able to solve the problem by tomorrow?

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: We would very much wish that by tomorrow we will have sorted it out. It depends on the availability of the time of the committee, but the Ministry of Finance is very ready to consult with them urgently so that we complete the process tomorrow.

2.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nsubuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just surprised that the minister is requesting for more time because yesterday late in the evening, I received an amendment – I even came to your Office for consultation- and we have consulted with all the stakeholders. We think we are in agreement. So, I do not know whether the ministers have again come up with another amendment. I have an amendment, which they gave me but if he is withdrawing that, then we can have more time.

THE SPEAKER: What is the problem? This is a very small Bill.

MR OMWONY-OJWOK: Mr Speaker, as the chairperson is saying, there were consultations between him and one of the ministers in the Ministry of Finance. Unfortunately, that minister is not with us here.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. That would have been the point. We shall deal with this Bill tomorrow. 

I think the Order Paper, the way it is, has attracted a lot of interest and this afternoon in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery we have Capt. Paddy Ankunda, the Deputy Spokesperson of UPDF. I think you know why he has come. You are welcome! (Laughter)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO NANYUKI III

2.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Joseph Mugambe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: As he arranges his papers, there is an announcement for briefing about the East African Community and Federation tomorrow 14th February at 9.00a.m. to 1.00p.m. in the Parliament Conference Hall down there. You are welcome.

MR MUGAMBE: This report has been on the Order Paper. I am sorry, the last time it was here I was called at a time I had just stepped outside -(Laughter)- and by the time I came in, the House had been adjourned. I am very sorry about that day.

I would like to beg that at the end of my brief submission, I present the whole 72-page report out of that meeting in the Nanyuki series. I beg to proceed under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure and present to you the report of the Parliamentary delegation that attended Nanyuki III.  

As you may be aware, a delegate of 29 Members of this august House were selected from various committees and parties to attend the inter-parliamentary relations seminar which took place in Dar-es-salaam Tanzania between 13 - 16 August 2006. We were joined by other partners and stakeholders who included Members of National Assemblies of Kenya, Tanzania, East African Legislative Assembly, Zambia House of Representatives, ministers and officials of the respective Ministries in charge of East African Affairs, High Commissioners and three member state officers of the East African Community Secretariat. The representative from the East African Court of Justice and officials from AWEPA, as you will see the full list in appendix 1 of this report, were also there.  

Mr Speaker, I am sure most Members may be wondering what Nanyuki series are. Below is the background to the Nanyuki series.  

Pursuant to the provision of Article 49(2)(a) of the treaty establishing the East African Community, the East African Legislative Assembly is required to liase with the national assemblies of partner states on matters relating to the community. East African Legislative Assembly devised what is called “Inter-parliamentary relations seminars” (Nanyuki series) as a means of fulfilling this mandate. 

For the last two years, EALA has been conducting annual inter-parliamentary relations seminars with the two critical committees of the national assemblies of partner states: the Committee on Trade and Foreign Affairs. In Nanyuki III, the invitation was also extended to the Committee on Health basically because issues of health especially HIV/AIDS have become equally critical to the region and as such the region should begin to tackle them jointly. Our delegation widened the scope of the representation to include membership from the Committees of Defence and Internal Affairs, and that of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

The Nanyuki series are an initiative by EALA to strengthen the functional relationships and the existing structures for communication and information exchange between EALA as the regional legislature and the three National Assemblies of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.

The scope of Nanyuki III is covered on page 2 and on page 4 are the observations. Through the deliberations that took place during the two-day seminar, it was observed that there existed some weaknesses and obstacles to the fast tracking of the East African Federation. In particular, the following are some of the weaknesses that were observed:

•	Poor awareness on customs union issues by various interest groups in East Africa.
•	Very weak institutional capacity of the secretariat to effectively and efficiently manage customs union process due to, among others, slow change from national to regional.
•	Multiple membership in regional economic communities complicating the operationalisation of customs union.
•	Weak public-private synergies.
•	Lack of appreciation of importance of infrastructure as the key engine of regional integration.
•	Weak harmonisation and coordination of infrastructural development policies and practices among member states.
•	Lack of coordinated and jointly negotiated projects and investment packages for infrastructural development.
•	Weak institutionalisation of the emerging consensus on democratic principles, norms, values and institutions, which promote good governance.
•	Weak public awareness of the need for fast tracking political federation.
•	Poor implementation and follow up on agreed decisions on fast tracking political federation.
•	Poor interactions between national parliaments and East African Legislative Assembly on the regional integration process.
•	Lack of formal channel of wider stakeholder participation in fast tracking political federation.
•	Limited legitimacy of regional integration institutions.
•	Limited appreciation of linkages between enhanced political will for fast tracking political federation and success in implementing customs union, common market and monetary union.
•	Weak formal communication and reporting mechanisms between the national assemblies with EALA.
•	Inadequate knowledge on the affairs of the EAC by the general population.
•	Weak implementation of the oversight functions of EALA.
•	Lack of regular forum for dialogue between EALA and national Members of Parliament.
•	Lack of formal mechanism to guarantee follow up on Nanyuki seminar series resolutions.
•	Inadequate financial resources for EALA to execute its functions effectively and efficiently.
•	Weak functional relationship between EALA and partner states legislatures.
•	Lack of harmonisation of legislative agendas in member states parliaments.
•	Lack of enabling laws of a fully-fledged legislative body.
•	Lack of facilitation for EALA to play its oversight mandate.
•	Inadequate information flow between EALA and national parliaments.
•	Lack of appreciation of importance of taking on board the national security concerns of member states in the fast tracking of political integration.
•	Weak follow up on ministerial level decisions at EAC headquarters.

Recommendations

By way of recommendation, the seminar proposed the following remedial actions to be taken by stakeholders in the process of fast tracking of the East African integration:

•	Develop a comprehensive communication and marketing strategy targeting various interest groups in the region through radio, TV, print and electronic media and public speeches.
•	Effect gradual and systematic authority transfer to plan and implement regional integration laws, policies and programmes from national governments to the relevant organs of the East African Community.
•	Commitment to adhere to accepted withdrawal deadlines, as stipulated in Article 75 and 76 of the Treaty.
•	Promote dialogue between the business community and governments.
•	Enhance prioritisation of mobilisation of resources for infrastructural development.
•	Institutionalise dialogue in policy management among key actors in infrastructural development.
•	Institutionalise joint negotiations of projects and investment packages for infrastructural development.
•	Promote participatory interactions among all political actors through institutionalised mechanisms.
•	Develop comprehensive communication strategy targeting various interest groups.
•	Institute review of all decisions so far made and recommend required action.
•	Establish formal inter-parliamentary channels of communication.
•	Establish formal channels of wider stakeholder participation in fast tracking political federation.
•	Review the East African Community Treaty with a view to enhance the legitimacy of relevant institutions.
•	Publicise success in implementation of customs union, common market and monetary union.
•	Establish effective and efficient communication and reporting mechanism.
•	Adopt innovative outreach programmes to promote the East African integration process.
•	Establish and strengthen the oversight institution of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA).
•	Institutionalise the Nanyuki seminar series. 
•	Establish and consolidate formal mechanisms for following up resolutions of the institutionalised Nanyuki seminar series.
•	National parliaments to augment resources for the East African Legislative Assembly. 
•	Establish committees in member states parliament responsible solely for the East African Community affairs and with the mandate to receive and consider all the East African Legislative Assembly Bills.
•	Cause all national parliaments to submit their Bills to the East African Legislative Assembly for comments before being passed.
•	Review the East African Community Treaty to permit the East African Legislative Assembly to operate as a fully-fledged legislative body.
•	Review the East African Community Treaty and national parliamentary rules to sanction the oversight mandate of the East African Legislative Assembly legislated and capacitated.
•	Review standing orders of the East African Legislative Assembly and national parliaments to allow the East African Legislative Assembly MPs to sit in national parliaments in order to table the East African Community issues for discussion.
•	Mainstream national security issues in all policy dialogue between the East African Legislative Assembly and national parliaments.
•	Legislate for the East African Community ministers to reside in Arusha and hold sectoral portfolios.

Conclusion

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg the indulgence of this august House to give due consideration to this report and the issues hereunder. Let us join hands to nurture the East African Community, which is young but a very vital community for us. Our present and future survival as a people and as an economy lies in our ability to have and belong to bigger economic blocks, and the recognition of the fact that we cannot make it alone.

Mr Speaker, as I requested, I would like to lay on Table the detailed report on the 3rd Inter-Parliamentary Relations Seminar (Nanyuki III) on the theme: “Enhancing Functional Relations in the East African Community” held at Kilimanjaro Hotel, Dar-es- Salaam-Tanzania from 14th to 16th August 2006.

In this report, Mr Speaker, there is: implementation of the customs union; a chapter on infrastructure development; a chapter on fast tracking political federation and in that respect, it was observed that the summit appointed the Wako Committee whose mandate was to examine how the process of integration could be expedited so that the ultimate goal of the East African Political Federation is achieved through the fast tracking mechanism.    

It was noted that all other national parliaments have discussed the Wako report, which was distributed to us but the national Parliament of Uganda has not discussed it. We were asked and we are concerned that the Wako report was not discussed and thoroughly debated in the Uganda National Assembly. I thank you and beg for your support.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman. The appropriate committee will handle it. But maybe when you look at page 5 of your report, what is the difference between 11, 15,21 and 25? Okay, honourable members, you have received the report, any comments?

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, some of us have not yet received the report. We have been waiting and when you talk about 11 and 21, we really do not know what it means.

THE SPEAKER: So, it means the report has not been internalised. What do we do, hon. Chairman?

MR MUGAMBE: Sir, I am not very sure about the distribution. Maybe some few people are missing but I see most of them with copies. A few of them - less than ten do not have the copies. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean, there are copies outside? In that case we should debate this report fully tomorrow. You will have read the report and internalised it.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Otherwise, thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 210 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF UGANDA AND SECTION 39(2) OF THE UPDF ACT, 2005 FOR THE APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REQUEST BY THE PRESIDENT TO DEPLOY UPDF TROOPS IN SOMALIA.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may remember, the honourable Minister of Defence tabled a motion for the resolution of this House. Since the subject was a delicate one, we decided that before we proceed with the debate, the matter should be handled by the appropriate committee to enable the public to also have their input. The chairperson had promised that they would be ready with the report so that we can have a full debate and then decide on the matter. Is that the case, Chairperson?

3.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rosemary Namayanja): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Mr Speaker, the Opposition participated in our deliberations in the committee and to that effect, there is an attachment to the main report by way of a minority report. But I will proceed to read the main report.

In the main report, by way of introduction, I beg to present to this august House the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the deployment of troops in Somalia. You may recall that on 07 February 2007, the hon. Minister of Defence –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, chairperson, I have an important person I have to introduce in respect to this subject. In the Distinguished Stranger’s Gallery, we have, Mr Hassan Sherah Sheikh, Chairman of East and the Horn of Africa Human Right Defender’s Project. He is on the advisory body to the government relating to Somalia. He is here to listen to what is going on. You are welcome! Proceed please.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to present to this august House the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the deployment of troops in Somalia. 

You may recall that on 07 Feb 2007, the Minister of Defence did move a motion for a resolution under Article 210 of the Constitution and Section 39 of the Uganda People’s Defence Act, 2005, requesting the approval of Parliament to deploy UPDF troops in Somalia under the African Union Mission in Somalia, (AMISOM). This matter was referred to the committee for further scrutiny and the committee has accordingly considered the matter and now begs to report as follows.

Mr Speaker, my report will cover the methodology, a brief background to the Somalia problem, the mandate to deploy in Somalia, the mission of AMISOM, the observations, recommendations and the conclusion.

Methodology

We held meetings with the following: the Minster of Defence, the Minister of State for Defence, the Attorney-General, the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, the Chief of Defence Forces, the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Uganda Somalis community, hon. Dombo Emanuel Lumala, member of Parliament for Bunyole, hon. Achia Remigio, MP for Pian county and Mr Joseph Kazura Mwambazi a concerned citizen. We also scrutinised the relevant documents. 

Brief background to the problem in Somalia

Somalia occupies a unique space, both geographically and strategically. The country sits on the crossroads of the sub-Saharan Africa and the near East. Therefore, the overall security of the region is affected by Somalia’s lack of internal stability.

Following the overthrow and collapse of the Siad Berry government 16 years ago, Somalia became a failed and shattered state marred by lawlessness. The various warring factions took control of the different parts of the country to the extent that not even the capital city was under one control. Members will recall that the intervention of the United States in 1992 did not yield much.

The continued state of lawlessness have negatively impacted on the lives of the ordinary people in Somalia. There is lack of security of person and property, and no environment for creation of a government and establishment of functional government institutions. This state of affairs causes a security risk to the region. 

In order to restore stability, IGAD in corroboration with AU, and with the support of the UN, organised the Somali Peace and Reconciliation conference in Kenya that brought together representatives of clans, fighting factions etc. 

It is against this background that in 2004 the Transitional Federal Charter was adopted, following which the Transitional Federal Institutions were formed, including the Transitional Federal Government, (TFG), the Transitional Federal Parliament and other Transitional Federal Institutions.

Recognising the need to support the TFG and other TFIs, IGD, AU, and UN agreed to deploy a peace support mission in Somalia, and this is reflected in the various mandates given by these organisations.

The Peace Support Mission was conceived to be undertaken in three phases: IGASOM for the first six months; the AMISOM for the following six months; and eventually to evolve into a UN peace support mission. 

The proposed Peace Support Mission could not be deployed because the UN Security Council Resolution 733 of 1992 had imposed an arms embargo on Somalia. This delay left a vacuum, which gave the factions the opportunity to organise, and hence the formation of the Union of Islamic courts, which were subsequently neutralised by the Ethiopian troops.

Mandate to deploy in Somalia: 

The authority to deploy troops in Somalia arises from a number of resolutions, and Mr Speaker allow me to highlight some of them. The UN Security Council Resolution 1725 of 2006 did resolve to, among other things, authorise IGAD and member states of AU to establish a protection and training mission in Somalia.

While sitting in Banjul, Gambia, on 24 July 2006, the AU Peace and Security Council did call for a peace support mission for peace and security in Somalia. They further stressed the need to expedite IGAD/AU preparations to deploy IGASOM. It should be recalled that the Peace and Security Council was formed at the AU summit in Abuja Nigeria, in 2000, to undertake peace keeping operations within the UN framework.

The peace and security council of AU, at the 69th meeting held on 19 Jan 2007, authorised the deployment of AMISOM for a period of six months, stating from 19 January 2007. 

The authorisation mandated AMISOM to: provide support to the TFIs in their effort towards the stabilisation of the situation in the country, and the furtherance of dialogue and reconciliation; to facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance, and create conducive conditions for long-term stabilisation; reconstruction and development in Somalia.

Therefore, as part of the UN, AU and IGAD, the Executive has taken a decision that Uganda participates in this noble cause. The modalities for the participation of the UPDF outside the country are provided for under Article 210 of our Constitution. 

Further, the UPDF ACT 2005, Section 39, 40 and 41, provides for a framework within which such deployment can be made. These provisions, among others, provide for parliamentary approval in matters of deploying forces outside Uganda. 

The mission on AMISOM in Somalia: Under the authorisation of AU, the mission of AMISOM is to provide peace support operations in Somalia and support the TFG institutions in their efforts towards stabilisation of the situation in the country, and the furtherance of dialogue and reconciliation, and to facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance as well as creating conducive conditions for long time stabilisation and reconstruction and development in Somalia.

The key objectives of this mission are: Securing the environment and undertaking preventive deployment. This will also entail political programmes aimed at promotion of dialogue and enhancement of political structures.

Securing grounds of strategic importance, instituting movement controls, promoting dialogue through negotiating agreements and promotion of cessation of hostilities; conducting training, enhancing trust, among the parties, support civil service institutions, organising elections and thereafter set ground for post-conflict reconstruction and development.

Observations

In considering the motion, Mr Speaker, the committee was, among other things, concerned about the following issues: the legal framework, the legitimacy of the TFG, the nature of the operation, the number of troops to be deployed, duration of the mission, resources involved, welfare of the troops, command and control, other troop contributing countries and the time framework for their deployment. 

And in considering those issues, Mr Speaker, the following were observed:

1.	The legal framework is at three levels, at the international, regional and national levels. It was observed that the legal requirement at the UN and AU have been sufficiently complied with, and the minister’s motion, is in pursuit of the national legal requirement.

2.	On the legitimacy of the TFG, Mr Speaker, the TFG is recognised as a government by the UN, AU, IGAD and other bodies and in this case the TFG is expected to form a nucleus for building viable state institutions.

3.	The remuneration and associated benefits of our troops have been sufficiently dealt with following the UN/AU standards in regard to allowance, feeding, medicare and compensation in the case of injury or death. And, Mr Speaker, these were highlighted also by the minister in her submission. I will not read them again. 

4.	On resources, Uganda’s contribution will be budget neutral and AU is the one to secure the incremental costs from the other partners. 

5.	On the size of the force to be deployed, 2 battalions (1,500 troops) will be deployed to form part of the total of the 9 battalions (8,500 troops) to be contributed by various AU countries. Preparations for possible relief of troops to be deployed in Somalia have also been taken care of.

6.	The nature of the operation is in line with the UN Charter and accordingly AMISOM will assist in the implementation of the National Security and Stabilisation Plan of Somalia, particularly the effective re-establishment and training of all inclusive Somali security forces. 

This will, therefore, be active peace keeping, the force will be neutral but with capacity to respond in self-defence in case of provocation. The protection of the force as a whole and at individual level has been ensured. Should the situation change, then Uganda’s involvement will be reviewed accordingly.

 In regard to duration, AMISOM shall be deployed for six months aimed essentially at contributing to the initial stabilisation phase in Somalia with a clear understanding that the mission will evolve into a United Nation’s operation that will support the long-term stabilisation and post-conflict reconstruction of Somalia. 

In regard to command and control, AU has given Uganda the overall command of the military component of AMISOM, and accordingly, a Ugandan shall be the force commander of AMISOM and the Uganda contingent will have its’ own commanders.

So far, the countries that have pledged to contribute troops are Burundi, Uganda, Malawi, Ghana and Nigeria. Algeria and Egypt have pledged logistical support.

On the readiness, Mr Speaker, preparations for the deployment of UPDF troops in Somalia have been finalised. The force has been undergoing special training for the last two years including not only the specialised military training, but also the basic aspects of Somalia culture and language. This has been coupled by the involvement of all different factions and warlords in the process of drawing plans for the deployment of troops from the AU countries.

The deployment of Ugandan troops will not create any gaps in the maintenance of peace and security in the country.

Recommendations

In view of the above observations, the committee recommends as follows:

1.	In order to avoid a vacuum as Ethiopia troops withdraws; forces from other troop contributing countries should follow immediately.
2.	One of the provisions of the Transitional Federal Charter is to the effect that the TFG should embark on an acceptable process of inclusive dialogue and reconciliation. The leadership of TFG should be encouraged to pursue this and in particular the Union of Islamic Courts should be involved in this dialogue, among others.
3.	In signing the agreements, particularly the status of forces agreement, there must be strict compliance with Section 41 of the UPDF Act, which is to the effect that the laws applicable to our troops in case of any offence(s) shall be the laws of Uganda.
4.	AU must draw a detailed operational and deployment plan to ensure that our forces are appropriately tasked and hence avoiding the 1992/93 scenario.

Mr Speaker, it is an inescapable fact that in the last four decades, all the major conflicts on the continent have been solved by Africans themselves, cases in point are South Africa, Liberia, Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi, DRC and the Government of Southern Sudan, among others. 

The situation in Somalia, therefore, imposes an immense obligation on the shoulders of other African countries. It is on this basis, Mr Speaker and honourable members that the committee strongly recommends to this august House to approve the deployment of troops to Somalia. (Applause)

The minister highlighted the benefits, and indeed we have a revolutionary duty to fulfill. I think, this is a pivot point for Uganda to make good on the commitment to Pan-Africanism; it is a pivot point for Uganda to heed to the international call; it is a pivot point for Uganda to reciprocate on what Tanzania did in 1979; it is indeed a pivot point for Uganda to prove its dependability for this will not only bring stability in Somalia but also Uganda’s geo-political stand will be enhanced. (Applause)

Conclusion 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee is satisfied with the justification for deployment of troops in Somalia and the nature of the framework within which the troops will be deployed. As a committee, therefore, we support the motion of the minister. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to end with the words of Martin Luther King Junior who said that, “the worst thing in society is not the evil of the already existing bad people, but the silence of the good ones who could have said something for moral change to be done”. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: First of all, I must thank you for the manner in which you presented this report; I must thank you and the committee for the good report, which is very clear. Thank you very much. 

Now, honourable members, as you heard from the chairperson, there was a minority report, but unfortunately the authors of the minority report are not here. There is no way it can be presented, because if you present a minority report, the clarification cannot be made - unfortunately this is the situation. But the report is attached to the main report; you can go through it and be able to deal with it.

Honourable members, you heard from the side of the minister and now you have heard from the committee. The debate is now open.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In view of the fact that the person who was supposed to present the minority report is not here, do we have to assume that the minority report is there? Do we expunge it from the record of the Hansard?

THE SPEAKER: You see, it was attached to the report and the chairperson mentioned that it is there. Just leave it there for the record; it is a copy of a report which has never been presented. The Hansard will record it.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, in light of your advice I want to draw Members’ attention to Rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure, relating to leave of absence from the House. It says:  “(1) Every Member shall attend the sittings of the House unless leave of absence has been given to him or her by the Speaker. 

(2) Leave of absence may be given by the Speaker to any Member who shows sufficient cause justifying his or her absence or who is away on official or parliamentary duties.”

In light of the fact that there is a minority report here, and the author should have given it, and in view of the fact that the benches here have been empty for a while, is it true that you gave them leave? Did they seek leave? If not, what action are you going to take, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: When would that question arise? Is it now or in the future? I think let us leave it for the time being. Let us proceed with our work. At an appropriate time, the Rule will be read and it will be invoked.

3.38
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA, (NRM, Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the Committee on Defence for the report. It is a very well written report and I want to support the motion.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, as you know Uganda, as a country, is a participant in global politics. As a participant in the global politics, we cannot just sit and watch when a sister country is suffering. It is in that respect that I support this motion. We are not only playing our role but we are also taking a leading role in this region.  This is the reason I support this motion.

Secondly, we have the problem of international terrorism and international politics.  International terrorism is linked to instability in areas that do not have stable governments.  Therefore, it is the duty of Uganda and other countries that are peace-loving to make sure that we fight international terrorism. By establishing peace and stability in Somalia, we shall be fighting international terrorism.

Thirdly, as has already been pointed out, we are an African country and we have duty and responsibility under the AU Constitutive Act to support other African countries. If you look at one of the objectives of that Act, specifically Article 3(g), it requires the AU member countries to promote stability and security. This is exactly what we are doing.  

In the AU framework, under Article 4(j) - the operating principles of the AU - member states have the right to request for intervention. As you know, the Transitional Federal Government in Somalia has expressed its willingness for Uganda to support them. It is within that framework that we should support them.  

Mr Speaker, if I move from the global perspective and look at national politics or national happenings within. We know that what is disturbing the Great Lakes Region is the presence of small arms in this area. The corridor from Somalia down to Karamoja is one of the conduits that have been bringing problems within. By solving the problem in Somalia, we shall have solved the problem of the presence of those small arms in our country.

The question therefore should not be whether Uganda should send troops to Somalia. The question is whether Uganda is acting under the international and AU framework. In my own answer, I say it is acting within that framework, as I have already spelled out according to the AU. Even if you went to the UN, under Article 39, Uganda has a right to participate in promoting peace and security. It is in this respect that I want to support this motion.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.42
MR ALI KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA (NRM, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like, first of all, to thank the chairman of the committee for having conducted the committee very well and for coming up with a very well presented report. I have only come here to lend support to this and also give some small background.  

We need to understand that we are here not because we started as a Ugandan Parliament but because of the struggle of the African people. The struggle of the black people was a result of the globalisation of the African people through a long history of slavery and awareness. We became aware because we were Africans. It is this being consciously together that led to the independence of the countries now and to the positions we are holding in different national boundaries.  In other words, one of the greatest weaknesses that has continued to bedevil Africa is balkanising our problems.  

After almost 40 years of struggle, at least a new trend has come up; the collective effort of Africa is bringing stability to these countries. The efforts in Southern Africa are an example: Zimbabwe, Zambia, South Africa, Namibia, Mozambique were all a result of collective African action.  

Recently, when the Movement Government took power, you know very well that this was the time when South Africa was at a crucial point. Because of the agreement, which had been reached so that Namibia gets independence, the South African freedom fighters were given a condition not to be near South Africa. It is in that understanding, because we are freedom fighters, that we were able to give Uganda as a place for the settlement of the South African fighters who went back to South Africa when South Africa ultimately got liberated. So we are continuing with the liberation. 

I remember that when the OAU was being founded, a declaration was made by the leader of the delegation that Uganda would be a springboard for the liberation of Africa. So, we have continued with that tradition. Of recent, our intervention and leadership in bringing about harmony in Burundi, the changes in Sudan, the changes in Congo actually show us as a nation which has been persistent. We would not claim to be descendants of those who have aspired for African freedom if we do not come up to support the Somali situation. 

When we come to the Somali situation, I would want to put on record that this is not the first time we are interested in the stability of Somalia. When they were completely disorganised, we had contacts with the Somali people and we lent them our experience. We said we also had problems but if you adopt a collective effort, you can be able to assemble yourselves together. We reached out to all the leaders in the different factions in Somalia and they came and visited us. We also visited them and told them that there is no good in exclusion but you can only build a country when you include everybody. 

As a result of that, with the efforts of our president when he was the Chairman of IGAD, he steered the Somali factions to produce the Transitional National Government of Somalia under Abdullahi. So, automatically, the Somali government is our child. 

It is the Somalis themselves who preferred us. They said, “please Uganda you have assisted us realise the necessity to be together, you are the fellows who must be able to come and assist us protect the government and be able to give us the lines as to how we can be able to build an army that will guard the nation”. For all these years, since the transitional government has been in place, we have not been able to do so because of the legal impediments of the embargo of the UN. 

The members of the UN have not been able to come together and offer, but Uganda is accepted by all factions. I can tell you this from personal experience. I have been there and I was able to visit most of the fellows when they assembled in the different camps. So, nobody should worry. We are going to people who are welcoming us; we are not imposing ourselves. 

This is the first time everybody in Uganda is being taken on board in broad daylight. We need to give our people very good morale, a good send-off and good success so that our leadership in the African continent continues to move under the leadership of President Museveni. Thank you very much.

3.48
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE, (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, I want to add my voice to thank the committee for a well-written and articulated report, moreover they did it in such a short time. We must really thank them. We must as well thank the Minister who co-operated with the committee. He was patient and provided all the background information necessary for all stakeholders involved to understand why we need to deploy our troops in Somalia. 

Three very positive points come out. They do not only justify the reason why we should pass the motion but actually they make us proud as Ugandans. I think they should be noted and be put on record. 

The three points that come out are these: Uganda being seen and preferred as a neutral country especially in finding lasting solutions in our continent. This gives me pride as a Ugandan and it should give everyone pride as well. 

Secondly, I am happy to hear that actually a Ugandan will be in charge of the mission. That is not only a positive note but it is actually a vote of confidence in our institution of the military. 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, the fact that we are not going to Somalia to fight as a mercenary force but we are going there to build capacity for the Somalis themselves to handle their own problems. It actually shows consistency on our part as a country. It shows that even our participation in earlier struggles of liberating other parts of Africa were not for other reasons, as is quiet often portrayed in the media, but for the cause of liberating Africa. 

I strongly support the concept of Pan Africanism, Mr Speaker. This concept is the idea that Africans should solve their own problems. On that note, I support the motion and urge all the other members to support this motion without any further hesitation. I thank you.

3.51
MRS OLIVER WONEKA (Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to congratulate the Committee on Defence for a report well prepared and well presented. As a member of United Nations, a member of the AU, a member of IGAD and as a country having just emerged from a state of anarchy, it is only fitting that Uganda responds to the need of our brothers and sisters in Somalia.

I would like, for purposes of emphasis, to re-echo this recommendation. One of the provisions of the Transitional Federal Charter is to the effect that the TFG should embark on an acceptable process of inclusive dialogue and reconciliation. The leadership of TFG should be encouraged to pursue this and in particular the Union of Islamic Courts should be involved in this dialogue, among others. I am emphasising this not only for all peoples of Somalia but for the women, the children, the elderly, the sick, the people with disabilities; those people receive the brunt of instability and of the war. 

Mr Speaker, peace is fundamental to progress. We plead with the people of Somalia to heed the call for peace and put down arms, settle and work for the good of this continent and for the good of this world. Thank you.

3.52
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I am standing here on behalf of the people of Dokolo to strongly support this motion. I support it because in 1862 the people of Dokolo County raised an army to protect the Kabaka and Omukama of Bunyoro. In that respect the people of Dokolo are fully behind me because they want peace and progress in Africa. 

It is a shame that for over 12 years the people of Somalia have been in turmoil when African leaders and Parliaments of Africa are sitting and watching the people of Somalia suffer. It is in that respect that I would like to support this motion. This is a sign and manifestation that the people of Africa are now going to stand and face their own problems. I am quite aware that Uganda has been given that privilege because our position in Africa has been recognised by the World and we are doing this to bring peace not only to Somalia but also to the rest of Africa. 

I also want to thank the President of Uganda for humbly coming to Parliament this time and seeking its permission to allow him deploy in Somalia. This is a clear sign that Uganda is now fully in position to implement and recognise our Constitution that was promulgated in 1995. 

Sir, I have a few points to mention here. I would expect that the Minister of Defence and our government would give us here - and lay on the Table of Parliament conditions of deployment of our soldiers in Somalia so that as Members of Parliament we would also scrutinise and see whether those conditions are being fulfilled. 

I also want to caution our troops that are going to Somalia that this time they should not go and involve themselves in the local politics. They should go for peace and nothing else.

I also want to point out that many times our foot soldiers have been suffering, as their payment has not been clear. This time I know they are going to be paid US $400 as their allowances, and other payments are also going to be given, but we want clear modalities put in place to ensure that these people are not ripped off of their earnings there. 

We are aware that our soldiers are doing very well here but we also want to appeal to other countries to support Uganda. We in the North have been suffering for 20 years and it is our soldiers who have been struggling. We have been struggling alone without assistance from other countries. I, therefore, want to call upon other countries now to come and support the people of Uganda so that we restore peace in Northern Uganda. Mr Speaker, I also want to caution our people who are going to Somalia - because I am aware there is a lot of confusion in Somalia - that is very clear and we don’t want it to catch more fire. Let us go there to bring down the fire that is currently in Somalia. 

I would like to conclude by thanking the committee for the report that has been presented very well by the chairperson. I would like to thank the President, Ministers and Members of Parliament for supporting this motion. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.59
MR ROBERT KASHAIJA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those of Members supporting this motion, and I definitely support it. There has been a lot of criticism especially by pseudo nationalists and opposition politicians about the deployment of the UPDF brigade on this mission to Somalia. Whereas there are a number of challenges involved in this venture we should not forget that there are also various repercussions that shall live to haunt us if as Ugandans we do not participate in this struggle of pacifying and stabilising our neighbours. I, therefore, have a few reasons as to why I think this mission is an inevitable requirement for Ugandans.

Number one is about the Karamoja disarmament question. For a number of years you will recall Members that Uganda has launched a number of operations against disarming the Karimojong and whereas we know that these people acquired these guns way back in 1979 and 1985 respectively from the defeated forces of Amin and Obote, it is also common knowledge that under the illegal arms trafficking in the region they are still getting more supplies and specifically from Somalia. Therefore, I think if we went to Somalia we would have an opportunity to close one of the unnecessary beds for these illegal guns that are being used by the Karimojong cattle rustlers. 

Secondly, about terrorism in the region, it is almost common knowledge that there is a proxy war being fought by the Al Qaeda in the USA. It is also possible that the Al Qaeda might be targeting the interests of Americans in the region. Therefore, this is our opportunity to be on guard than to fold our arms waiting for luck to determine our fate. Therefore, I would like to urge my colleagues, Members of Parliament and other stakeholders to support this motion. 

Thirdly, Uganda is a member of African Union so there is no way we can operate in isolation. We must, therefore, for Pan African reasons be involved in stabilising our neighbours. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this is a recommendation. As we are going to Somalia, I wish that my colleagues and other stakeholders in this venture would convince as many African countries as possible to get involved in this in order to make it a shared burden and reduce the cost for individual countries. I thank you very much.

4.02
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I had a chance to meet the Committee on Defence and to make my submissions and I am very happy about the key points that have come from the report of the Committee on Defence. 

One of the issues that was very important to me and this House, honourable members, is the issue of command. Somalia today is different from the Somalia of 1993. In October 1993 when there was a disaster, which led to the death of 18 Americans, one of the problems that brought about that fatal issue was the issue of command.  

In 1992 the UN sent about 3,000 forces from 37 countries and they were supposed to carry out humanitarian operations but along the way the Americans together with one of the factions in Mogadishu sent a special US force whose headquarters and command was in Florida. On the fateful night of October when 18 Americans were killed, there was a directive from Florida to the American US Force without even the awareness of the UN Humanitarian Force directing them to go and capture Farah Aidid. That confusion in the unit of command brought a lot of problems in Somalia.  

It is an honour that Uganda is leading this peacekeeping force to Somalia. In 2000 the UN General Assembly made a recommendation for the reform of the UN and there has been a general move to do so. As Uganda we have adopted that report that there should be a formation of regional peacekeeping forces particularly in Africa. This resolution has been adopted and Uganda is going to be one of the first countries to implement this resolution of the UN and the General Assembly towards the formation of regional peacekeeping forces in Africa. It is an honour for our country and for Ugandans. We must be proud that in the East African region we have the confidence of member states and the confidence of Somalia that our troops, officers and men of the UPDF and Uganda as a country is going to be one of the countries that are allowed the advantage to pioneer in this to bring about peace and stability in Somalia. 

For many reasons Members have mentioned the issue of disarmament and I think this is a step in the right direction. Mr Speaker, I also have some concerns and I want to draw particularly our forces’ attention to this very important thing. Resolution 13(25) of the UN Security Council, which was passed in 2000, has specific and severe issues concerning the deployment of forces and the offences that arise with the deployment of forces in different countries. This was particularly after the problems of the UN forces in Congo and Liberia where within a period of almost three years about 6,000 children, which is an average of about three to eight children per day, were being produced by the peacekeeping forces. 

In that regard I am very happy that recommendation no. 3 says that in signing the agreement there must be strict compliance with section 41, which is to the effect that the laws applicable to our troops in case of any offence shall be the loss of Uganda. It may look very simple but this is a very serious issue because issues concerning sexual offences can even go to the ICC. This is very important and I do not expect our troops to go and do anything. 

In deploying this, we must carry our flag high and encourage our troops to observe compliance. They are expected to have a code of conduct and I think that is very important. This also goes with culture. It is very important that we have the dos and don’ts and I was very happy to learn from this report that the UPDF who are being prepared to go to Somalia have had ample time even to learn the Somali language.  

Mr Speaker, the people of Karamoja and especially the people of Pian have a large population of Somalis and they have asked me to support this motion very strongly. They are looking forward to going back to their country and I am very proud to stand here as a Ugandan and as a Member of Parliament for Pian to support this motion. Thank you very much.

4.08
MR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start off by saying that I am in full support of this motion and I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the honourable Minister of Defence for the work well done. One of the scepticisms and fears when this motion was first introduced about this deployment was the risk to the lives of our gallant soldiers who are going to be deployed. I am glad to note from the report of this committee that a lot of considerations and arrangements have been put in place to minimize the risks to our soldiers.

However, I would like to note that in science of risk management one way of minimizing risks is to reduce the time of exposure to such risks, in this case our soldiers’ stay in Somalia. I am glad to note that in this case some of the phases, which are going to be utilized, are only a mere six months. Another aspect of reducing risks is to reduce the numbers exposed to the risks. Here I am not saying that the battalion of 1,500 should be reduced, no, but I am wondering whether the committee put in consideration the fact that the mission is bi-partite, one is peacekeeping and the second one is the training of personnel, that is the Police and the Army. If that is the case then definitely the peacekeeping needs to be on spot.  

Concerning the training, I wonder whether they considered that such training could be done at home here in Uganda. For example, we have got excellent training facilities in Kimaka and Singo where I come from and for the case of the Police in Masindi, Kibuli and so on. Apart from reducing the risks of our trainers being there, it would have been advantageous to utilize the resources at hand, which could even be upgraded using the budget. We say it is budget neutral so we would attract those resources to be utilized here. Although it has been said that there has been no vacuum left here, it would also reduce duplication, that is, having to train our Ugandans here and also train the Somalis there. We could have an interactive training of both Ugandan personnel in the Army together with Somalis here so that we could have a good interaction. 

Furthermore, this requirement for training before going to Somalia should not be a one off training, but continuous. Therefore, I am proposing or wondering whether in the future this home training could have been an option to be considered? I end by supporting the motion for this deployment. Thank you very much.

4.11
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and let me take this opportunity to thank the committee and the chairperson for the good report. 

I will make just a brief comment on the minority report; they make their arguments -(Interjections)- there was a comment that when the Union of the Islamic Courts was in power, there was peace. I want to say that it is not true because I travelled to Somalia during that period and it was not peaceful. Therefore, the arguments raised in that report are redundant if they are following that argument.

Increasingly there are conflicts in Africa and we also know that we cannot rely on outside support all the time. As the report clearly puts it, when the support comes from the African countries, then we have seen that results are yielded. There is a need for African solutions to most of the African problems. That is why I support the motion that we send our forces to Somalia to help our brothers and sisters in Somalia. But I also want to say that the African Union should be quick to constitute a standby force so that when problems arise in other countries, we are able to respond as soon as possible.

I also want to raise a comment that much as the mandate of the UPDF and other forces, which are going, is put in the report that it is active peace keeping, there are definitions of peace keeping and other concepts around that like preventive diplomacy, peace building, peace enforcement and so forth. I want to urge the ministry to ensure that the mandate is very clear to the UPDF as they go. Some of the problems that have arisen in some of the missions have resulted from the vagueness of the mandate. 

There are key principles of peace keeping. One is the consent of the parties involved. We very well know that the transitional government has consented but we hear voices from the warlords that they are resisting the peace keepers from outside Somalia. 

The other principle is neutrality and impartiality of the forces, which we think our UPDF and other forces which are going will observe. The other is minimal or none use of force. If we are to define peace keeping, those are its three principles. But as I see it, the mandate put here combines the three chapters of the UN Charter, that is chapters 6, 7 and 8, which will be a combination of peaceful means but also resorting to force when need arises. So, the mandate to the soldiers who are going should be very clear to them so that they know what they are expected to do and not to do in Somalia.

My other comment, which has been raised by one of the Members, is that we need assurance from the Ministry of Defence that emoluments and the payments which are clearly put in this report and from the minister’s statement will be paid to the soldiers. For instance, in the case of a soldier’s death, how is the family going to claim the emoluments from the ministry? Some of us receive very many soldiers and veterans who claim their payments from the ministry and the procedures are not very friendly to them. We, therefore, need assurance from the ministry that the procedures will be very clear on how the soldiers and members of their families will be able to get the emoluments and all the payments that will be due to them. 

One time I attended the burial of one of the soldiers who had participated in Liberia. He had no house and the conditions at his home were very bad. There were allegations that he had not been paid his dues. I am not sure whether it was true, but the point I am emphasising is that as we send our troops, the payment mechanisms must be very well streamlined. 

Lastly, as the other colleagues have said, I also want to comment on the social behaviour of our soldiers when they are in Somalia. A few years ago, we had our soldiers going to the DRC and we read and heard reports that many of them returned with wives and children and husbands. Today there is a very big project supported by the International Organisation for Migration, which is returning the women into Congo and reintegrating them into Congolese life. A lot of money is being spent on that because of the behaviour of our friends who went to Congo. 

So, I just want to caution and request our soldiers who are going to Somalia that they should stick to the mandate, which is clearly given. We also know that some of the problems like HIV are relatively high in Somalia. Thank you and I support the motion with those few cautionary statements. 

4.18
MRS JANET MUSEVENI (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, in support of this motion and in support of the committee report, I just want to add my voice to those of my colleagues who spoke before me that it is right and good that Africa should prove that it has come of age and can find its own solutions for its problems. Therefore, it is right that Uganda characteristically as it has done in the past should take its own place among those who are standing up to be counted in answering the call of Somalia in their hour of need. If any African country understands the hopeless suffering in a situation such as Somalia is in, Uganda does. I think that is why it has become characteristic for Uganda to answer the call of some of these African countries when they are really in need of support. 

I want to add that Members of Parliament, therefore, will be left with a duty to sensitise our population so that they understand, and I know they do because they know how Uganda lived in very difficult circumstances for a long time. That is why we will never forget what Tanzania did for us when we were in the same circumstances as Somalia is in right now. 

Nonetheless, I think it is our duty to sensitise our people because UPDF are the children of the mothers and families and so it is right that the families in our population know why UPDF must go so that we all hold them in our prayers and in our hearts knowing very well that we are sending them off as a country with our blessings and everybody knows what this is all about. Instead of just leaving it for them to hear about what is happening in future, it is right for them to know as we discuss it right here and now. 

I add my voice to the rest of Members who support this motion and I believe that it is right to do it now.

4.21
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, in light of the clarity of the report by the committee and the eloquence with which my honourable friend the MP for Nakaseke presented it, and in light of the fact that the presentations so far have clearly emphasised the points made in the report, I beg to move a motion that the question be put and that as we decide this important question, for the same reasons we used to send this issue to the committee – that, Mr Speaker, you exercise your discretionary power under rule 86 of our Rules of Procedure to determine this matter by division. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Those are two motions. Let me start with the first one. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: In determining this question, let us use the roll call method. I would advise those who are in the lobby if they want to vote on this to come in.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: No abstentions, no nays and Ayes are 155.

(Question agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL MEDICAL STORES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember a week or so ago hon. Butime on behalf of the committee presented a report. It was a big report, which required time for you to internalise. I hope you have finished that and you are ready to debate. [Hon. Members: “Not yet.”] But let us give ourselves a time when to dispose of the report. Can we commit ourselves to discuss it next Tuesday? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: It appears we have disposed of the business listed today save we did not deal with the Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, which we shall handle tomorrow. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.29 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

  


 







