Wednesday 10th February, 1999.  

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair).

The House was called to Order.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FISCAL YEAR, 1998/99

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, when we adjourned yesterday, there were people who wanted to contribute, although I gave indications that it was going to be otherwise when we commence today.  But I am flexible.  If there are people who wish to contribute, so be it.

CAPT. MIKE MUKULA  (Soroti Municipality, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the report with a few observations.  

I would like first of all, in reaction and in an observation within the report - particularly focusing on the C130,  to say that there are very serious and very critical anomalies that have risen from the repair of the C130, which have now accumulated to a figure close to US $12 million.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, when the C130 caught fire in Cairo, this C130 Registration 5X3 from Charlie Fostrod UCFX is of an extended version, one of the few in the African region and more so, in the world.  This C130 had a commercial value, at that point when they did carry out the valuation of the C13O,  of US $3.4 million.  Today,  a total or an amount close to US $12 million has been spent on that aircraft.  The commercial value of that aircraft as we speak now is not more than US $8 million.  What was the logic of spending so much money, more so from the taxpayers, the consolidated fund, from privatisation and from loans, from various banks,  to a point where we no longer have almost an effective holding on this aircraft?  Unless the Minister of Defence has come up with an alternative method of paying this amount which is so colossal and beyond the general aviation factors, Mr. Speaker. 

I do recall very clearly that this aircraft - two or three months before it had this accident - had just returned from Israel where it had undergone what we call a compulsory check,  or the C-Check.  This compulsory check which was carried out by Israel industries, involved even the repair and overhaul of propellers.  This aircraft has got four propellers from major checks which were undertaken in Israel.  

In the repairs that have been carried out where the aircraft has just gone through the maintenance schedule, it is also very clearly indicated in the invoices that these propellers have been overhauled at a very high cost.  The engines have also been overhauled.  In an aircraft it is the power plant - which is the engine, and the propellers that are the most expensive.  Mr. Speaker, I am even surprised to note that in the invoices that have been sent, basic equipment like the global positioning equipment, the GPS, has got the average cost of US $1,500,  and installation, the cost of approximately US $186.  Where does this figure come from?  I am very concerned,  and I would like to submit to the report that an effective Select Committee be instituted to ensure that they look at updates, at the factors that have caused the haemorrhage to this country of this magnitude.  

I would also like to move and ascertain some factors.  Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption).

MR. DOMBO:   According to the submission of hon. Mike Mukula, it seems he has access to some information which can be of use to this House, if it is provided.  This is because he is quoting from authentic documents which this House would have loved to have access to.  May I find out from hon. Mukula whether he wishes at an appropriate time, to lay those documents on the Table?  Thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA:  I would be most obliged and tomorrow I will provide and lay on Table the documents pertaining to the C130 for the ideal consumption of Members of Parliament as they may so wish.  The areas that I have alluded to, I will very clearly  mark so that members of Parliament and the whole House can be able to access the critical information that I would have made available to the House. 

I would also like to raise a very serious observation to the Minister of Internal Affairs in reference to the fire fighting controls that we have in this country.  Mr. Speaker, on Sunday night, the prophet of doom prevailed and landed in Soroti and a market and property worth millions of shillings was gutted to the ground.  Currently 450 vendors are at a loss.  Over 2,000 families do not know how to feed themselves.  I am privileged even to lay before this House, pictures of the actual destruction which has taken place in Soroti.  

They tried to send a fire fighting van from the Flying School which only had 1,000 litres and it only functioned for less than eight minutes and it could not do anything more.  They had to call for a fire Brigade from Mbale.  It took exactly one hour and 45 minutes for this fire truck to arrive in Soroti.  It tried to control the fire but there was not even enough water. It carries an average of I think 6,000 litres.   It could not stop the fire.  They made a total of seven trips to Awoja which is about 8 kilometres away and this fire could not be stopped.

DR. MALLINGA:  I would like to get clarification from hon. Mukula, whether the Minister of Disaster Preparedness has been made aware of what happened in Soroti and what is the action from that Ministry to alleviate the suffering in Soroti?

CAPT. MUKULA:  The bureaucracy in disaster management is extremely alarming.  In actual fact, when I called the Third Deputy Prime Minister yesterday, he said that until he receives a written communication to the effect that disaster has befallen a certain area and it is faxed to him and he can get it in writing, he will not know and even if he reads it in the papers, he will not respond.  Mr. Speaker, when you have pictures of this magnitude of destruction, then you can imagine the pains that my people are going through in Soroti right now.  

It is very unfortunate that even in Kampala itself, the fire fighting equipment that we have here, is I think probably either pre-colonial or even if it is post-colonial, the equipment is not ideal.  I would like to humbly appeal to this august House and mostly the Ministry of Internal Affairs to try to see if we can endeavour to have at least adequate or reasonable fire fighting equipment in various parts of this country.  Are we going to say fire will only prevail in Kampala, so that you can have this equipment only at Clock Tower?  What about the people in Gulu?  What about the people in Kasese?  My people in Soroti have been left at a loss and they have given them  - I think they have sent them 25 bales of second hand clothes and 100 bags of posho.  What will that do?  Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious matter and I would like to have an effective response from either the Leader of Government Business and the Minister of Internal Affairs, to see that my people in Soroti, have got something that they can look to in terms of support from Government.  And in future, they should see how fire fighting equipment or prevention of this nature can be instituted to allay the fears of my people and those of the whole of this country.

I would also like to talk about a more fundamental matter.  Yesterday we talked about the helicopters.  These helicopters that were delivered, we were talking about them not being airworthy,  but these helicopters have gone beyond what you call the flying time.  The flying time as it were, the helicopters of this nature, the MI24 are supposed to have,  for operational combat purposes, less than 1,000 hours or within the confines of 1,000 hours.  But these helicopters are beyond 1,000 hours.  They can fly, you can start them, you can rotate the propellers, you can fly.  But the pilots refused to fly them because the lifespan of the engine is over and above the required minimum for operations of such aircrafts.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Mr. Speaker, as if hon. Mukula was not here yesterday,  is it really, in order for hon. Mukula, Member of Parliament for Soroti Municipality to start disclosing to the public, the capacity of Uganda military equipment, to disclose this classified military, security information?  Whereas this information could be given to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs or any other Committee, like the National Security Committee, and this matter can be discussed there if there is a mistake or a problem!  But is he really in order to disclose classified, military capacity equipment of the country to this House, Mr. Speaker.  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Yesterday the discussion was that the equipment which was purchased was defective and Members were expressing concern about that especially in terms of how much security they can provide.  But I think I guided the House, that even to talk about that situation so publicly, may be a security risk.  I think when you are discussing these matters, you must bear in mind your national security.  But there is no problem in someone complaining about military equipment which is defective if it is defective,  and therefore the hon. Member was not out of order.

MR. AWORI:  I would like to inform the hon. Minister that this information which may be available to us by the hon. Mukula is actually available in a magazine called Jane Weekly. You can buy it in any bookshop and it has even the details that he is calling national secrets. These things are public knowledge. Do not use the occasion to cover up for misappropriation of public funds.

MR. TAIRE IDHWEGE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  As a policeman, I know what classified information is.  I am informed that the helicopters were procured by a motor rally fan.  Is this classified information?  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.

CAPT. MUKULA:  I would like to thank my Colleagues for that important information and I would also like to allay the fears of my hon. Colleague, the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs to the effect that the factors I am raising are not in any way detailed combat capacities and capabilities of the MI-24.  If I was to give this House what you call classified capacity, then that would be a different thing. But I am only going into the details of where the regularity is and I think it is important that Members of Parliament get to understand this. 

At an appropriate time, I will give the Committee more detailed, more classified, more informative factors about the MI-24,  which the Committee may not have.  I am very guarded and sensitive to the security of this country, that I cherish so much, more so, the gallant forces and that is why, because of that commitment of these gallant forces, I am conscience about the security of this country.  That is why I am raising these matters of great concern.  

Not forgetting the fact that, if we are talking about security,  Mr. Speaker, a few days ago, our Colleague hon. Akech was knocked down by a boda boda cyclist, and the boda boda cyclist was arrested and detained.  But my hon. Minister in charge of Internal Affairs knocked down a child too.  I do not know what happened, there has been no information that he has been able to put across as a leader of Internal Affairs to explain to the people of this country as to what could have happened.  Sincerely, in my own view this should have been a more fundamental factor in the security of this country.  I thank you.

MR. ONGOM ABEDNEGO (Omoro County, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker for allowing me to raise a few questions on the report of the Committee.  The Committee did recommend two things about the veterans, that is the former army employees or former combatants.  
The first was that those veterans who are neither NRA nor UPDF should also benefit from the package that is being offered.  The question I would like to ask the Committee is whether they have now got any information as to what the Ministry's reaction is to this recommendation.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I do not know whether you were not around, but this particular point was explained to the satisfaction of all the Members.  That something is happening.  In fact that within a number of weeks payment will commence.

MR. ONGOM:  To all?

THE SPEAKER:  Not to all, to some as a beginning.

MR. ONGOM:  Well, I am sorry I was called on another national duty outside here and I did not hear this information.  Therefore I will only be happy that apparently,  according to the information availed to the House,  all the veterans will benefit from this.  All veterans of all former armies will benefit from this package. I think that is the information.  Well, even the NRA were former rebels so they are all the same.

I would like to talk about the question of Uganda Air Cargo.  We were told yesterday that even the Select Committee is considering the problem of privatising Uganda Air Cargo.  Mr. Speaker, I remember vividly that when the formation of Uganda Air Cargo as a parastatal was brought to this House in the NRC, I was one of those who actually opposed the creation of this company as another parastatal.  At that time, I did point out that Uganda Airlines Corporation needed money to re-equip.  We were not providing an existing corporation with facilities to let it operate properly,  at the same time we are bringing in another company doing a similar job and incorporating it.  I did object and I have now been proved right that actually that money could have been better used to re-equip Uganda Airlines.  

Maybe the crisis that we now have with Uganda Airlines would not have arisen if some of our advice was heeded.  It is useless now in fact to talk about privatising Uganda Air Cargo when we are still talking about privatising Uganda Airlines.  And Uganda Air Cargo as we know now has also incurred so much loss.  Just one aircraft we have is costing the country so much.  It is my considered opinion that, that company should really be wound up so that we incur that loss once and for all.  It is going to serve us no purpose at all.  And what else is there anyway to privatise in Uganda Air Cargo apart from the one single aircraft?  
And that aircraft could actually be,  if it is still useful, given to the air force.  I understand they are likely to form one.  It is my submission that we should not even bother about trying to privatise it, we should just wind it up and transfer whatever assets we have to other State enterprises or those other companies being privatised.

MAJ. OTOA:   I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that at the moment, the Select Committee on Privatisation is scrutinising the status of Uganda Air Cargo.  And I hope that they will come out with a similar Resolution like the Member is trying to put to the House.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you for the information.  In fact, I referred to that in my submission.  Your Chairman actually told us the same thing yesterday and I am saying that there is no need to go into those details, just wind it up, we are wasting time and money on it.  

Yesterday a Member brought up the question of the status of LDUs;  and he brought it up in connection with a law which regulates the status and operations of LDUs.  This matter should be taken very seriously, it is a problem which is causing us some headache particularly those of us who come from the disturbed areas.  We recruit people as home guards, some of them are deployed together with the army and when they die, nobody seems to know what to do, because they are not covered under any existing regulations.  

And now there are several families who are concerned about their sons who have disappeared in this manner and they are not getting any answers.  It is very important that their affairs are regularised.  But what concerns me more is that whereas we recruit these people, the Local Defence Units - at home we call them home guards - to defend their homes, they are deployed against these instructions.  It makes our position as politicians very difficult.  Because if you go to recruit people, you are asked, 'but we have just offered our sons and daughters, where are they?'  Usually we give no answer.  I understand some of them are even being deployed in the DRC,  a war which many of us object to.  And what happens to them when they die over there?  

MR. KAVUMA:  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker,  and I thank my old hon. Member of Parliament for giving way.  I wanted to inform the hon. Member and the House that I have taken the matter of the status of the LDUs and other forces as a very serious and important matter. I am finalising consultations and fortunately it does not require to come out with a totally new piece of legislation to attend to the problem.  In the existing law are sufficient provisions we can use to solve the problem by about 80 percent of the journey being travelled administratively.  And this is one of those matters I have already directed that they become the subject of discussion at the next nearest meeting of the concerned body.  This will take care of their status and those who prefer to become part of the reserve force and the army will then be able to get the benefits that accrue to other personnel employed in similar capacities.

MR. ONGOM:  I thank the Minister very much for the information, and I hope that they will proceed expeditiously.  But in the meantime, Mr. Minister, we recruited these people to protect their homes not to go and fight in the DRC.  Could they be returned now to where they were recruited?  They were recruited to protect their homes not to be deployed as a National Army.  And that this is a very serious matter because it is causing us a lot of problems in our areas of operation,  while talking about the DRC and our involvement.

I understand we have now even assumed the responsibility of declaring conditions on behalf of Congo rebels.  Can the Minister tell us how much our presence there is costing us?  We are discussing the Budget for Defence and our information is that, that war is contributing heavily to the expenditure of UPDF.  Can we be informed of it?  

In fact I think the Committee should have got interested, how much have we now eaten into the Budget of the Ministry of Defence?  We are now more than six months into this Budget Year, how much have we consumed?  I understand some of the information we get may not be correct,  but that the Ministry has even over-shot its budget now and very soon it is going into supplementaries.  Are these rumours true?  If so, is that why perhaps other Ministries are not getting their releases as they should so that most of the releases are actually going to Defence?  Can the Minister tell us how much this war is costing us?  

We were originally told that we were only at the border, our forces were on the border and stopping rebels from infiltrating although they have not been stopped.  But now we are told that they are in Kisangani.  And by any stretch of the imagination we cannot be told that Kisangani is on the border.  Surely, can we be informed as to how much the country is spending on this war?  And is it really necessary expenditure, Mr. Speaker?   Sorry, these are the few questions I wanted to raise for the Minister to answer.  Thank you very much.

MR. BITAHWA SAMSON (Igara West, Bushenyi):   Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted to first of all congratulate the Committee for its wonderful work.  But I would like to add a few observations which in my view are not reflected and they have been neglected for quite some time.  

These concern security in the countryside.  When one goes through the report of the Committee, one gets the impression that the Police Posts are serving the urban areas,  or the posts are situated along the road where means of communication are easy.  But there is no mention of caring for the population which lives in the countryside and these are the people who need protection most.  There is even no provision,  within the established posts, for policemen or police service to go deep in the countryside and provide services to the needy population.  
This has been pronounced in some cases where some areas have suffered guerilla attacks.  For instance in Bushenyi District there was panic when there was this threat from Kasese,  and it was extremely difficult for the police in Bushenyi to reach the countryside, because they are not properly facilitated.  The only vehicle which is in that post is being used by the DPC and the ordinary policemen do not even have bicycles!  This makes it very, very difficult for the policemen to extend services to the countryside and I am requesting the Minister that this matter should be adequately addressed.  

The second point which I wanted to point out concerns the Prisons department, and the prisoners themselves.  Mr. Speaker, when people are sentenced to jail, it appears as if the Government tends to forgot all about these people coming back again and being normal citizens of this country.  In prison, they live under extreme hardships!  I have had a chance of visiting some of the prisoners,  they are very poorly fed and the attitude that they develop when they are in prison is that of hardening against the Government, against this country.  And when they come back there is no guarantee that these people are going to behave normally, because there is no proper re-integration programme.  
There is need in our prisons department that there should be a kind of rehabilitation programme so that these people in the prison can receive services or possibilities of even learning some of the skills while in prison.  So that when they come out they just do not go on the street; so that they can look after themselves and that they are not hardened against the Government, against the State, but become responsible citizens.  

A third point which I wanted to comment on, I am glad Mr. Speaker that it was mentioned in the report,  is that drivers should be tested in order to find out whether they have taken alcohol or not.  This has been a very serious issue in this country, a lot of accidents have happened because drivers are drunk.  These accidents do happen at certain festivities for instance towards Christmas or at night after heavy drinking hours.  

Recently,  motor racing which is otherwise a popular sport in this country, has claimed many innocent lives due to hooliganism and drunken driving.  This happened three years ago, it happened last year, it has happened again this year and we can only expect that the rates of accidents are going to increase as the years go by.  And this is the reason why I would like to request the Minister, whether it is not possible that the Minister provides services to the police so that they can properly control hooliganism, this sport should be abolished.  Mr. Speaker, with these remarks I thank you very much.

DR. MALLINGA STEVEN (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  It is during happy times like this when we, as politicians, have got to re-examine our role.  I appreciate the efforts of the Committee, but it is obvious from the findings and recommendations of the Committee that the politicians and leaders in this country have not disengaged the military from politics.   

The most expensive item in our Budget, year after year, is military expenditure.  When are we going to learn that we are a poor country, we should be spending our money in areas which would develop the rural areas and poorest people in this country?  I would have been excited and I will be extremely grateful if this amount of money was honestly spent on agriculture, education or health.  We have seen it in this country, every regime which has come has built an army and at the end when there is a change in the Government, that army has come to an end.  The people of this country have spent their money unnecessarily on the military.  Obote I built an army and an Air Force.  When Amin took over, all that equipment and the people were destroyed.  Amin built an army at a very large expense to the people of this country.  That army, when there was a change of Government, was destroyed; the equipment was destroyed too.  A great loss to the citizens of this country!   

Now, we are building another army.  We have not learnt our lesson!  It is our duty to try and solve the political problems of this country politically without relying on the military.  We have had a problem in the North; there has been fighting there for more than ten years.  If somebody was serious about finding a political solution to that problem, it would not last even half a year.  If somebody was willing to talk to Mr. Kony - if he wanted to be a Minister, give him the ministries.  But instead, we said we cannot talk to Mr. Kony because he has killed people, he has maimed people.  But we cannot stop him.  People continue to be killed in the North, people continue to be maimed and problems of the North have now spread to the West - which has created a problem when we have had to move soldiers deep into Zaire.  
We have to learn to find political solutions to political problems in this country.  Otherwise, it becomes very expensive in terms of money.  Like we are seeing, a big percentage of the Budget is spent on the army.  In these findings and in the recommendations,  we have to learn to talk to each other.  Politicians in this country have not had respect for fellow politicians, instead they call each other names.  Lawyers have respect for each other,  they call each other 'learned friend.'  Doctors have respect for each other, they call each other colleagues.  Politicians in this country have been intolerant and have never learnt to respect the opinions of fellow politicians.  As a result, we have had killings, revolutions, and counter-revolutions.  When is this going to end?  When are we going to stop having a large military expenditure?  I hope I have said enough about the military.  I am a pacifist, I no longer believe in the army - I believe in solving our problems by talking.   

In the Police still,  people are arrested in this country.  They are detained sometimes for a month,  yet the Constitution does not say so.  Within 48 hours, I think, you have got to charge that person. We should learn to respect our citizens.  Our responsibility is to serve the people of this country.  A citizen of Uganda should be respected everywhere he goes.  When we are not respected at home, there is no hope for us to be respected when outside.  There was a time when Ugandans were extremely respected outside.  Nowadays, when a Ugandan is seen in a foreign country, the first thing they think of is that he is up to something wrong - he is about to commit a crime.  Their passports are scrutinised to make sure they are not duplicates or they have not committed a crime.  We have to elevate the status,  the respect of the Ugandan citizens.

In the Police, there is a great need to sharpen the investigatory capacity of the Police.  A lot of murders go unsolved.  A very prominent citizen in my constituency, Mr. Byakika, was murdered more than two years ago.  Up to now the case has never been solved.  Those who were arrested were kept in Luzira for sometime, after a year they were released.  When are we going to be able to safeguard the citizens of this country so that when crimes are committed against them, they can be solved?  If we have not educated our Police sufficiently to have the skills to solve murders, then let us import people to teach them.  Let us spend the money on educating the Police so that the people of this country can be sure that when a crime is committed against them, it will be solved.  

I am concerned, a member of my constituency was an Inspector General of Police in this nation.  His profession came to an end.  He was just whisked away carefully and quietly.  I think somebody who was in that kind of position, the nation should have had an explanation as to why the Inspector General of Police lost his job.  Was it corruption?  If it was corruption, do we have different measures of -(Interruptions).

MRS. MATEMBE:   The law in this land does not force anybody to be employed when he or she wants to step out of the employment.  That is one.  

Two; in this country the political appointments are made by the Head of State and when he makes them, he makes them.  When he reshuffles, he reshuffles.  I have never heard the President addressing the nation and saying, 'I have removed Minister so and so because of one, two, three reasons'.   With these political appointments, people have been appointed, they have been reshuffled,  and those who want to resign have resigned and therefore, I do not see why only one individual could be a point of question here.  In any case some of us are employed on contract.  If these contracts end, your employee may renew it or he may not.  When he does, I think he tells you as an individual.  If you asked the individual, he could explain to you the terms under which he was working and how he has resigned.  Thank you.

DR. MALLINGA: I would like to thank the hon. Member, Mrs. Matembe, for the information.  But it was extremely difficult for me to understand her information.  This is because the Inspector General of Police is not a political appointment,  he is a civil servant.  He might be on contract,  but he is responsible for the security of this country and when he is removed, I think whoever is concerned owes the nation an explanation.  Even if he resigns, the nation should know why the Inspector General of Police resigned.  But, Mr. Speaker, we are left with just entertaining rumours and rumour has it that the Inspector General of Police was a supplier to the Police.  I ask the question, is he the only one in the armed forces who has been a supplier to the armed forces?  Has it happened in the army?  Are there no military men who have become bloody rich because of supplying to the army?  Or are they forgiven?  Or in this case, was it selective?  Were we using a different measure to judge the same offenses?  

It is high time the citizens of this country,  if we are going to fight corruption -(Interruptions).

MR. NDEEZI:  Thank you very much, my Colleague for giving way.  It is not a rumour that the former Inspector General of Police was supplying the same Police he was manning.  It is not a rumour,  we read this clearly in the papers, and also quoted highly reliable sources including the IGG.  So, this was clear.  If somebody was supplying to the same institution whose interests he was supposed to defend, how ethical is this?  I am happy the Minister in charge of ethics is looking at me.  

Again if it is true that this person was forced to resign because of corruption, why is it that he was not charged in court?

DR. MALLINGA: I would like to thank the hon. Member for the information.  I am one of those who do not believe in corruption, but I must emphasize one fact.  If one member is corrupt for doing a certain thing and you get rid of him, and then others commit the same crime and they are left, that is where the problem starts.  

MISS. NAMUSOKE:   I really tried to restrain myself but I think I should give this information to my Brother.  We have sat here in Parliament quite often and said that - one Member at least has given a proverb that rotting of a fish starts from the top.  The official he is talking about was a top leader and when the investigation went on, they had to start from the top and I imagine at the advice of this House that the top leadership must be scrutinised carefully.   

I also want to inform my Brother that he should take heart.  This House is determined to fight corruption and we have done so.  Even with the Ministers, we did not start with all of them at once - we are going one by one, scrutinising them and we know that the few who have gone are not the only ones, we will probably catch more.  But we have to go one by one, those who left will be replaced and then we move on.  My Brother, take heart, we are doing the job.

DR. MALLINGA: I thank the hon. Member for the information.  But the way things are, I am waiting to see if there will be any more people in the Police who we will get rid of for corruption.  This was not -(Interruption).

AN HON. MEMBER:   Is the hon. Member in order to drag this House into an argument when he fully knows very well that the person who resigned was the very person supposed to give the explanation as to why he resigned, not the employer?  In any case, after finding out what was happening, he saved this House the bother of debating whatever would have come later by taking the short-cut of resigning.  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the hon. Member was developing his argument.  But I think he is beginning to personalise what is otherwise a general debate on general principles.  I think, although you are in order, I am giving you one more minute to wind up.

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your judgement.  

We have a lot of road accidents in this country.  There is racing of vehicles.  On public roads, there is only one lane going in either direction, there is no space for the ordinary driver who is travelling from Jinja to Kampala to use the road.  We are only second to Ethiopia in Africa; in the highest deaths from accidents on the roads.  I would appreciate if the Minister of Internal Affairs will address the issue of racing on public roads.  It should be abolished, those who are interested in racing vehicles should build their own stadiums where they should race and not allow so many deaths on the roads.  

I would also like to emphasize, as I am about to wind up, Mr. Speaker, the nature of prisons in this country.  They have turned out to be torture chambers instead of areas where rehabilitation should take place.  We have read in the press that people have been made lame,  they have been mistreated.  There are Members of this House who have been imprisoned;  they came out bitter against the society and some people leave prison when they are worse off, they are anti-social, they are determined even to kill the first person they meet.  There was in this country before in the 70's,  a rehabilitation programme in prisons, where did it go?  They practised agriculture  - if they had no education at all they were taught agriculture.  We had furniture stores in the industrial area selling furniture which was made by prisoners,  they were taught how to make shoes.  I think there is a lot of need to improve the prisons so that we do not get people out of the prisons who come out with bitterness against society and determined to commit even worse crimes.  Thank you very, Much, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I wish to thank the Chairman of Defence and Internal Affairs Committee of Parliament for his Committee's deep and serious study and analysis of the 1998/99 Budget and Policy Statement of my Ministry.  I am very satisfied with their recommendations and I would like to thank him greatly for the very good job done.  The House of course did finally pass these Budget proposals.  I will therefore inform the Minister of Finance,  in Cabinet, to re-adjust my Ministry's Budget as per recommendations of Parliament so that we perform better in the remaining part of the 1998/99 financial year.  

I wanted just to exploit one important and new concept and this is the concept of 'operability.'  That is where the security organs of any government,  all the organs,  should be able to work and the disparity should be minimal and negligible.  What I am trying to say, Mr. Speaker, is that a soldier cannot have 10 pairs of boots, while a policeman has two and a Prisons warder goes barefooted.  That kind of disparity should not be accepted.  

The other example I can give is what we were taking about, of the tanks they need.  -(Interruption)- Mr. Speaker, I am contributing and answering as a Minister of Internal Affairs, not as a Major of the UPDF.  I thank you.  You cannot talk of tanks where an Army has all the tanks that are required, but then the Police does not have fire fighting equipment and when fire breaks out in Soroti the whole place is erased,  but at the same time you have prisoners who are naked and have no food. That is again disparity and that kind of thing should not be allowed in any country which has got good planning and management of the Budget and the national resources.  I do not believe that a country can also have a wonderful Air Force and then the Police has no vehicles and the prisoners are dying of hunger and there is no vehicle to take them to courts of law.  That is also poor planning.  In other words, there must be the capacity for all the security organs involved in the criminal justice system,  all those involved in that criminal justice system must be facilitated to open it so that there is that concept of 'operability.'  

And the other point I want to make is that even when it comes to wages and salaries,  you cannot have a State Attorney being paid half a million per month and a Police officer with the same qualifications,  a lawyer but in the CID,  being paid Shs 250,000  or  Shs 200,000 per month when actually he prepares the file which is given to the State Attorney to go to court and represent the state.  That is another problem which we are facing.  

And lastly you cannot have a Private being paid Shs 150,000 and you have a policeman being paid Shs 68,000 -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: There is a clarification;  are you prepared for it?

MAJ. BUTIME: No, Mr. Speaker, I am in a hurry.  I would like to finalise this point so that I allow my Colleague, and the Chairman to finalise.   I was just trying to put it to the House that the recommendations of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs are very correct and I am pleased that they have recommended that a Prisons Warder and a Police Constable be given Shs 2,000 per day as cash ratio allowance to help the Police and the Prison's Warders cop with the work which these people are doing. Mr. Speaker, I will not talk about Majors because Majors in Parliament will opt to be paid from Parliament than to be paid from the Army, I think you know that very well.

Hon. Byanyima yesterday, it is a pity she is not here, she wanted me to clarify and explain about the people who are missing in Mbarara Municipality and I have the following to say.  There is no family or community now in Uganda, including Mbarara Municipality,  whose relative was arrested as a terrorist suspect and the family or community does not know where he or she is.  If arrested,  that person must have been take to court, if taken to court he must have been charged, if charged he must have been remanded, and if convicted he must be serving a sentence.  If found innocent,  he must have been released and really that is the current situation today.  Government no longer detains people,  Mr. Speaker,  and the House is very clear about this.  The only thing you can talk about is Police briefly holding somebody, for interrogation and questioning.  But the question of detaining a person beyond the prescribed period in the Constitution and law is no longer possible.  

And therefore, I would like to advise the hon. Member, hon. Byanyima Winnie,  that she should help me to substantiate,  to tell me exactly who are these people she is talking about.  And maybe, advise her that it is possible that those people missing could be parts of the remnants of ADF,  killing people in the districts of Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kabarole.  Saying that they are missing could be a pretext when as a matter of fact they could be part of the remnants of ADF who are killing our people.  

Hon. Nsubuga Nsambu wanted to know the whereabouts of Mr. Kassim Mukiibi who was working with Uganda Commercial Bank and Greenland Investments.  Mr. Speaker, this man is not with us, he is not with the Police and even his wife is not seen anywhere.  If this man is in Uganda,  he is hiding and there is a possibility that he is in South Africa.  We are trying to do our best with Interpol to prove that this man is in south Africa and ask them to assist us to bring him back to answer charges,  if we find that Kassim Mukiibi is required.  But he is not with the Police.  If he is in Uganda he is hiding but there is every possibility, Mr. Speaker, that the gentleman is in South Africa.  
About the people who are being abducted at the Clock Tower, that is a lie.  Clock tower, Mr. Speaker, between midnight and 5.00 a.m in the morning, has been a den of thugs and thieves and robbers.  What has happened is that the Police has reinforced security at the Clock Tower and people - maybe, hon. Nsubuga Nsambu is talking about the kind of people who have been terrorising or robbing the innocent civilians around the Clock tower.  And I am sure hon. Nsubuga Nsambu knows the sociology of his constituency and he should actually employ sociologists to help him carry out a survey of his constituency so that he knows how to handle part of the problems which are in the Makindye constituency.  

About the inmates in Luzira prison,  my responsibility to Luzira is to keep the inmates prisoners there, to keep them alive and produce them in court.  But whether the judges are available or not that is not my responsibility.  And I am, of course, always amazed that the theme of hon. Nsubuga Nsambu  - he has two themes every time he talks here,  Muslims and Mengo - as if Makindye constituency is really only concerned with Mengo and Muslims!  And I always wonder because I also lived there.  So, I hope that social worker will also help him to know that his constituency has very many other people other than talking about Mengo and Muslims. (Interruption).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:   I would like to thank the Minister for giving way.  Although hon. Nsubuga Nsambu is not here but being my political leader,  I would like to give information to the hon. Minister over the attack he has made.  I know hon. Nsubuga Nsambu as a man of great ideas.  He is not only committed to the conceptions you have mentioned, but he is known right now to be in court over the land question in Uganda so, he is a very widely established man in terms of ideology.

MAJ. BUTIME:  I thank hon. Lukyamuzi, but that land question must be only about Mengo and nothing else. 

I am grateful to hon. Prof. Kagonyera for his observation about accommodation for the Police and Prisons.  We are making an effort to ensure that the Police and Prisons personnel are properly accommodated.  Last year we got some money which enabled us to purchase former Kireka UPDF barracks,  it is now Police barracks.  And we hope that this year as it is in our Policy Statement,  we shall be able to develop more accommodation for the Police especially in areas of Nsambya and Kibuli.  
That is why I will not accept the offer of hon. Aggrey Awori to take some policemen and put them in his boys' quarters,  because policemen are not houseboys and neither are they chamber-maids.  So, that offer will not be accepted.  They are supposed to stay in gazetted places and those places must be known as barracks etc, but not boys' quarters to help in the security of the hon. Member of Parliament.  If it is for his special security,  I can provide it but we cannot accept that you have security for yourself by keeping policemen in the front or behind of your house.

On the question of traffic Police being corrupt, Mr. Speaker, we have a programme,  we have measures which we are putting in place and the Minister in charge Ethics and Integrity is part of this campaign to rid the Police of any possible corruption.  It is a very long protracted struggle and we hope in the short-run we should be able to clean up any traces of corruption in the Force.  

About the law governing LDUs, Mr. Speaker, this law should be in this House towards the end of February or early March because part of this law was discussed as a Cabinet paper and what remained was to be worked out between the Minister of Local Government, Internal Affairs and Defence about the position of LDUs and Special Police Constables.  But these will be part of the Police 1994 Amendment Bill which will be brought here to improve on the Police law.  At the sometime,  it will also talk about the position of LDUs, SPCs, home guards, vigilantes etc.  

I informed Parliament yesterday that the construction of Nebbi Police Station was on. I am confirming that the materials for the Nebbi Police Station construction were delivered three weeks ago and I informed the hon. Okumu-Ringa and that the construction of this Police Station should begin anytime.  When the team finishes the construction of Arua Police Station,  they will move to Nebbi and continue constructing the same. 

I will now explain about safe houses.  A safe house is an exclusive building for intelligence organs for briefing, planning, discussing and executing certain sensitive assignments and those assignment include interrogation.  It however excludes custody of anybody and it excludes torture.  The people in safe houses are only operatives of a security organisation or an intelligence organ or workers or officers or commanders.  We here in Uganda do have safe houses.  They are all over the world, they are in every country. These houses were unprofessionally used when terrorist suspects were taken there for interrogation,  that was unprofessional.  Nobody is supposed to be taken to a safe house for safe custody, that practice was unprofessional and it was stopped and closed totally.  Anybody arrested today, terrorist suspect or not,  he or she will be taken to a Police Station.  We have created room even for terrorist suspects in our Police Stations today.  There will be special cells for such people at the Police Station but not anywhere else,  not a safe house,  and therefore, there are no safe houses to gazette, Mr. Speaker, and that is that. 

About my Friend hon. Lukyamuzi, the Uganda Police uniform is gazetted, its colour is beige almost like the coat you are wearing.  I am glad you put it on today because that colour tends towards beige, or grey,  that is the kind of colour.  What we have had is a problem of the company which recently won the tender for the supply of Police uniforms and this is a Ugandan company, Picfare, Jinja.  They have not apparently got the beige which we wanted.  In our view they have violated the tender regulation because the shade which they supplied is not the gazetted shade  of the police and we are handling this issue, we hope that they can improve.  But it may be difficult to make them lose their tender which was offered to them legally; they can only improve maybe on the shade.  

About Police salaries, we are handling it with the Minister of Public Service and Finance to improve on the police salaries.  

About your demonstration, Hon. Lukyamuzi, if police accommodation is not improved, I do not know when you intend to carry out this demonstration,  is it six months from now?   I can assure you that that demonstration will be constitutional, it will be according to Article 29 (1) (d) and also 38 (2) and I will give you a Police band to assist you to demonstrate so that you can attract a lot of attention from the whole country about the plight of accommodation of the Uganda Police Force.  I think that will be good,  and I will join you.

The policy - Mr. Speaker,  I am responding to hon. Bitahwa's contribution.  The policy of Government is to have a Police Station in every sub county.  In every sub county there should be a Police Post and this is the programme on which we are working, except I did not know how many Posts hon. Bitahwa has in his Igara West constituency.  But at least, there is a very big Police Station at Ishaka.  We are improving on other police posts in your constituency, but the policy is to have a Police Station in every sub county and that is the policy we have been pursuing.  

Finally,  hon. Mukula was saying that I was involved in an accident.  Mr. Speaker, I was not driving, I was a passenger in that vehicle and I ensured that there was instant transport to take the child who was involved in the accident to hospital and this was done.  I also ensured that the accident was reported to the police in 15 minutes and this was done and finally, I also ensured that those who were involved in the accident made statements to the police the same day and this, Mr. Speaker, was done.  In fact, the matter has been finalised and the file is before the DPP and if I am called upon, as a witness, as a passenger, I will go to court and appear as a witness.  

I think hon. Mukula did not say that in good taste, but I thought he would have gone further to explain what is happening with the funds for fund raising in Soroti, because, there is a problem there, I hear.  He would have thrown more light on the funds which have disappeared after the fund raising which was very successful in Soroti.  But since he is not here, I will not pursue that matter any more.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

On the Inspector General's resignation, investigations are continuing.  I want to say that it is a pity that Mr. Odomel is no longer the Inspector General of Police.  He served this country very well.   I think he developed the Police from the time he was appointed to the time he resigned.  He resigned on a matter which everybody knows, investigations were made in the office of the Inspector General of Government.  It was to do with violation of the Leadership Code.  After investigations, the report was given to the President, options were also given and these options are in that law.  The options are resignation, being taken to court, being cautioned, being dismissed, all these are there and one of the options there which was chosen was resignation and really, that is what took place.  But I have no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that Mr. Odomel served this country very well.  He developed the Police, he was a good Inspector General of Police but he was caught in this particular mishap.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE  (Mr. Steven Kavuma):  I thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I add my voice to those who have thanked the Committee for a good job done and for having produced a good report.  I also thank them for having been understanding in dealing with matters of the Ministry of Defence as reflected in the Report.  

I also want to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to congratulate the gallant soldiers,  men and women of UPDF for their untiring efforts to continue performing their constitutional duty of defending the sovereignty of this country.  They are defending and protecting the lives and properties of Ugandans and keeping up a very good relationship with the civilian population in this country; a thing that has won the UPDF a special position in today's Ugandan society.  

I also want to say that it is because of these efforts of your sons and daughters in the UPDF that has resulted in the obvious successes that have been scored in the area where they are responsible.  

A question was posed; by what percentage has the security of this country improved?  I say, what was the threat against which we must weigh the success or failure of UPDF?   Mr. Speaker, the detractors, those who do not want to see Uganda at peace have had very ambitious programmes.  Theirs was to overrun Gulu and Kitgum districts, overrun the barracks, capture the airstrip in Gulu and use it to launch an attack on Kampala with a view to taking political power in this country. They intended to blow out bridges including Karuma.  After the mission had proved too difficult for them, they thought the West would be a soft target and therefore, the attack on Mpwondwe.  

In the hope that they would capture Kasese, again they used the airstrip with the assistance of their collaborators in neighbouring countries,  with the intention to overrun Mbarara, Masaka, come to Kampala, and take power. I am proud to declare that up to today, your sons and daughters in the UPDF have denied the opportunity to these rebels, the bandits, to control even one inch of this country.  I leave it to Ugandans to quantify the percentage of the success.

I also want to talk about a matter which cropped up yesterday, which was reported widely, that there was contradiction from the Minister of Defence about matters we discussed yesterday.  I want to say that there was no such a contradiction.  I did say in answer to an allegation that had been made, that some helicopters have been flown into this country on implied combat missions in contravention of the law.  I said nothing of the sort has happened, and nothing has happened.  

Another Member of the House, hon. Maj. Noble Mayombo mentioned that he flew in one of those aircrafts and this was in answer to an allegation that was made that because these were junk, they could not even take off.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, hon. Mayombo referred to what we call test flights, that is different from flying on a combat mission.  There was no contradiction and I wanted to erase the impression that has been created.

Very serious allegations were made yesterday about abuse of public money in the Ministry of Defence, about purchasing junk in the name of helicopters and tanks.  I want to say this, Sir, that I do not condone and I will never condone corruption.  But we also have a duty as responsible citizens of this country to guard our speeches in such a manner that we do not directly or indirectly lead to insecurity in this country.  As you ruled, Sir, by mere word one can cause insecurity and I think we have gone through enough security problems in this country.  My hon. Friend Aggrey Awori knows it, we do not deserve any more hardships, certainly not the population.  I know some of us can easily pick up our passports and fly away or walk across the border and we go to safe havens but the bulk of our population are fed up with insecurity in this country.  I believe it is our duty as leaders to conduct our business bearing in mind that whatever we say, whatever we do, should never give an opportunity to anybody to cause insecurity again in this country.  Mr. Speaker, I wanted to be  -(Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA:  I would like to thank the hon. Minister for giving way.  I think the matter that he is raising, especially after it has come in the press today, has been discussed a lot.  I was wondering, what avenues do Members have, a Member like Aggrey Awori when he gets that type of information, what are the avenues available to the House?  Or if they are not there, are there avenues being organised where such important sensitive matters which come to the knowledge of a Member?  And if in the national interest he would like to raise it, to bring it to the attention of those concerned and in a way, if he does not get satisfaction, to the House?  What are the channels of handling matters of this nature, because, at the moment, I do not see them.  The Committees are open, Parliament is open, Committees are part of the House and I do not see any mechanism in our Rules stopping Members of Parliament from exercising this right and just only appealing on their sense of judgement is not good enough.  

For me, it is very important that maybe the Speaker could shade more light on this and educate me or the hon. Minister, if he is better informed.  But I think this matter is important for Members to raise.  The issue is, where should they raise it,  now that you are criticising it that the way it was raised brings insecurity in the country?  I would like a clarification maybe from the Minister or from any other person who is more knowledgable. 

MR. KAVUMA:  I only want to repeat that I appeal to all Members or leaders to exercise whatever rights and responsibilities they have responsibly and in such a manner that they could never result into insecurity in our population; that is one.  

Two;  I did say yesterday and repeat it and I remember my senior Colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs also posing it, that we have a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs of this House, where all such matters can be brought and discussed within the confines of the rules of procedure of this House and I believe those provisions were put there for a good reason.  

Having said that,  allow me to say one or two things, again about a matter that was discussed yesterday.  This was about allegations that this country bought tanks and it bought junk, they are not combat-worthy and the exercise was crafty.  Within the caution I have given, Sir and within my undertaking to meet the Committee on Defence and the Internal Affairs, I want to assure this country, through this House, that we never bought junk in place of tanks.  M

I did mention yesterday that if you had a problem with your vehicle because of a defective hose pipe, I do not think you would call that vehicle junk, and yet that vehicle could be found lying on the road. We did not move some tanks on roads for obvious reasons.  We did not want to damage the roads and put this country to a lot of expense.  It was only where we could not use other means than roads, that certain distances were covered on the road and if one piece was found to be lying on the road, because of a burst tyre or a defective radiator or a defective hose pipe, I call it irresponsibility for any Member to come and say that that is junk.  

I want to say that I attended the commissioning and the passing out of the tanks crew.  I had invited Members of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs to come and bear witness.  Unfortunately, I think they did not get the information, because that was the time people were proceeding on recess,  but the crew's performance was excellent, visibly.  We never bought junk, I can assure you, we did move a very long way in our programme of modernising and equipping your army using the resources you granted us here and nobody should ever be worried about it.  But I can give more information to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, and there was no graft involved Sir.  

I know there were tricks of overstating prices, so that I or any body else could be enticed or intimidated to come and divulge information which could possibly be used by our enemy. I resisted that deliberately and I am not about to be intimidated into that kind of situation.  I will not supply intelligence information about this country free of charge to people who are always in contact, in touch and even by mobile telephones, with people like Kabanda and the others.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Minister for giving way.  I am definitely very impressed by the way the Minister is avoiding to give some clarifications.  But, you know this question of submitting information to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs bothers me and I was hoping that the Minister would answer the clarification sought by hon. Karuhanga.  He dodged it.  

The problem is, if we supply this information to the Committee and yet Parliament is interested, how are we going to handle the rest of the Members who are equally interested in the same information, who are equally concerned about the security of the country, equally concerned about the expenditures?  How will the Committee inform them without somehow coming to this Parliament and informing them?  Even if they have to write surely, something is going to leak out. Is there no other mechanism?  If there is not, can we not develop something that will inform everybody, so that everybody is clear and happy about the knowledge of what is happening to the money that we have got here, and the security of the country?  Because even if the Minister calls it a hose pipe breaking, buying defective equipments for the army definitely is in itself insecurity for the country.  So the Minister should be happy that Members are concerned about this.  

I am afraid,  Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister has avoided to answer what hon. Karuhanga wanted to us to know and we would like to have an answer to somehow.  How we can get around this so called tricky matters of security interest,  how do we get around it?

THE SPEAKER: Are you giving the information to the House?

MAJ. BUTIME:   There are other venues where such a matter could be debated.  You know for example in the United Kingdom there are what they call strangers in the House.  If such a matter that must be debated here in the House privately, the House is closed.  Everybody in the public gallery leaves, we sit down and we discuss that particular matter.  And it is up to the Members after that debate to go and leak it to the press, as we have always done.  But for us we shall be satisfied that it has been debated here and there were no strangers in the House and everybody took responsibility.  I thank you Sir.

MR. AWORI:   In addition to what the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs has said, I wish to take this opportunity to inform him that this kind of information he is so eager to protect and yet it is so public can be found at Portbell, it can be found at Dar-es-salaam Port, it can be found in Ukraine, it can be found in Belshazar.  Actually our enemies did not come here to get that information.  They are very well stationed in strategic position to obtain that information much more so from the source.  

I also would like to inform the hon. Minister that from my previous experience, I have handled this matter since 1971.   There are certain procedures in acquiring or procurement of equipment.  Given the internet now, information is circulated among the dealers in that kind of equipment and these dealers deal with enemies and friends alike.  This information comes to all of us almost free of charge.  It is just that we restrain ourselves from disbursing it.  We only come here to get the correct information from the Ministry that have we spent the money we were given correctly?  So in the question of clearing the gallery, you are not stopping anything at all.  If you are really in charge of security and Internal Affairs, you know how information circulates in enemy camps.

THE SPEAKER:  I think if my recollection is correct to the extent that I ruled yesterday, it is true if the manner in which you have purchased military equipment which are supposed to protect you causes insecurity, even to talk about that fact publicly also causes insecurity.  It is not that we should not discuss it.  And if you want to discuss your own security and make it known to the whole world that you are actually insecure,  then I think you are making yourself insecure.  We who are conscious about our national security when debating such matters, this is a fact which must be taken into account.  In enquiring about our security,  having gone that far, should you go and unveil the curtain and expose yourself to the next enemy?  That is really the point.

DR. OKULO EPAK:  I am seeking your guidance.  I thought that the Committee at this stage has done its work and during its work the hon. Minister had the opportunity to respond to some of the issues now presented in the report.  At the moment we are in the plenary of Parliament in which we are discussing the report of the Committee and those of us who are not Members of the Committee have been accorded the opportunity to raise questions and to make contributions to the report of the Committee within the context of the report and within the context of our concern with the Budget of the Ministry.  

I hear the hon. Minister in his response to questions raised on the Floor in Parliament saying he will be prepared to present those points to the Committee, which Committee now?  This is a Committee which has reported to us on the Ministry's 1998/99 Budget.  To which Committee is he now going to respond on this Budget? And would it be that he is going to respond before we pronounce ourselves on this report of the Committee on its Budget for this year?  I seek your guidance because this is not going to help us. If we come here and this is the opportunity for those of us who are not Members of this particular Committee to contribute to this debate, and the Minister dodges all the questions saying he is going to discuss them in the Committee, which Committee?  Could you please guide us on this?  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  There is no doubt that the Minister is taking part in this debate and he is supposed to answer questions particularly those which have arisen from the Floor.  It may well be true that he was part and parcel of the discussions at the Committee Stage and the Committee whose discussion resulted into this report.  But as I said earlier on, certain questions have come from the Floor and the Minister is in my opinion trying to respond to those.  

But I quite agree with you that unless the Minister is referring to a Committee where he thinks some of the  information which cannot be divulged in light of our security concerns,  I think this is about the time when we should be very careful.  Maybe he is talking about the National Security Committee.  Because it would appear that the Sessional Committee has presented the report, questions are coming from the Floor and the Minister is answering those questions.  That is my understanding.

MR. KAVUMA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker for your guidance.  I only want to add that there are some matters which were not covered by our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs last time we met but somehow featured in this debate.  I also want to repeat what I said yesterday that there are some areas in certain aspects of the Ministry where we have audit exercises, investigations going on, notably the Uganda Air Cargo.  And I made an undertaking that at an appropriate time when we have got all those which were not available before, we shall definitely go to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.  That is the Committee I referred to, I have no intention of usurping the powers of this House,  I only want to follow the Rules of Procedure as we agreed upon them.

Secondly,  Sir, I did not intend to avoid answering any question to the satisfaction of my hon. Friend who has now decided to go out, hon. Absolom Ongom.  I only wanted to be brief in view of the time constraint we have,  to say that there is what we call rules of procedure governing this House which have adequate provisions for the kind of proceedings I anticipated.  And that the situation will be taken care of.  

Having said that, let me say that there was also a point raised about equipment that was bought and deployed in war at a very great risk to the life of the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF.  A radar was mentioned.  I want to say Sir, that we have never in the Ministry of Defence bought such equipment nor have we ever deployed it anywhere especially where the Commander-in-Chief was commanding.  What I know is that sometime back a false report came out of one of the papers circulating in this country making a similar allegation against officials of the Ministry of Defence.  That paper was taken to court, it sought a settlement of the case and it did pay damages in compensation to the injury that it had caused by publishing a false report.  In fact it was libel committed and The Monitor paid for having published lies of the nature that were creeping into this House.  

What do I see?  You buy whatever you buy in accordance with the size of your pocket.  You may want to drive a brand new pick-up but it may not be possible for you because of the limited resources you have and yet you must travel.  I know many Ugandans in very prominent positions who are driving comfortably in vehicles that are 10 years old and above, but have been overhauled and have been tested and found to be road-worthy;  reconditioned cars, I understand that is the terminology used for them.  It does not mean that when you buy anything other than the new, that whatever you buy is junk, that it is not road-worthy, that it is not combat-worthy.  You may not be in a position to buy new helicopters, new tanks, but definitely we buy equipment that is suitable for the use we want it and equipment we can afford.  And we take precautions to make all necessary investigations to satisfy ourselves on that.  

Questions were raised -(An hon. Memmber rose-) Mr. Speaker, I wish the Member could bear with us, I wanted to make my submission and we proceed on other business of the House.  Some questions were posed and answers requested by hon. Byanyima.  She posed the question about an alleged confession of taking a bribe and asked what steps have been taken to recover the bribe.  I must say that first of all,  the Ministry of Defence when it detected that there might have been a breach of contract in the purchase of the helicopters, I hope it is not being camouflaged.  

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  The concern of the Members of this House was that second hand equipment were bought as new and paid for as new.  Now the Minister is telling us that you may buy a second hand pick-up if you cannot afford a new one.  That is fine.  When you are buying a second hand pick-up you pay the price of a second hand, you do not pay the price of a new one.  Is the Minister in order to mislead the House, Mr. Speaker?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER:  I do not know whether the contract was for brand new aircrafts.  I am not aware of that.  But I think what the Minister was talking about is, because of your pocket,  you opt for reconditioned or overhauled equipment.  And if in the agreement it is said so, then if you end up with an overhauled equipment, there is no breach of contract.  I am not clear in my mind whether the original contract was to do with brand new aircrafts and therefore I cannot determine whether the Minister is really out of order.

MR. KAVUMA:  Thank you,  Sir.  As I was about to mention, the contract was for purchase of overhauled helicopters. And the reason why we found there was a fundamental breach of that contract within the Ministry of Defence itself even before anybody could have had opportunity to know about it, was because we found the units that were delivered as first consignment were not overhauled as per the terms of the contract.  

So, it was our initiative in the Ministry that we detected the fault in the performance of the contract and we took measures to rectify the situation. Unfortunately Sir, when a study was undertaken by a Committee, it was not part of the terms of reference of that Committee that they look into the question of graft.  Because no information had been received on that.  

I am glad to inform you that the Commander-in-Chief has now directed that the entire exercise be looked at, covering all aspects including the possibility of graft.  And when I say that at an appropriate time I will come to the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, that is one of the areas that I intend to address,  after the completion of that exercise.   And following from what would have come out Sir, then appropriate action will be taken.  

A question was also posed; what is the fate of the contract?  I want to say that there was no inflation of the contract price.  I want to explain as I did explain to the Committee that there is a misconception about what was paid for in the sum of US $6.5 million.  The impression being sold around is that this was the price for helicopters only.  It is not true.  The price covered other areas including arms and ammunition, including training, including commissioning, including purchase of ground handling equipment and several other areas.  Sir, one could jump to a conclusion that US $6.5 million to buy overhauled equipment was an inflation, but this price was covering a far much wider scope than what has been talked about.

Secondly, I have also done some inquiries and they have preliminary review that actually the cost of an overhauled helicopter would be of the type we are talking about - would be US $1.45 million.  The price for a helicopter we are talking about, one unit was about US $1.5 million.  You could see that the two figures are not very much at variance.  

The other question was, what was the fate of the contract?  When we detected the breach of the contract, initially we ordered for termination of the contract.  However, after reviewing the situation taking into account the amount of time that could be spent in going before courts of law in countries other than here because of the terms in the contracts, prosecuting litigation and seeking to recover whatever money we may want to recover from the suppliers, but more importantly, taking into account the security needs of this country, the decision was taken that it may be better to enforce the performance of the contract by the suppliers in its original form to fully comply with whatever they had not complied with.   

Therefore the contract was reviewed to the extent that those units which have been delivered and found not to be overhauled, we took the responsibility to overhaul them by engaging competent people to do the job under our strict supervision, but offset the cost to be incurred against the balances we had not paid to the suppliers on that contract,  and the progress is being made in that area and in that direction.  

We also said that for the undelivered units, we will not rely on what happened last time by sending only our people from the Ministry of Defence, but in addition to sending our people, we should commission a reputable firm of consultants mutually agreed upon by us and the suppliers to supplement the efforts of our people in seeing through what they call pre-ship inspection to verify whether the work done on those units is in conformity with the contract.  We received the information recently that the units are ready for pre-shipment inspection and I intend to dispatch a team to do that job next week together with the consultants we have appointed.  That is the fate of the contract, and I can assure the country that no public funds are likely to suffer on the compliance with the measures we have put in place.   

The other question raised was, 'what have been the consequences of the non-performance of that contract in time?'  I can understand the worry of the hon. Member and this House that maybe the security of this country had been put at great jeopardy.  I want to say that when your Army plans, it plans with a clear vision of the present and the need for the future.  It may not coincide that when you buy equipment today, it has to be deployed immediately, nor does it mean that when you buy such equipment, there is no other equipment that could be utilised in the event the equipment you have purchased has not attained the level of deployment.  We have aircrafts of this nature performing very well.  All I want to say is that the problems we had have not paused a major security risk to our country at the moment due to the proper planning in the UPDF.   We always have a fall-back position in case of need,  and there  was one.  

The last question I think was that we dealt with the company which had been blacklisted.  Mr. Speaker, I want to say that the company we dealt with has never been blacklisted.  We do not have that information in spite of our thorough examination of the entire exercise.  That information could have come across in our findings.  We dealt with a company which has no taint in this regard.  

I also want to say that one hon. Member raised concern whether we bought from a motor rally company?  I think the problem was, my hon. Member the former Policeman is not very conversant with what we call the objective clause in a limited liability company, where a company registers to have capacity to perform all types of business they can think about and then they choose what they want to do at a particular moment in time.  I will take time to inform my hon. Colleague when he returns to the House to sort of erase that misconception from his mind.  
There was also a question that the Minister of Defence has not fully explained the circumstances that led to the death of one of the high ranking officers of UPDF, namely the late Jet Mwebaze.  Sir, I want to say that on behalf of Ministry of Defence, I initially came into this problem because again another lie had been published by a newspaper under a story cover that a plane full of UPDF high ranking officers had gone missing.  That was untrue.  It would have been irresponsible on my part and my Colleagues in the Ministry if we did not come to tell the world what actually happened.  If there was one officer in a totally civilian aircraft with his other friends, not members of the UPDF, not even on a UPDF mission and then you go and tell the whole world that a plane full of UPDF officers has gone missing, I think that picture had to be explained.  That is how I came into it.  

I also said that it was not true that those people died, because I had information that at the point of the crash, the people walked out of the plane alive, and as a report showed later, deaths occurred beginning from about four, five days after the incidence.  That is why I said yesterday and I repeat, I owe no apology to anybody for what I stated.  It was the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth.  
So, Sir, how do I conclude on this?  My hon. Member from Mbarara Municipality is not here.  But I want to say that in Government there is what we call very simply, division of labour.  This assignment was squarely in the hands of the Ministry of Transport and Communication.  After I had done my bit, the Ministry took it up and I want to inform my Colleague who is not here now and the others who may not know, that actually a report has been published. It is now a public document, you can go and read and educate yourselves about what happened with regard to that unfortunate incident.

Then,  a word or two about the C130.  I must express my gratitude to Members who have discussed this matter, who have also indicated that they have a lot of information.  Hon. Mukula has promised to table some of these documents.  I want also to say that my Ministry will take responsibility for the time the C130 was under direct control and supervision of my Ministry.  But there is time in between when the matter was referred to the Privatisation Unit, which was responsible for overseeing the repairs and the rest of it.  

I will come back to the scene at the time when I decide in the interest of the security of this country on behalf of Ugandans, that instead of dilly dallying with purchasers who come and say, 'we shall come tomorrow' and then they do not turn up, those who demand that they want the aircraft to be registered from Uganda, but registered elsewhere in a foreign capital before they can make their offer. I said, 'no, let us take over temporary supervision of the aircrafts, use it in our endeavours to ensure the security of this country while the privatisation process continues.' And the contract, we concluded with the firm in a mere three months contract. Nobody should have heart attack that some catastrophe is about to happen on the C130.  In fact, I think I will invite Members of Parliament who will have time to come and inspect this aircraft when it is available.  I must assure you, it is doing a very good job and it has helped this country a lot.  

As I said,  because of what has been happening around, I have already put into motion a very serious audit exercise with regard to the performance of this aircraft from the time it was acquired to date.  And again I will avail this information as a first step to our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs because of the security nature of the matter.

Concern was raised about the problems with veterans.  I want to say that Ministry of Defence shares concern about the plight our veterans are going through and it is because of this that we came to you hon. Members and requested that you give us a bit of more money on the Vote catering for the veterans.  I am glad to report that in addition to the Shs 3.5 billion which had been paid out last financial year, we have so far this financial year, paid out Shs 6.5 billion.  That makes it to a total of Shs 10 billion in that field.  This year as you remember, you approved Shs 15 billion.  We are hopeful that by the end of the financial year we shall have requisitioned, obtained and dispersed the balance on that account and this will cover the wider scope of veterans,  covering as many as those who have served this country in former Armies.  

Fortunately, whenever payments are made, the cheques are issued in the names of the beneficiary.  So, questions of misuse of the money, unless you negotiated with the beneficiary, are minimised to that extent.  I have no doubt whatsoever that this money is getting to the intended beneficiaries, but the problem is you cannot pay all of them at the same time because of obvious reasons.  I therefore, appeal to them to understand the situation - the spirit is willing, but the body is weak.
A question was also raised on the security road in the North.  I want to say that a good job is being done on that road.  I want to state categorically that not one inch of that road is being built beyond the borders of Uganda into the Sudan.  We do not have any people under the Ministry of Defence doing any work on behalf of Government of the State of Uganda in terms of building the road or any other capacity,  supervised by the Ministry of Defence within Sudan.  In fact this road is, I think, close to about ten miles from the border on our side.  But I want to say that actually the responsibility for roads and the rest of it after we have identified our security concerns, is a matter for my Colleague the Minister for Works and therefore, I will not trespass on the questions of who got the contract, who were the persons involved because that is in the province of the Ministry of Works.  

I think concern was also raised that there is some farming activity going on in the North and the impression was that that farming activity is for personal benefit to officers of UPDF.  I want to say, Sir, that it is part of our duty constitutionally to have a protective Army.  

Secondly, this House directed in very clear terms that the UPDF, the Ministry of Defence should pay more attention to the welfare of the soldiers and their families.  There was land lying idle in the North, which is Government land, all we did was to enable some UPDF soldiers and members of the families of the UPDF soldiers who are not in actual combat, to access high quality seed in terms of a loan.  We did open up some land for them so that they could plant, look after the gardens,  we allocated some acres to each one who was willing and eligible to participate in the programme, and the results were very,  very promising.  They all paid back the monies we had loaned to them just from the harvest of one season.  So, when Members look at this kind of activity, they should know we are only doing what we are supposed to do in accordance with the instructions of the Constitution and this hon. House.  

My senior Colleague, Minister of Internal Affairs has talked about the LDUs - I also did give some information about it. I only want to briefly address some other small questions. The question of rent payment.  I want to say the Ministry of Defence is not practising any sectarianism in paying rent.  It is possible that not all those who have houses rented by UPDF have received their payments, but we are making payments as and when the resources are available.  I would request hon. Okulo Epak to furnish me with the list of those people he thinks are being segregated against so that I look at it.  And I would also say, you should also give me another list of those whom we have paid from the same area.  But I will take action on receipt of the list.  

I had requested for the indulgence of Members and if my hon. Friend  -(Interruptions).

AN HON. MEMBER: I have listened very attentively to the Minister's response, but there is one area he has completely left out.  About the LDUs, we heard from the Floor, from hon. Ongom, that there are allegations that some LDUs have been deployed in the DRC.  By so keeping quiet Mr. Speaker, it seems what hon. Ongom has said is the truth.  Can we get proper clarification?  Thank you.

MR. KAVUMA:  I am glad the hon. Member realises it is not the truth because it is not our policy in the UPDF to force anybody to participate in the defence of this country.  We have not forced any LDU or any other person to come and take part in our fighting.  Your sons and daughters fight out of conviction that they have a duty to defend this country.  That allegation is totally untrue and unfounded.  But I am saying, those who remain to do other duties which are similar to those being done by the Army in terms of containing insecurity internally, Government is already making arrangements to give them the necessary legal cover and to enable them to benefit from their sacrifice.

Another question was raised whether certificates should be given to members of former Armies.  I want to say that that is part of the discharge process and in addition to those certificates they also get their dues as and when our Budget can accommodate.

About the Karuma soldiers, I think there must be an administrative problem because as far as the welfare of this Army is concerned, we have made sure that we get enough uniforms for all our soldiers.  But I am going to look at that.  Including books - in fact as I talk now, we have excess stock in our stores, but there could be an administrative problem.  I will look at that.  

As far as expenses incurred by the UPDF in containing the rebels in the DRC are concerned,  I want to assure everybody that we have not exceeded our financial provisions as agreed upon by Parliament in this Budget.  If need should arise, Mr. Speaker, I take cognizance of the fact that -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Are you prepared to take the clarification from hon. Lukyamuzi?

MR. KAVUMA: I would rather proceed, Sir.  My Friend hon. Lukyamuzi expressed worry about the soldiers he saw moving up and down through his constituency in new army uniforms with new equipment and on lorries.  I want to request hon. Lukyamuzi to pay tribute where tribute is due.  This is part of modernizing the army that is why there is new equipment, new uniforms and the rest of it.  And they are defending Uganda from the lake side where Kalangala alone has 84 Islands,  not to mention those in Mpigi and Mukono.  He should not be worried when he sees a number of soldiers going there and coming back from duty.  

This House recommended that we improve the welfare of soldiers by paying them an extra Shs 500 on their ratio allowance.  Sir, much as I wanted to do this, it was not possible because we did discover that it would need an additional Shs 9 billion to attend to that item alone.  And definitely there was no way our Budget could accommodate it while on the other hand we are trying to address the welfare of the soldiers in terms of looking after them with proper uniforms, proper equipment, further training and the rest of it.  

As regards casualties,  we have established a casualty unit where we have put programmes to cater for the sons and daughters of UPDF who have suffered disability in the course of defending this country.  

I want to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me to respond to the points raised by the hon. Members. I also want to thank the House for the support they have always given the UPDF. I want to assure you that they are more determined than ever before to continue defending this country to your full satisfaction.  

Allow me to also thank the UPDF once again for their discipline that has helped to bridge the gap between the Army and the civilian population.  I thank you very much, Sir, I thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Chairman, in light of all that has been said, I think you are not going to dwell on all those points.  I am sure you will be as brief and precise as you always are.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for this august House to proceed with deliberations when we have no quorum?  We are exactly 38 Members and I was waiting for the Minister of State for Defence to finish his contribution so that I would raise this point and give the House an appropriate time to approve this very important decision on the Ministry of Defence.  And I think, Mr. Speaker, it is not fair that we proceed in light of this very important matter involving defence and security of this country.  Mr. Speaker, are we in order to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Clerk to ascertain the matter of the quorum.  

THE SPEAKER: I have been advised that on ascertaining there is no quorum, I will therefore adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose and adjourned to Wednesday 11th February, 1999 at 2.00 pm.)
