Thursday, 15 February 1996     

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

MOTION

MR BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  When the House adjourned and the Bill was sent to the committee, the committee was mandated to report today.  However, we have met some snags; one of them is that the committee has not had the benefit of a reply from the Minister in charge of the Bill to various points raised in this House.  So, we thought that with your permission that the Minister should be allowed or given an opportunity to reply to the debate and in accordance with rule 58 of the Standing Orders.  Then the committee which, in fact, is already meeting, will continue its deliberations with now the benefit of the reply from the Minister.  

Mr Chairman, I must report that the committee has vigorously pursued its work, and I must thank Members who have attended; in fact, the attendance is very good, Mr Chairman.  I would like, however, to ask the indulgence of the House through you that the committee be allowed to continue its deliberations because we have not finished the work, the work is very great indeed.  We have not finished and we would like to be given more opportunity to finish the work after the minister has wound up.  

Mr Chairman, allow me also to appeal through you to Members who wish to present Amendments and they have not done so, to do so.  If the Amendments are not before the committee then it will be too late for you, and if you present the Amendments you should appear before the committee to defend them.  Because from the committee we shall go to the report of the committee, if it is adopted we go to the Third Reading.  So, which means much of the work is going to be done in the committee which is currently sitting.  With those words, therefore, in summary the committee has not finished its work; we intend to do it and report by this week, Thursday if possible.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, while I do support the view expressed by the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee, I am not very sure as to whether he meant that the Minister should reply now.  If that is what he means, I beg to differ, to differ in the sense that we are already busy in the committee, going through various Amendments, and if in the middle of this process the Minister now interferes with a reply we shall lose track.  I would like to propose, Mr Chairman that we continue with the committee work and when it is finished, we then can come here.  

I also want to use this opportunity to express concern about the shortage of time we have ahead of us.  The amount of work ahead of us, for we ready for elections so much, and I do not think that the time we have is enough.  We have so many months, or days, or weeks required for campaign; we have the question of preparing the registers;  all these things we do not have enough time.  I would like, therefore, to ask you to work with the Minister and see whether we can work out a method of getting ready so that we can beat the time without finding it necessary to extend our stay in this House, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to differ with hon. Tiberondwa.  I think it is very, very important that before the committee proceeds with its work, we know the reaction of the hon. Minister to the many, many views expressed in this House.  Otherwise, it will mean that every time an Amendment comes we have to wait for the Minister to respond to it individually before we proceed.  This certainly will delay the process.  So, I really support the suggestion by the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee that we allow the Minister to respond to very, very many issues which were raised here.  For example, if he concedes to some of those suggestion which were raised by hon. Members, then this will be much each for the committee, it will just adopt because the Minister is agreeable.  On issues where he disagrees it may be necessary for us to call him and explain why he does not accept the view of other Members.  

So, Mr Chairman, it is my considered opinion that it would help the committee, it would speed our process if the hon. Minister were allowed to wind up and comment on so many views that were expressed by Members before the committee proceeds its work.  I thank you, Sir.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Mr Chairman, we are aware that the time is not on our side.  The Chairman of the Sectoral Committee has already requested whoever has, or he is proposing to move an Amendment to go to his committee, present his views, have them thrashed out; my humble opinion would be that other than spending time here, the Minister should come back and look at the Amendments which will be considered again in the same committee, let us go to the committee straight and do the work; then there is no point of coming and then - he has to attend to the committee, let us go to the committee and I would request that we should not spend more time but we should just go to the committee, and if he is agreeable, let us have them there;  there is no point of winding up when we already have the Amendment on our hands, let us go and consider them there, because already the Chairman has already threatened that whoever is bringing the Amendment and he is not there in his committee to defend them, he will not come back here.  Let us go to the committee and have the issue cleared.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I think, hon. Nkalubo has made a very good suggestion except that he has forgotten that when we moved this Bill to the committee, the Minister had requested to wind up the debate.  Then we said no, let the Bill go to the committee first and when the committee has thrashed it the Minister will come here and wind up.  

Now, the point is the Minister has to wind up and then we go into the committee stage in the committee where Amendments will now be accepted and they will be put in the Bill accordingly; but he has to wind up before we bring the Amendments, and that is a normal procedure.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, I do not see why there is double work, let him wind up and then we go to the committee and move the Amendments.  I do not know why some people are afraid of the Minister winding up, but I think, the Minister has a right to wind up.  Thank you very much.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, we set ourselves rules in this House, and I think, we should appear to abide by those rules and we should, actually, do so.  Last time, Sir, what happened a Motion was moved rather prematurely, because the steps we had taken with regard to this Bill had chosen a particular mode of proceeding by this House, and we since we had opted out for that, after rejecting a Motion moved by hon. Kanyeihamba, the only procedure we had to abide with, was as laid out in rule 58 of our rules; and I will read it, Sir.  It says:  “If a Motion for the second reading of a Bill is carried, the Bill shall stand committee either forthwith or on a date to be fixed to a committee of the whole council, unless the council on Motion commits it to a Select Committee to be immediately nominated by the Chairman.”  Sir, that is the guiding rule we have to follow; last time the way the matter was referred to the committee was contrary to our rules, and I think, as an august House of this status we should abide by our rules.  Secondly, Sir, it would be most unfortunate for us to proceed to the committee without the benefit of my - and it is going to be very brief, innocent winding up.  Because, it will amount to government being condemned unheard, and nobody would want that.  

Thirdly, after the report has come from the committee our own rules do not talk about another winding up; we get the report, we adopt the report and the Bill is completed.   The whole idea was to save on time; we should abide by that -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the Minister to stand here and confuse this House by mentioning a Select Committee we have been dealing with sectoral committees.  A Select Committee is specially appointed by the Chairman, but we did not refer this one to a Select Committee.  Mr Chairman, we referred this to a sectoral committee which is already in place.  Is it in order for the Minister to confuse the two, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He can go ahead and proceed.

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, I want to complete and say we tied our hands to a particular procedure, and we should follow that procedure to the end so that business is conducted normally and to its logical conclusion.  Sir, with that I beg that I be allowed the few minutes to wind up and then we go to the committee as soon as possible.  In fact, this morning we are agreeing that we can meet even beyond the normal hours of our meeting, Sir, with a view to completing quickly and we come - because time is not on our side and it is everybody’s hope that this week we should pass this Bill.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, we tend to forget the procedure on Bill; when a Bill is introduced First Reading, Second Reading, there is a debate and at the end of that then the Minister winds up on a Bill and it is put to vote; then it is at that stage that we decide whether we could refer it to a committee or not.  That is laid down clearly; and further, Mr Chairman, since the committee has been sitting, we have been listening to various views by Members, the Mover of the Bill, Mr Chairman, in all fairness has also a right to present the views of the government on the Bill.  Mr Chairman, the committee feels that we should have the benefit of the reply by the Minister which reply contains government position on the Bill so that we are in a position to deliberate very fairly, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, now I call upon the Mover of the Bill to reply.

MR KAVUMA:  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I wish to start by thanking all the Members who contributed to the Bill who unanimously supported the Bill.  I am glad to note, Sir that there are very limited areas of apparent controversy in the Bill, and I have every confidence that as we come from the consideration of the Amendments our thinking will have been harmonised.  Sir, let me take this opportunity first of all to dispel to this hon. House and indeed to the whole country the dangerous and malicious rumour circulated in the press by some people calling themselves, National Youth Democrats or something like that, to the effect that Uganda was importing aliens from a neighbouring country in the tune of one million of human souls to come and vote with a view to rigging and election.  

Mr Chairman, I want to state very clearly that that is false, it is wrong, there is no intention whatsoever from government or from anybody using state machinery to rig any election, let alone this very first election which is going to give us a first freely elected President of this country and a Parliament elected to take on the responsibilities of a legislature.  

Mr Chairman, I must also remind everybody concerned who may be harbouring ideas of creating imaginary instances of mismanagement of election, that in the ten years this country has been led by the National Resistance Movement, the Movement has demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt its capacity to organise elections in a free and fair manner.  I do not have to mention the elections of the RCs, the expansion of this House, the election of the CA among the many that have been organised.  Sir, it would be dangerous and unthinkable for the government now to come and destroy this credibility it has built for the first time in this country by eroding that valuable reputation.  The people of Uganda, Sir, will elect their President and their MPs and other leaders indeed, freely as they wish and in accordance with the law that this House will pass.  I, therefore, wish to caution any person aspiring for leadership, including the youth, that they should refrain from making such irresponsible allegations and the youth should also refrain or watch out against possible desires by some of our archaic politicians to use them in fighting battles they are not party to.  

I also want to say a word on the issue of constituencies.  It was again reported that Kavuma son of Yovan Bugingo had demarcated the new constituencies for the forthcoming election.  Sir, I only said that Parliament or this legislature would do its duty as regards the constitution of the constituencies which are going to be followed in the forthcoming elections.  I am glad, however, to report, Sir, that all consultations have been completed and I am now in a position to move an Amendment to this Statute so that before we pass this Statute this legislature will have done its duty with regard to a number of constituencies as required by the relevant provision of the Constitution.  

Mr Chairman, allow me now to turn briefly to the question of election of women Members of Parliament.  I will start by explaining that the provisions in the Bill, Sir, regarding this matter are intended to implement the constitutional obligation of this House and the government to accord effective affirmative action to the women of this country who have been greatly marginalised by our law customs and cultural practices in the past; inspite of their invaluable services and contribution to this nation.  The constitutional base for this action, Sir, is to be found first in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy.  

With your permission, Sir, allow me to state that although I am aware these policies are not justifiable, but they have a very, very important effect on the way we manage our public affairs, and with your permission I will refer to the first objective in our Constitution, and it says:  “The following objectives and principles shall guide all organs and agencies of the state or citizens, organisations, and other bodies and persons in applying or interpreting the Constitution or any other law and in taking and implementing any policy decisions for the establishment and promotion of a just free and democratic society.”  That is the role of the national objectives and directive principles of state policy.  

Mr Chairman, allow me further to refer to objective number 15 and it says:  “The State shall recognise the significant role that women play in society.”  Sir, again with your permission, I beg to refer to Article 32 in our Constitution and it says; “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the state shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which existing against them.  Sir, Article 33.5 we have the following:  “Without prejudice to Article 32 of this Constitution, women shall have the right to affirmative action for the purposes of redressing the imbalances created by history, tradition or custom.  

Mr Chairman, that is the constitutional basis for a proposal contained in the Bill with regard to the election of the 39 women Members of Parliament who have to join the next Parliament so that Parliament becomes fully constituted.  Sir, I submit further that by necessary implication, the Constitution calls on this House to legislate for an appropriate electoral college for electing of the women members of Parliament.  I will now request hon. Members to be treated to a reminder of our Article 78 in the Constitution; and it says - I will particularly refer to article 78.3 and 4, in 3, it says: “The representatives referred to in paragraph (a) of clause 1 of this Article shall be elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage and by secrete ballot.  That is with regard to directly elected Members of Parliament to represent the single member constituencies.  Sir, in 4, it says:  “Parliament shall by law prescribe the procedure for election of representatives referred to in paragraph (b) and (c) of clause 1 of the Article.”  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, paragraph (b) deals with one woman representative for every district.  I am saying that the Constitution by necessary implication has told us that the Members to be elected for the single member constituencies shall be elected through universal adult suffrage, and it has now given the power to this House to legislate for the procedure under which the other members including the women are to be elected.  It is not worth, Sir, that there is consensus that among all the other groups which are contained in the Constitution, these will be elected by the Electoral College.  It, therefore, follows, Sir, that it defeats one’s thinking that we should discriminate against women who are part of that special groups, as regards the modalities of their election to that Parliament.  I am saying it is the spirit of this Constitution that we should work out an electoral college that we think is suitable for the election of women just as we are going to work out the suitable electoral colleges for the election of the other specially represented groups in this House.  

I do not want to go into justifying why the women should be treated the way I am arguing, they have always actively participated in all activities that are intended uplift the well being of this country including themselves; they did participate in the armed struggle, they definitely had an agenda, and to my mind politically they wanted to fight for their Ebyaffe, and their Ebyaffe in this Bill is representation by women and the journey for them to come to Parliament should be made as easy as possible.  That is the only time we can leave this place and say we have given the women of Uganda a fair deal.  I have heard arguments, Sir, that let women be elected by women alone.  That is misunderstanding the whole issue; these women representatives are not going to represent fellow women only; they will represent the women, they will represent the aged, the elderly, the children and everyone of us in the district.  So, it is our duty to participate in the way they are elected.  

I have also heard arguments being put very, very strongly that they should be elected by universal adult suffrage.  I am saying, Sir, that will be contrary to the spirit of the Constitution, but secondly, I do not think it was the intention of the Constitution to create super MPS in the form of women representatives to this House.  I am thinking about a situation where the men are going to be canvassing for votes in a county on universal adult suffrage, and then you ask a woman to canvass for votes throughout the entire district, again on universal adult suffrage.  My ambition is not to create super MPs from women but to afford them an opportunity to come as easily as possible.  

So, the spirit of the Constitution and this law I am proposing is that affirmative action in this matter should be looked at from two angles.  One, according to the women their seats in Parliament as by the Constitution and the two, make the journey simple and straight forward for the women to come into this august House for obvious reasons I have explained.  


Mr Chairman, other arguments have been made that this was Entandikwa and, therefore, they have now graduated.  I think this is to be politically, to say the least, to be unfair.  Because I think this kind of argument tends to personalise the issue of women around those who are already here. We are saying although we have 39 women who came through this gate here, there is a host of other women who have not been exposed politically to the national level, and we know they may have very, very good leadership qualities; why should we look at these 39 here and we think, since these have now graduated, then we need not now implement the constitutional obligation of affording women as a group affirmative action, I think that would be wrong in law and in principle, Sir.  

I, therefore, appeal to all the progressive forces in this House, and I know they are very many to squarely face the challenge before us as seasoned and patriotic legislators to legislate for the total emancipation of the women of this country by supporting the proposed method of election of future women members of Parliament.  This is their Ebyaffe and this House should give them.  Sir, I now turn on the question of qualifications.  Again this is a subject that has been debated and it is continuing to be debated very vigorously. Sir, I think, we need to remind ourselves, about what kind again, spirit governing the provisions we put in the Constitution with regard to this matter.  Sir, allow me with your permission to turn to Article 80 sub-article 1(c), and it says; “a person is qualified to be a Member of Parliament if that person (c) has completed a minimum formal education of Advanced level standard or its equivalent.”  

Mr Chairman, this provision is very liberal, it is so liberal that it is not saying as it should have said if it wanted to, that this passing woman or man should have successfully completed; it is saying you must produce evidence that you attained A level standard or its equivalent.  So, that must be spirit in which we look at this provision.  It is never the intention of this Constitution to restrict the gates of people who want to come and participate and compete for elective offices.  It has not been the policy of this country every since our politics changed.  Our politics is to include as many people as possible, and our policy is to put confidence in the electorate.  The electorate know who is the best representatives of their; academic excellence, Sir, does not normally or always mean that you will also be an excellent political servant of the people.  I am, therefore, appealing to Members of this House to see the wisdom in this Article and adopt a liberal interpretation and approach to the definition of what ‘A’ level should mean; to my mind it should mean what we have put in the provision. 

I am grateful ever since this Bill has been debated, a number of loopholes have been indicated and I am flexible to including improvement in that area so that at the end of the day, we are not accused of being sitting here and legislate for self preservation because we believe most of us have academically qualified levels of degrees and the rest of it.  

Sir it is my submission and again it is my appeal to this House that we should accord this requirement a very broad and liberal interpretation to allow as many people as possible to come and compete for elective positions.  If we are at any one time called upon to legislate for academic experience as we may very soon have to do or the next Parliament will do then we shall define the precise terms what this qualification should be in terms of only academic excellencies.  I am glad to confirm as my Colleague stated last time that we made exhaustive consultations, the Minister for Education was involved, the UNEB was involved, Makerere University was involved, some other institutions of higher learning were involved and the idea was to get as much information as possible in order to arm ourselves with the necessary tools to come and legislate a law that will be respected both on the political arena with a strong cult of academic input.

Mr Chairman, I now want to turn to the question of constituencies.  I did mention, Sir, that we had carried out exhaustive consultations in this area and I have ready made an amendment which I intended to introduce, but I will inform the hon. House that the gist is to recognise the status of all the constituent Assembly electoral areas as constituencies for the next Parliament. (Applause)  

There are a number of good reasons for this, Sir, as I have always said time is not on our side there isn’t that luxury of time that we can invoke now to go into a major exercise of the demarcating constituencies in this country.  We are left with a very few months to reach the end of the interim period it would be a political catastrophe to start engaging in that kind of exercise.  I will also say, Sir, that when budgeting the first aspect which also takes a lot of money was not accorder a vote unfortunately, so it would mean extra budgetary constraints on our resources which are not known to be very abundant.  

Mr Chairman, again to borrow the terminology of Article 264; we consider it as not being necessary or practical to demarcate fresh constituencies for this forth coming election.  Again, Sir, there is also danger that the moment we embark on this kind of exercise a number of our own people may misunderstand the good intentions we may have we shall be accused of trying to pick out a few Members of Parliament from where they are supposed to be campaigning and winning votes and I do not think, Sir, we need to go into this un necessary political battles at this moment on time when we are looking forward to completing this interim period in a smooth orderly and peaceful manner.  

Mr Chairman, my proposal also takes into account the fact that our electorates have already achieved a status in terms of being represented I would be the last person to come with the proposal which intends to reduce any electoral area that had qualified as a constituency from that status.  I am aware of arguments advanced that this formula is going to give us a House that is going to be to big to be managed and the rest of.  I must remind Colleagues in this House, Sir, that whereas it is true that may be, our colonial masters did not for reasons best known for themselves anticipate that we should have a kind of democracy that is popular with the rest of our people things have changed in this country, we now believe, the bigger the number of people involved in decision making the bigger the number of people you involve in discussing problems the better for this country.  

We are not going to be constrained by resources. I will remind hon. Members; recently we had two Houses almost of equal size, the NRC was on and the CA was on, you were able to see those two Houses through that long period of 16 and so months, that cannot be valid argument that this House which is going to be only one House is going to be too difficult for us to manage and in any case even if it takes a bit of - democracy has it’s price it is better to come shoot at each here in this chambers or anywhere else instead of going to shoot at each other on a battle field using hard copper and I submit that arrangement should be followed for the next Parliament, Sir. (Applause)  

Sir, people were saying that you see that kind of House is going to delay decision-making I am glad to say that, that fear has been already taken care of.  Our constitution now recognises committees of this House and Committees will help to do away with that problem.  I want to end on this, Sir, by saying that the formula I am proposing in this constituency area is going to give us a House that is equal to what the C.A was and fortunately considering that our population is now around 20 million it will result into a population quarter of around 93,000 people  which again is not a very bad idea.

Mr Chairman, there are numerous advantages to be derived from this kind of arrangement, it will enable the leaders of this country to be accommodating various shades of opinion from all sort of corners of this country, it will also caters for the different political interests that are at play in our society.  It will also afford this country an opportunity for all-important decisions to be debated and decided upon when every part of Uganda is adequately represented.  It will also, Sir, be further training ground for leaders in this country and I think we must weigh the benefits that are to be derived in that kind of train of our leaders who will serve from that experience in many other capacities of leadership in this country.  Sir, this will also fasten the rates of development, because whereas in developed countries a Member of Parliament is primarily concerned with representing the constituency alone here in our development countries or the other developed countries we have an added obligation of causing development to take place at the level of our constituency.  The smaller the place is provided there is enough inhabitants in that place the easier it becomes for any Member of Parliament to be able to effectively serve and causing real development in the constituency. 

Mr Chairman, I am aware that there was an argument here that other neighbouring countries do not have such a big House I think there was somebody who was talking of Kenya, I know Kenya has about something like 21 million the population quarter of about 111 people and with a House of 188 Member of Parliament, but, Sir, I want to say that our politics is quite different from that of our neighbours and it, therefore, justifies to have our own approach to how we manage our own affairs.  Our neighbour in Tanzania has about 23 million people in population, a population quarter is a little higher about 130 and the House is about 250 Members.  But, Sir, as we all know Tanzania has been one of the most stable areas in this region they have not gone through the political problems we have encounter here, they have not had the turmoil we have I submit, Sir, that is enough justification for us to have a bigger House so that we can attain adequately to our differences politically before we resort to extra constitutional or extra legal means of resolving conflicts.

I now want to say that I have derived a lot of use and benefit from the debates so far carried out in this House and the amendments submitted and that has caused me to improve on this text of this Bill and I am grateful to all these people who have contributed and I have come out with a list of quite a number of amendments to make so that we can attain to these areas which has been highlighted, I will mention one or two, Sir.  The question of the independence of the Secretariat of the Commission that one I have accepted to make the secretariat more detached from the Executive Arm of the Government and more closely related to the independent commission we have put in place. (Applause)  

I have also accommodated the ideas given by a number of Members that there was something lacking in this Bill, in that the Commission was not guided as to how they should reach their decisions.  I am making an amendment so that the Commission will work as a team as we expect them to work and would follow democratic principles that we are trying to put in our culture of leadership so that decisions are reached and taken first and foremost by consensus, but were consensus does not emerge then by majority of the Members present and voting. 

The other area was the area of the transfer of votes.  Sir, I must say that again I am coming out with an amendment at least for future purposes as we update the register to ensure that the transfer is going to be limited to the original provisions so that nobody shall transfer to another polling place unless he was originally qualified to be in that place in other words unless he resided there or he originated there or he works for gain in that place I am curing that apparent loophole.

Mr Chairman, there was a small one being talk about very much by Members in clause 26.2; when would somebody have authority to have two lawfully voters cards?  Yes, I will improve on this, Sir, but I think this was in anticipation, but it is possible by the majority of our people for somebody to lose the card that was originally give to him, then he would make a report as we are providing he would now get a duplicate card, then somehow he finds his other card, those cards are there and we are saying we should not be over scared that he has two cards in his own names, but for purposes of accommodation the wishes of the Members of this house I have improved that provision so that we restricted to  no person should carry more than one vote’s card.  

There was a lot of desire expressed that whatever we require to be published by the Commission should not only be gazetted, but as much as possible attempts should be made to circulate that information in a paper which circulates in that area, I have accepted to this request in most cases in most cases and an amendment will be coming to take care of that situation.  

Mr Chairman, I now want as I near the end of my very humble winding up to say something about candidates meeting.  

Sir, we are proposing joints candidate’s meeting in this statute it is our belief and very firm belief that this is the only way we can ensure that this period of campaigning shall be handled with minimum chaos in our society, we are going to have it could be even more that 1000 Members aspiring for Parliamentary seats if we do not organise them we could put our population at a risk.  

 am also fortified in the support by the fact that the last experience of the C.A if there was anything that was very popular with our population it was this arrangement, we would come together talk together and you could dismiss, dispel any allegation false you made there and then unlike the other times when people would talk a lot of bad things and you have no opportunity to be heard in order to put the record straight.  I want to appeal to hon. Members in this House to accept the proposal of joint candidates meetings, they will be organised and they will be in the spirit of the constitution in terms of our article 269; article 270; which emphasize that at least this election we are planning for is going to be held under the Movement type of Government where the political system - where election is on personal merit.  

Allow me to conclude by saying something about the sequence of elections.  Here, Sir, I will give my person experience, this matter has been the subject of a lot of discussion and my own interaction with a very, very close section of the people of this country both in urban and rural areas has indicated that our people have a feeling that since this is the first time they are going to elect to participate directly in electing their President they want to have that sorted out first, they want to have Presidential elections first -(Applause)- and their thinking is that they want to do first things first.

Secondly, Sir, I want remind hon. Members of this House, that there are a number of constitutional fixed huddles in the journey on the process of electing a President, if at the end of a day none of the Presidential candidate scores over 50 percent of that votes validly cast there must a repeat of that elections whether you like it or not because it is constitutionally required and the number of days fixed goes up to 30 days.  Again, Sir, should there be a challenge and Ugandans are not known for wanting to challenge things even if they have no good grounds to, but should there be a challenge the constitution also says, “the court of law should be allowed as many and 20 days in order to resolve the challenge” that is another huddle in terms of time.  Sir, in the law we passed a few weeks back in this august House we also said that, in the event that one of the candidates goes to heaven I will not send anyone of them to hell, all ceases to be a candidate since politics is now a joint venture between the electorates and the candidate then the electorate should be given an opportunity to see whether they want to nominated somebody else again that is another huddle that will take a bit of time.  What is a situation compared to Parliament, Sir; there is no huddle we could even elect two /three days before the expire of the interim period and even if at the end of the day you had as many as 50 or 60 petition, Parliament would still be in place and we shall be in line with any agreement with Constitutional provision.  So, Sir, I think there is a lot of good sense in what I have heard Members arguing that we should get the difficult task out first and then we can go in the simpler one.  I had a benefit of listening to a lecturer who very ably argued that in teaching in a lecture room you normally start with the small problem before you tackle the big one.  Sir, in political circles sometimes it pays to settle the bigger ones so that you are left with the smaller one and then you can complete the job. (Applause)

So, I have heard of again people saying, no, doing this is going to dwarf the election of the Parliament and the Parliament that will come before it, far from being true the status of Parliament has been defined by the constitution and nobody can dwarf it at all, all you need is to make sure that you have followed the law and the constitution.  (Interruption)

PROF. KENYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform through the Minister and this House, how Parliament should behave and we should behave.  I was present this afternoon when Mr Mulenga Joseph I think he is the elected Vice President of DP was interviewed on TV as to how we should conduct ourselves and behave towards the new constitution even if we do not agree with, I understand this interview will be shown to Uganda Television at 8.45 p.m. I would urge everyone to see and hear what he has said.

MR KAVUMA:  So, Sir, the other argument was that is you have Presidential elections before Parliamentary then there is going to be influence, but, Sir, all of us who are sitting here know that politics is largely about influencing others.  You influence them so that they can see your line of argument why are we fearing influence at this hour especially when that influence will be a guiding force in what comes as our next Parliament.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to wind up so that we can go to our Committee -(Interjection)- so, Sir, I now wish to propose - (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I thank the Minister for giving way.  Mr Chairman, that argument in a country like the United States, they went through the same arguments and Ugandans are human beings and, therefore, if we can learn from the history of other countries, Mr Chairman, I urge the Minister to know that in the United States and other European countries they hold elections consecutively.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, there is a small question that was put that, are we going to declare election days public holidays?  To my mind, Sir, I say this is not necessary we already have too many public holidays the provision we have put in the law are sufficient to take care of a situation where want employers to allow their employees to go and vote.  Sir with those few and very humble and innocent remarks I beg to move that the Bill be read the second time.  I beg to move. (Applause)

MR GWAIVU: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Chairman of the Legal and Committee, because he has said that after he has presented a report here there will be no further discussion on the Report.  But, Mr Chairman, there is an issue which has become contentious as we speak now and reading the Chairman’s -(Interruption)- very much bias and he said that the Committee will decide.  Now, what if the committee decides against the wishes of the majority of these hon. Members?  That issue, Mr Chairman, is the method of electing district women representatives to this Parliament.  I want him to clarify if an issue like this one arose and the majority do not support the Committee what will happen?

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister to clarify to me something because he mentioned something like the allegation of a million Rwandese.  Mr Chairman, we live in this country and I want all of us to be clarified on this issue, the point I am raising, Mr Chairman, is this that we do not have to have words which distasteful to each other and a point I have in mind which I want the Minister to clarify is this. How do -(Interruption)

MR MARWAS: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, to my submission that the Press has to write whatever it wants to write, but is it in order that whatever the Press has to write must be debated in this House?  Because there so many things that are written by the Press -(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, this is an issue that has been going on when you read from the Press that it is in court and it has been clarified it should not become an issue because there is no basis yet where the rumour came from, should we discuss it when it is not founded.  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, he is in order, they will explain to him, do not worry.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, the point I am trying to seek clarification on is the use of language.  Must we have distasteful language to each other, for instance, Mr Chairman, how would ‘Kabaka Mutebi’ be -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think you are out of order, you take your seat.

MR KAVUMA: I thank you, Sir, for the ruling and I was going to say, but, may be, it is now in order if Members still desire to go and have more discussion in the Committee for anyone to move a Motion that is committee - after you have put the question the Bill goes to the Committee and we go there and then.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE PALRIAMENTARY ELECTION (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr Chairman, with your permission I beg to move that this Bill be submitted to be legal and Security Committee as you had already ruled. Mr Chairman, I beg to move that it be transmitted now.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, as you have already seen there so many amendments the Committee will not be able to finish within this week, I am sure.  

MR KAVUMA: Sir, I thank you very, much, in view of the constraints we have and in view of the fact that the Committee had already started informally I think it is possible to go through these amendments and we complete with the Report to this House.  I must also say, that many of the amendment are on a restricted number of controversial areas so that as we deal with one we deal with very, very many.  So, because of the constraints we have in time I beg that you allow us to report this week.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I am very much - to the urgency of this matter, but just as we were sitting here more amendment were just being distributed and I was wondering if we have really to give due attention to these amendment whether by Thursday we could finish.  Mr Chairman, I am suggesting that the Committee sits even after here and we sit continuously on Tuesday we present our report.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, the Committee will meet continuously from today and then report on Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m. without fail  (Applause)

MR BESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I am a Member of the Legal and Security Committee and I would like to raise my observation in form of a concern.  My concern is that, this House when it established sectoral committees did not establish a procedure for them.  (Applause)

MR DAMIANO LUBEGA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  In the amended version of our Rules of Procedure; the Procedure for Sectoral Committee is there.  I requested the Clerk to the National Assembly to circulate that revised copy where the procedures are laid.  And even recently, I reminded the Chairman of the Legal and Security Committee that these procedures are there and I have a copy here, so there is no doubt of course.

MR KIIZA BESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I suggest that what hon. Damiano is talking about maybe a draft amendment to the Interim Rules of Procedure.  If these rules are available and I would be gladly corrected, then I request that they be circulated to us so that we know what to follow.  I am rising this because in the Committee you find nobody knows whether there is a requirement for quorum, nobody knows how the various amendments are going to be dealt with, which one follows the other and whether one can amend another amendment and so on and so forth; and subsequently how to report to this House.  And ultimately whether the provisions now that govern the Select Committee’s Provisions for reporting to this House also govern the provisions for the reporting to this House of a Sectoral Committee.  I would seek this to be clarified Mr Chairman, for the efficient running of the Committee’s work.

MR MWANDHA (Representative for the Disabled):  Mr Chairman, I would like to share the concern of hon. Kiiza Besigye.  I have sat in several Sectoral Committees, and I have also served on Select Committees and I have also served on Standing Committees.  Now, I find that Sectoral Committees are a bit un weld.  Today you have one set of people, the following day you have a different type of people -(interruptions)

HON. MEMBERS:  That is democracy.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, if that is democracy I just want to point out weakness.  The weakness is, that when you have done so much work and you have 50 percent of the people present who had not actually attended the previous meeting, they actually drag you back to what you had actually discussed and completed.  Mr Chairman, since we agreed last week that the Legal and Security Committee is now going to work as a Select Committee, then it is important that we must follow the Rules which govern a Select Committee.  The issues concerning quorum and  people who should be attending all the time, must be adhered to.  So that at the end of the day, we do not have people walking in and walking out of the Committee, with lack of seriousness.  So, Mr Chairman, I want to appeal to you Sir, to ensure that the Select Committee set up, must operate as a real Select Committee.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I think let us give time to the Committees to start working.  And with that we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 pm. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 February 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)


  








