Tuesday, 15 February 2005

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I wish to welcome you and to thank you for what you have been able to do the past week and yesterday.  I am glad to mention that one of our honorable members, the Minister of State for Defence, honorable Ruth Nankabirwa, gave birth to a baby girl over the weekend; the situation is okay. 

Honorable members, today in the distinguished visitors gallery we have honorable Richard Stevenson, a United Kingdom Member of Parliament and a President of the National Conservative Convention, as well as Councilor Sarah Richardson of City Westminister.  They are here to have the experience of our democratic process.  You are most welcome.  (Applause)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Since two weeks ago, we have been debating the report on the White Paper and every Member who has contributed has appealed for peace, stability and harmony in the country.  

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to raise two issues that I consider to be of serious national concern.  In yesterday’s Monitor, Sir, the lead story was “Mutale trains 800 for 2006 campaigns” and that President Museveni commissioned these members; and that the group was dressed in Army green uniform, and that the training camp is near River Ssezibwa in Luweero District.  

I was wondering, Mr Speaker, given the trend of the debate and what members have been appealing to the Nation to do, if the Leader of Government has something to comment on this development; if this is a new institution in Government, how it is funded and what its role is.  
But what is more disturbing, Mr Speaker, in today’s New Vision, “FDC to start Anti-Mutale Youth Brigade” and that the spokesperson said that the brigade armed with sticks and stones would go to counteract Mutale’s group.  This is a very dangerous development, Mr Speaker, because already now it is like we are advocating for violence long before.  I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that the Leader of Government Business informs this House on what is taking place.  

Also, Mr Speaker, in yesterday’s New Vision, page 3, there is a big headline that “Kyabazinga campaigns for Museveni”; and I am sure, Mr Speaker, you are aware of the provisions of Article 246, precisely 3(e), of the Constitution.  I imagine if the Kyabazinga had said something against the President, then the spokesperson of Government would have been the first one to remind him that traditional leaders are not supposed to engage in politics.  I have waited for this comment, I do not see any; I hope the situation, Mr Speaker, could be clarified.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honorable members, since your point of reference is the newspaper reports, I would say that you have made it on record, the Minister concerned should investigate the truthfulness of this story.  In the past, we have had problems arising from newspapers.  You very well remember some time ago I was in United Kingdom, I read in the Monitor newspaper that the Deputy Speaker had distributed dry banana leaves to people, only to come out later the newspaper apologizing about this story.  So, these stories could be true, they could not be true.  So, what I can say is to ask the Minister concerned with security, especially that some matters are of security, to investigate and make a statement on Tuesday.  

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise to compliment you as a chairman of this august House on the way you pursued the matter of live coverage of this august House.  It has produced tremendous results according to my survey; members of the public are now more interested in what is happening in this august House.  However, Mr Speaker, I also wish to make another request to you as a chairman of the Parliamentary Commission and a chairman of this august House, that the proceedings of this august House be available also on the Internet for our Ugandans in the Diaspora.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will examine that, thank you. Over the weekend I was in Nairobi dealing with the ICT for Parliaments and I complimented UNDESA and the Italian Government for the support that enabled us to have this live broadcast of our proceedings. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Mr Speaker, honorable members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2005” be read for the First Time.  



Mr Speaker, this Bill is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications duly issued by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is in compliance with the provisions of section 10 of the Budget Act, Act No.6 of 2001.  

I beg to lay the said certificate of financial implications on the Table.  Sir, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT)  BILL, 2005

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament, the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee, to consider the same.  But I think it is appropriate that I make some statement in respect of this particular business, and also to detail out the procedure that we are going to follow.

Honourable members, today the constitution review process, which commenced in 2001 when the Constitutional Review Commission commonly known as the Sempebwa Commission was set up, has now reached a very important stage; a stage where we are concretizing the findings and recommendations resulting from the Commission, the White Paper, and our debates here.  

It is today that we are exercising the mandate given to us by the Constitution to make laws because this is the law over which we have the mandate to deal with; and today the Bill has been presented.  It is the key, the legal one, that we are going to use to open the Constitution, see what we clean out and what we leave; and therefore we are also exercising our constitutional mandate to review and amend the Constitution.

It is a very important mandate and I for one have no doubt about your ability, your resolve to handle the work; and I have no doubt that in handling this work, you will take national interests forefront other than personal interests. It is an important work that we need to handle as a team.  We need to handle this as a team, we need the goodwill of each of you to be able to successfully handle the work; we need to be considerate.  

Before the bringing of this law, I have heard in media and elsewhere people trying to grade the constitution review in saying “this is important, this is not important.”  I would advise that if we are to get the goodwill of everybody, consider the various views, listen to them, assess them, accept them on principle and reject them on principle.  

The question of being selective will not help us to work as a team.  But having heard you during the debate, I have no doubt that you have resolved to work as a team and to respect each other.  This should continue, it should not be a question of grouping yourself in this camp and the other camp, because if you do that then there may be a bigger camp and a small camp and then you lose it, when actually a small camp may also have good ideas that would help to shape the destiny of Uganda.  

Now, this brings me to the procedure, because one member or two today, I think after having received a copy of the Bill, came to me and said, “Will this Bill not cause a problem?”  I think their problem was that the Constitution groups the kind of amendments in three groups.  There are those amendments, which are simply passed by Parliament, and these amendments can even be passed in an hour or in a day; and there are other amendments, which are effected by Parliament plus a referendum, which completes the process in this Constitution.  These are Articles falling under Article 259.  

There are other amendments, which we pass, but the amendment is only completed when there is a ratification by the District Council; and the procedures are a bit different, for instance, the Second Reading and Third Reading must be spaced by 14 days without going to the Third Reading.  

Somebody was asking, “Will this not complicate the handling of this matter?”  I want to assure you that this is not a problem. We shall handle the amendments of the Constitution, the review of the Constitution, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution dealing with the amendment, namely Chapter 18; and we shall also follow our Rules of Procedure. 

Those amendments that can be made singularly by Parliament and can be effected in one day, for them to be effective they will have to wait for us to comply with a procedure outlined in Article 259, and it is no harm for them waiting.  So, the question of these disturbing us, I do not see any problem and I know you know what to do with these amendments.  We shall follow our Rules of Procedure, which are very well known to you.  

I understand there is a motion to make some adjustments in the procedure. This will be handled and once it comes out, our Rules of Procedure will be known.  But as I indicated earlier, I will personally prefer that if you have any amendment on our Rules of Procedure, you effect it now rather than when the actual process has started then you start changing the procedure. I would not really – please help me so that these rules, if you want to amend them, you amend them now.  I would not like to invoke my discretion - many times I may - but I would like to abide with the rules if the rules are there.  Should they not be there, then I will see what to do. 

Now, you know that according to our Rules of Procedure you members are free to bring amendments to amend either the Bill itself or the Constitution as the case may be.  But I would advise that according to our Rules of Procedure, before you give a notice to move that kind of amendment, you should have taken the amendment to the committee so that the committee discusses it with you, and when they make the report, they report on it.  I will not want amendments to come on the Floor, which have not been considered by the committee.  

So, I want to appeal to you that should you have anything to do with this Bill by way of amendment, please go to your committee, present the same. Should the committee refuse to accept your amendment, you will be free to bring it before us.  This message also goes to other stakeholders who are not Members of Parliament, who will not be able to come here to present their amendments; they are advised also to go to the committee to have their input in the matter.  

The Constitution does not belong to us; it is true we have the mandate, but we are doing it on behalf of the people, and therefore the people should be listened to.  But whatever decision you make, you should own it.  You will not say because the public pressurized me or this one pressurized me, you should be able to own your decision. So, you should be careful about the decision you take. 

I also want to explain that the Bill will go through these stages; the First Reading, which has been done today, and the Second Reading after a general debate, which must be carried by two thirds majority of Members of Parliament; and should it fail to be carried by two thirds majority, it means it will not be passed, and therefore we shall be standing with that Bill based on the First Reading and not on Second Reading.  

According to our Rules of Procedure, I think Rule 53(3), you will see that if that happens, if something is rejected, you cannot reopen it in the same Session, you have to wait for another Session unless there is a motion to rescind the rejection; this you should be aware of. And you know we are amending this Constitution because of other programmes we have transiting from Movement to this and the other, and we have very little time within which to carry out this exercise because we expect elections next year.  

So, honorable members, I appeal to you that you dedicate your time, you reschedule your other activities so that time is created for us to handle the work before us in good time.

There is another stage through which the process will go, which I also want to make clear, that is the committee Stage when the Bill will be considered by the committee of the whole House.  The procedure there is different from the one stated in the Constitution.  The Constitution was concerned with Second Reading and Third Reading and it gave the numbers that are required to pass it.  

But when the Bill comes to the committee Stage, the Rules that will govern us will be our Rules of Procedure; and the decisions in the committee Stage will be carried by a simple majority provided the quorum is there - these are our Rules.  I want to make them clear so that people do not say these things were hidden.  Should anybody have an alternative, or if he thinks this is wrong, let him point it out in good time so that we can address it.

Hon. Members, I thank you for listening to me, but we shall be talking about these procedures from time to time.  Thank you very much. (Applause) 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your elaborate explanation on the procedure on how to handle the amendments.  However, Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on two issues: one, the pre-eminence of these amendments to any other legislative matters that might arise.  

For instance, should I consider to bring to the Floor of the Parliament a Private Member’s Bill to effect a change in law on a matter, which might appear or which is appearing in the amendments?  Will I be compelled to wait until amendments are finished and then I can bring up the Private Member’s Bill, or I do it and when we come to that amendment, we handle it?

Two, Mr Speaker, in the past two days when we were considering the White Paper, we have heard from the Front Bench, and specifically from the Leader of Government Business, saying “that item is no longer there, this item the Cabinet has dropped it, this one, do not consider it.”  How conclusive legislatively is that statement?  I may be unfair to you, Mr Speaker, by seeking guidance on a matter pronounced by the Executive.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, if the Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business, says, “We have abandoned this issue”, we have confidence in him, he will stand by that word; and when the Minister goes to the Committee, he will withdraw that particular provision. I have no doubt about that.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, let me beginning by thanking you for recognizing the presence of a fellow conservative from the House of Commons.  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Is your Conservative Paryt registered?  (Laughter)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance on two issues; one, Mr Speaker, following your articulate presentation in terms of guidance on a matter of public importance, do you not think there is also need, Sir, for some form of roadmap to be worked out to let the people we represent know how we deal with these amendments so that they are not in the dark in terms of time frame?  That is number one.

Number two, far from what honourable Aggrey Awori has stated in regard to the prospective amendments within the framework of this Bill, there is also another area, Mr Speaker - and I did make a comment about it in the past and you said I would see you in your office, but I think it is better for us to share your guidance. I do intend, for example, to forward several amendments on the Environmental Chapter.  How do I go about it so that I know what to do ahead of time?

THE SPEAKER: You draft your proposed motion or amendment and you send it, and you go to justify it before the Committee.  If they accept it, your work will have been done; if they reject it you can repeat it here and say, “I took it to the Committee, the Committee did not accept, but I want to bring it forward to the Plenary.”  We shall consider it.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The first guidance I was seeking.

THE SPEAKER: Which one?

MR LUKYAMUZI: The roadmap so that the people we represent know –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, the roadmap, honourable members, again I have heard many statements in newspapers about Parliament having not complied with the roadmap.  I think these were unfair accusations against Parliament. There have been two stages; one was the stage when the White Paper was brought here.  That was an indication that the Executive wanted to embark on a review of the Constitution.  But it is only today that this work of the review is now in our hands; it is no longer in the hands of the Executive.  The Executive have given us the Bill, we are going to handle it as a working document, reconstruct it if you so wish together with them as Members of Parliament. It is from today that we can gauge the magnitude of the work and therefore draw the kind of logical roadmap you are going to follow.  

We know that after amending the Constitution, it is only then that we shall be able to embark on other supporting laws like the Presidential elections, Parliamentary elections and Local Government elections; we cannot deal with them now before the Constitution is known.  The Constitution must be amended before because they must be pegged on the Constitution, otherwise we will be speculating.  I think we shall be able to pronounce what kind of roadmap we expect to transit us to the next stage.  Yes, we shall do that.

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your Communication from the Chair; team work, considerate, national interest for anything else, rescheduling of our activities and dedicating our time.  You have rightly pointed out that there is little time to do this work and other subsequent pieces of work.  Mr Speaker, I know you are also a Member of Parliament for Bukoto Central, this is a very –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is my base.

CAPT. GUMA: That is an important base. You would never have been a Speaker if you were not sent here by the people of Bukoto Central. This rescheduling of our activities and dedicating our time, in my view, is likely to be very tricky. And if you face occasional quorum problems on the Floor of this House, I would want to place it on record that the country, fellow Ugandans, should not misunderstand us that we are irresponsible people because we have other concurrent activities from many Bukoto Centrals. 

I can assure you that those of us who want to work extremely hard to return here in July 2006, you will be seeing little of us here. And if you are also to return from Bukoto Central, you need also to continue, “throwing a leg” there. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, whereas you are planning for your future of coming back here, at the same time you have a duty to carry out; a duty that brought you here in this current mandate. So, I am really appealing to you, do that for one day or so. It should not be that you are in Bukoto Central everyday whereas the people of Bukoto Central sent you here to do national work. That is the appeal I am making to you. 

I know a number of activities of honorable members, but I am appealing to you, please, they are going to accuse us more that we are delaying the process and we are doing this and the other; or that we do not want that. Let us try to do our best. We may face problems in future but when we do, we shall try to address the problems and suggest solutions.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was really appealing to you that it would be better for us to have a compromise, both the Executive and Parliament. All of us should know that there could be an additional day to the normal Parliamentary days of Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. We could have a compromise and agree that on Monday we can sit and then Friday people go to their constituencies. Or we could agree that we sit morning of Friday and then Friday evening people go and come back on Monday. I think there should be an agreed position so that all of us are at least agreeable and can follow the timetable. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER. Well, I do not want to pre-empt the recommendation of the Rules Committee, which is handling this matter. I certainly agree that we have to compromise, to strike a balance so that the fears of hon. Guma Gumisiriza are also catered for. We could maybe start at 10.00 a.m. Tuesday to Thursday. If we start at 10.00 a.m., we shall create some 12 extra hours. That may plug the gap. These are ideas but definitely the Committee on Rules is considering this and when the report comes we shall consider the options.  

STATEMENT BY THE LANGO PARLIAMENTARY GROUP

3.06
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to make this statement on behalf of Lango Parliamentary Group, and indeed on behalf of all the people of Lango on the Barlonyo massacre memorial service.

On the 21st of February last year, the world woke up to hear of the worst killing ever to have taken place in the long forgotten war in the North.  Initially the Government put the number of those killed at 80 persons only. It is now officially accepted that at least 300 persons were brutally killed from a camp of some 5,000 persons who were poorly protected by 50 newly trained and inexperienced Amuka boys - Amuka boys is the UPDF auxiliary local force. 

After protracted handling of the issues related to the massacre, the Government later took responsibility and gave the remains a decent burial in a national function, which was presided over by none other than His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. The Government also promised to build a vocational school in memory of the victims, but construction has not yet commenced. It was the Barlonyo massacre that opened the eyes of the country and the rest of the world to the serious insecurity Lango was facing. Many previous killings had gone unnoticed. 

The people of Lango, through their political, religious and cultural leaders, met recently and resolved to hold Barlonyo massacre memorial service’s first anniversary on Monday 21st February 2005, that is this coming Monday, with the following objectives: 

i. To pray generally for peace, unity and reconciliation.

ii. To pray for the victims of the Barlonyo massacre and to hasten the healing process.

iii. To pray generally for all the victims of insecurity, rebellion and cattle rustling.

iv. To launch the annual memorial prayers in Lango for victims of war.  

There are a number of lessons to learn from the Barlonyo massacre, which include: 

i. To do everything to end the war immediately and in order to realise permanent peace.

ii. To ensure that those condemned to camps are protected and provided with necessities of life.

iii. To extend special assistance to the victims of insecurity, especially in the areas of education and income generation. These victims of insecurity are helpless now. They have no money to look after themselves and their families. They cannot pay school fees and so on, and these are extreme victims of insecurity.  

We are grateful to his His Excellency the Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, for accepting to officiate at the function. You are all invited to attend. Barlonyo shall never die; Barlonyo shall never be forgotten. From the graves of Barlonyo great things shall come and wipe away our tears.  

Mr Speaker, this is just an addition, which is not in contradiction to the main substance. Since yesterday we have been in the state of Valentines. Let me conclude by saying that in addition to His Excellency the Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, who has accepted to officiate at the function, I am also inviting all Members of Parliament who can come for this function to attend, and indeed all the people of Uganda.  

In memory of Barlonyo and indeed of all who have died as a result of insecurity, I beg you that we stand up and pay our respect in one minute’s silence.  

THE SPEAKER: Let it be.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honorable members, I forgot to mention our visitors, they are in public gallery. They are students from Mandela College, Kawaala, Lubaga North constituency of hon. Tom Kayongo. You are welcome. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TOURISM (Mr Akaki Ayumu): Mr Speaker and honorable members, I rise to make a statement on the re-occurrence of Anthrax in Queen Elizabeth National Park. 

My ministry first made a statement on this subject in September 2004, informing the House of the outbreak of an unusual epidemic leading to deaths, especially of the hippopotamuses and buffalos, and highlighting measures that had been taken by government to contain the situation. Following the confirmation that the deaths were unusual, my ministry immediately established a national task force and a multi-professionally composed force with specific terms of reference as hereunder: 

1. To undertake further investigations to establish the exact cause of deaths in hippopotamuses and some other animal species, 

2. To professionally handle and dispose of the carcasses, 

3. To share and disseminate information as necessary, and

4. Co-ordinate and manage the epidemic to its logical conclusion, including instituting a surveillance and disease monitoring mechanism.  

The task force team comprised the following institutions as the key stakeholders to the problem at hand then:

1. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries with the Commissioner, Animal Health and Epidemiology as the chairman;

2. The Ministry of Trade, Tourism and Uganda Wildlife Authority as secretary;

3. The Prime Minister’s Office, Department of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, member;

4. The Ministry of Internal Affairs and Government Chemist, member; 

5. The Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, including NEMA, member; 

6. The Ministry of Works, member; 

7. The Makerere University faculty of Veterinary medicine, member; and 

8. The Local Government of Bushenyi and Kasese Districts.  

On the 25 October 2004, the cause of death was confirmed as Anthrax. During the aforementioned outbreak of 2004, we lost up to 250 hippopotamuses. This is about seven percent of the total hippopotamuses population in the park - you might have to correct your statement there. It should read, “seven percent of the total population of hippopotamuses in the park”.  

The management of the Uganda Wildlife Authority, in close collaboration with the task force, worked hard to ensure that dead hippopotamuses were properly and safely disposed of through burning and burying. This also helped to ensure that further spread of the disease was curtailed.  

There was concerted public sensitisation about the disease, and vaccines were procured and administered to domestic animals around Queen Elizabeth National Park. By the end of November 2004, the animals had virtually stopped dying from this epidemic. The equipment borrowed to help with burial of the animals from SBI, a construction company, and from the Ministry of Works, were released with the hope that the disease had indeed been brought under complete control. Samples collected from the dead animals and from the soils and water for further analysis and investigation so far show that the water is not infested with the bacteria.  

There has, however, been a reoccurrence of the disease. The month of January up to 9th February 2005 was generally hot and dry with total rainfall amounting to only 26.6 millimeters in January and an average of 0.8 millimeters per day. The mean maximum temperature recorded was 30.6 degrees Celsius, while the mean minimum temperature was 18.1 degrees Celsius. The drought resulted into extreme lack of pasture for the animals and existing water holes, which were hitherto widely scattered in the protected area all dried up, forcing the animals to travel long distances either to Kazinga Channel or to the main Lakes of George and Edward for water.

From the 8th of January 2005, the protected area management started registering cases of animals dying again. The first case was recorded in Kahendero and later this progressed to other areas, mainly the Kazinga Channel, Kasenyi and Kisenyi areas. Thus from the 8th of January this year up to late last week, a total of 37 hippopotamuses had died in these areas and others such as the Lion’s Bay. 

From the 12 January 2005, a total of five buffalos had died in Kazinga Channel as well.  The highest mortality recorded in the month of January was five hippopotamuses in a day while in the month of February the highest recorded were four. 

The mean daily hippopotamuses mortality in the month of January was, therefore, at 0.7 hippopotamuses.  The death of hippopotamuses occurs in different locations between the Lake George where –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, what is 0.7 of a hippopotamus?

MR AKAKI AYUMU: Sir, this a mean, that means that once you have counted all the number of days and the number of animals we have lost and you wanted to consider the rate at which they are dying, one of the methods we use is the mean. This means that when you divide a number of hippopotamuses to the number of days, we are losing just one hippopotamus per day.  

The death of hippopotamuses occurs in different locations between the Lake George and where Kazinga Channel enters the Lake Edward.  However, of the recorded hippopotamuses’ deaths since 1 January 2005, three hippopotamuses were known to have died of other causes, including fighting.  

Since its re-occurrence in January this year, the average daily death rate of hippopotamuses has reduced from 0.7 in January to 0.5 in February so far.  This, therefore, means that for every two days we are losing a hippopotamus.

Management took these measures: 

The carcasses are being disposed off by burning on sight for the case of other species other than the hippopotamuses and by burying under lime for the case of hippopotamuses.  

Samples are taken for later investigations on virtually a daily basis.  

The burial sites are being decontaminated using jik and lime at the moment, but we will be soon using the contamination using 10 per cent formaldehyde once the spray pump is on site.  This will be done periodically to render the place safe from AV concentration of spores. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the issue of safety of the tourists is of concern.  This can be looked at in two ways. 

The first one is the health aspect. Anthrax attacks human beings through ingestion or through close contact with animal carcass when someone has a broken skin.  

Tourists visiting Queen Elizabeth National Park do not have to drink unboiled water from the lakes and that Channel.  

The bacteria cannot survive in temperatures of above 70 degrees Celsius. 

They also do not have to get into close proximity with the dead animals, in this way there is no likelihood that they would be in any danger from anthrax.  

The second concern is seeing dead animals floating on water; this can be nauseating and saddening.  As already explained, Mr Speaker, we have put up a mechanism to ensure that dead animals are disposed of in as proper manner as soon as possible.  

Therefore, tourists visiting Queen Elizabeth National Park will not be exposed to these unsightly scenes and they are virtually no dangers of ingesting the bacteria.  

Awareness shall continue among the communities surrounding the Park, and contact between livestock and wildlife should particularly be strictly limited. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the climate and weather conditions within Mweya Peninsula, through the royal circuit, extending to Kahendero and Kasenyi in Kasese District are usually characterized by hot dry temperatures and low rainfall with annual rate totals as low as 500 millimetres.  The dry seasons are sometimes quite severe and animals have to move to the Channel for watering. In extreme cases as in case of this year, such climatic and weather conditions result in animal deaths.  

It must be noted though that a natural occurring bacteria in soil causes anthrax.  The bacteria are most often dormant and can live for over 60 years in soil in the form of spores.  

Changing weather conditions, particularly dry weather, is usually conducive for infections when animals graze very low grass ingesting the spores in the soil.  

During the last dry season across Africa, for example, anthrax claimed up to 750 buffalos, several hippopotamuses and elephants in Botswana, and a large number of hippopotamuses in Zimbabwe and Mozambique.  Similar action as in our case was also undertaken.  

In the last 40 years in Uganda, anthrax is believed to have killed hippopotamuses in tens for five times in Queen Elizabeth National Park alone.  This case being reported, however, has been the most severe outbreak and investigations continue.  

I thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I sit down I want to appeal to honourable Members that I have been given an opportunity to explain a little bit further on the issue of the tsetse flies in the National Parks, and on Tuesday I will be coming with an explanation, so we might want to devote this time only for the anthrax today.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister.  Now, honourable members, this statement has been made we leave it in the hands of the committee, both of Trade and Agriculture, to monitor?  Do we have really to debate?  We leave it to the Committee to monitor and make periodical reports to us so that we can handle another matter.

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, there are some issues, which are inaccurate, we wanted the Minister to clarify.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

3.15
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  Honourable Minister, I thank you for this report.  You are right to say that the bacteria, which cause anthrax can die at 70 degrees Celsius.  But in actual fact, bacteria in water is not the problem, it is the bacteria in soil because the bacteria can - and this bacteria form what we call spores; so they form some sort of capsule or some sort of protective casing where they sit and live for up to 60 years.  

Mr Minister, what measures are you taking to ensure that - and by the way when an animal is sick with anthrax it oozes - it sends out all the openings actually - it has diarrhoea, it has a running mouth, it has bleeding from the nose and so forth.  So, wherever it passes, it goes on putting anthrax in the soil.  

Your concern should be the anthrax in the soil where tourists might be sitting or playing or what have you, because if you get those spores they will enter the skin and you can get the anthrax. So, what measures are you putting in place to ensure that the anthrax in the soil or the areas where people go are protected and disinfected from potential danger of anthrax spores?  I thank you

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Mr Speaker.  The hon. Minister has indicated that one of the causes is because the animals eat grass very low on the ground; and in the normal farming when you have overstocking, the animals finish the grass and eat grass close to the soil, in which case you get infestations of worms.  

For the case of wild animals, I happen to have been in Kasese, and I observed one time there are so many hippopotamuses; you have got a lot of wild animals.  

Don’t you think we have cases of over stocking?  If, yes, are there any measures of- for example, thinking of providing the population with game meat, you get money from meat and you control the stock so that this- because the stocking rate is known- so that you keep these Parks with the right stocking rate to avoid overgrazing.  I thank you.

3.25
MRS LOYCE BWAMBALE (Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the Minister for bringing this statement, although in my opinion it is overdue.  I wanted some clarification from the Minister before the statement is sent to the Committee of Trade and other relevant Committees, where I am a member. 

I will do more contribution there.  But at this material time, I wanted the hon. Minister to explain to us whether he has taken precautions because the waters where the hippos live are at the border.  So, there is a cross-border effect; Lake Edward, one side exist in Uganda and another side in Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and I do not see any –(Interruption)

DR KAPKWOMU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  The information I wanted to give was a bit of a scientific matter.  There is what we call anthrax districts in Uganda, that indicates that there are particular areas where anthrax is so prevalent; and therefore, these are areas, which should be marked by the Minister.  

Besides that, from my personal practical view, it is more common at the beginning of the main rainy season that anthrax really takes place.  So, it can be taken as a precaution.  When did it happen, last year, at what time of the year and season so that we take a precaution in future?  I thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much for that information, and it is obvious that Kasese District, Bushenyi and perhaps Rukungiri are likely to be in there.  So, honourable minister, can we get more information about districts which are prone; and can you take interest in knowing which other areas of the DRC are likely to be affected so that we could see a joint action in trying to control disease, which does not know borders.

Secondly, I would like to know whether there are any human beings that have been reported to have suffered or been victims of the anthrax.  This is important because hippopotamus meat is a delicacy in that area - yes, in Bunyaruguru, in Kasese and other areas - its smoked meat which very is delicious, so there is temptation for people to eat it; that is the honest truth.  

So, I would like to thank the Ministry for a timely action to have effectively buried the carcasses of these hippopotamuses, and more awareness and sensitisation should be done.  But my point is have we done enough clinical survey to ascertain that people going up Bunyaruguru, going up the mountains, actually are not carrying this up the mountains also to the local animals?

MR OGOLA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to be given is that, that area, Lake George and Edward in Kazinga Channel, I think on the other side it is shared by our neighbours, the DRC; are these deaths of animals also occurring on the other side since the water is the same, and if not, why do we seem to have the monopoly of these deaths and not our neighbours, and what concern for that matter is our neighbour taking on the other side to ensure that the same danger does not arise on them?

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much for the information.  I am sure it will be useful because such initiative has assisted other programmes in other ministries. For example, honourable minister, when we are carrying on national or international immunization for Kasese District, and Bundibugyo I bet, we normally make sure that there are enough vaccines and a collaborative programme so that our brothers and sisters on the other side do not fail to immunize their children and continue to infect us.  

The same programmes and strategies are deployed when there is cholera.  Therefore, honourable minister, can you take initiative to ensure that there is a similar collaborative programme and effort so that we can effectively contain this problem.

Finally, it is a pity I did not know this thing was coming here because last week I read in the newspaper, and the Chairperson of the Committee of Trade is my witness because I called him and showed him the newspaper.  

There was a certain Veterinary doctor, whose names I cannot recall now, but I will avail them to the Committee and I will avail the cutting to the Committee, who claims that he pointed out when some hippopotamuses died earlier, that anthrax was already penetrating the hippopotamuses in that Kazinga Channel region, and the reward he got for his researched and academic information was a transfer to a different department, which was not related at all –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Actually, hon. Member, thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I wanted to give my Colleague is that the doctor, who actually blew the whistle, is called Dr Okori, that is the name.  After raising that issue, the doctor was transferred to a less relevant department; in fact it is said that he was actually demoted and he is quite uncomfortable with that.

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, honourable member, for the information. I am sure the honourable Minister –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: My problem is, are we debating this statement or we intend to take it to the Committee to examine it?  I thought there were brief questions or clarifications, but conclude please.

MRS BWAMBALE: Mr Speaker, I am sorry, I was seeking clarification because I need to clear my mind so that when we are debating this statement in the committee, we are recommending from a point of knowledge and having the relevant information that will assist the committee.  

So, I would like when the Minister appears to the committee to explain to us these allegations that we have put on the Floor of the House concerning Dr Okori, a Veterinary Doctor, whose concerns were not appropriately addressed. Otherwise, we are very sad to have this disease; we equate it to the disaster of ADF. 

You know, this is another aspect, which is causing further poverty because the tourists will soon respond according to how they perceive the situation, and that can be bad for us in the area.  Thank you very much.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I stand on a point of clarification from the Leader of Government Business.  

The other year, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development recommended to Government to put related departments or sectors in one Ministry and offer associated services under one control for efficiency and control.  

Mr Speaker, what is happening now and what happened yesterday in this House is that we had contradictory statements from different ministries serving under one Government for one reason. 

The Ministry of Tourism and Trade is in charge of looking after animals, and Ministry of Agriculture is in charge of veterinary services, which deal with livestock.  But the diseases that spread in wild animals crosscut with domestic animals and human beings.  What you see now is not a surprise because previously these animals were under Ministry of Veterinary Services and I think with Marine - life in water.  

Mr speaker, the clarification I am asking is, why is it reluctant because it is becoming increasingly expensive for Government?  Yesterday we had sleeping sickness spreading from Busoga to the neighbouring districts, and now we are seeing the re-occurrence of anthrax.  Why can’t Government move forward and put these related services together for efficiency and effective control?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I have just three concerns. I am concerned about the Minister’s method used in disposing of this problem, the environmental calamities involved.  

For example, what was the justification of the application of jik and lime? Is the Minister aware that it is now an offence for smells of that kind to be left at large? 

Secondly, it is in regard to the prevention of this calamity, honourable Minister.  You have proposed that the contact between livestock and wildlife should be strictly limited.  How can you guarantee in the situation where you have scenarios like Lake Mburo National Park, where cattle moves at large along with wildlife?
  
Finally, you have said that by the end of November 2004, the animals had virtually stopped dying from the epidemic.  What mitigating measures did you use to arrive at that conclusion? 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, do you expect the Minister to answer all these questions in this Session?  Why don’t you call him in a Committee sitting and ask these questions?  He will come with the technical staff so that he is helped to answer these questions.  

It is better that way rather than trying to test him whether he is a technical person; he is not.  Anyway, the question has been recorded, when the committee is handling this matter somebody will come to answer those questions. 

3.44
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora county, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, particularly we would like to thank you for at least allowing some clarifications to be sought from this statement, the reason being that anthrax is such a dreaded parachute and zoonotic condition; it attacks both animals and man.  

This reminds me of a clarification my honourable sister, Mrs Loyce Bwambale, sought, whether there have been no human deaths as a result of the anthrax outbreak.  

I remember when the Minister first Tabled a statement last October, there was a report of two deaths in Bushenyi, which was not being attributed (An honourable member rose_)- let me complete first then I will take the information - which according to the Minister was really not attributed to the outbreak of anthrax.  

I would like to caution everybody that, let us not take anthrax lightly, let us not gloss over it.  Honourable Minister, even if you talk about 0.5 deaths as a mean daily mortality average, really let us not gloss over this matter; a total 250 hippopotamuses dying from October last year to-date is not a simple matter to joke about.  

We are talking about death of hippopotamuses, may be it is because the hippopotamuses are large enough to be seen; there are a number of other species, which I am sure are perishing out there unnoticed. 

In fact, as my honourable Colleague, Dr Johnson Nkuuhe, put it, these animals once infected, as they move they just spread the bacterium wherever they pass because all the natural openings of the body are discharge points.  

I would like to remind everybody that actually with anthrax the blood never clots, it oozes through all natural openings of the body, and the blood is black and does not clot.  

When it dies, it does not get what they call a rigor mortis, the muscles remain flaccid; there is no stiffening of the muscles. Everybody is cautioned not to go anywhere near to a carcass of an animal, which has died of anthrax.  

Now, Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the Ministry- first of all, the report shows that we are doing fire brigade works, so to say; vaccines were procured after a problem had broken out.  There is need for us to be proactive.  

We do not know, even after procurement of vaccines, how many domestic animals may have been handled since this problem broke out? You may be talking about procuring hundreds of doses and yet we have thousands of animals.  So, I think there is need for us to be very cautious and proactive in handling this issue.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, a concern raised by my honourable colleague, Maj. Bright Rwamirama, on having to put relevant departments under one umbrella is a long overdue issue. Veterinary surgeons from all over the country have petitioned this Parliament, and their petition is already in the Speaker’s office and I think in the Clerk’s office too. I hope that some time, either this week or early next week, the petition will be put on the Order Paper and we try to see how to help this department from suffering further losses. I would not like to pre-empt the contents of the petition, I think details will come as and when the petition will be tabled. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and the Minister for the report, though I am not very much satisfied with it. I am seeing some sort of lack of seriousness on the side of the ministry, especially on the management of the carcasses and disposal areas.

Mr Speaker, the best method would have been to use 10 percent formaldehyde, but you hear that the ministry is still looking for the pumps to carry on the back.  Mr Speaker, the pumps they are referring to are those made by Mulwana down here, which cost less than Uganda Shs 200,000. But they are using jik from the trading center of Kasenyi, whereas the pumps are around and the most effective; it is to use 10 percent formaldehyde. 

Really, Mr Minister, how serious is your ministry if you can fail even to have back pumps to spray formaldehyde because it is liquid and it penetrates the soil than using your jik, which you are mixing in water and lime - I do not know where you are getting lime from, whether from Utura - just a simple method, and you are saying that the pumps are still on the way coming, when they reach on the site we shall apply 10 percent formaldehyde! 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Just a question and a concern, one, I would like to know from the Minister if his ministry has the capacity to handle cases of wild animal diseases. Don’t you think, Mr Minister, it is time for you to hand this responsibility to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I believe there are professionals in that the ministry who have the capacity to handle such occurrences of diseases?  
  
The other concern I want to raise, and this arises from the report of the Minister, is that he seems to consider tourists more important than the local community. Understandably, he is the Minister in charge of tourism, but I think it is important for us to think about the local community seriously as well. By the Minister saying tourists visiting Queen Elizabeth National Park do not have to drink un-boiled water without addressing himself to the local communities, he is really putting the tourists above our own people. I would like to know from the Minister, considering what he said in his statement about the manner in which anthrax attacks human beings, how Government has tried to ensure that our local people avoid getting in contact with these carcasses.  

I do know from experience, having visited the Park and the surrounding areas that people living around Kazinga Channel actually consume water from the Channel. They bathe in that Channel and are therefore a vulnerable population. So, Mr Minister, even as you think about those tourists who should drink boiled water, are you telling our people that they also need to boil water?  How are you managing that situation? Let us think about our people first before we think about the tourists. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are valid questions, but I think you need proper meaningful answers. I think these are questions that can be noted at a proper forum for the Minister to answer.  Are you in a position to answer all these questions?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honorable Maj. Rwamirama raised the question, which is handled by the Ministry of Public Service, which it is responsible for restructuring. But there must be consensus within that ministry that we may split agriculture and animal industry. To the best of my recollection, there was no consensus from the Ministry itself. Therefore I asked the Minister to ensure that they discuss this matter and come to a position, then that position should have been addressed to the Ministry of Public Service.  It is a pity the Ministry is not represented here –(Interjection)- oh, I am delighted, I meant the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Industry. But in case the Minister in charge of Restructuring has an answer, I have no hesitation, Mr Speaker, in asking him to clarify.  I thank you.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, during my submission I did allude to the fact that there is a pending petition to be presented to this House, and it has not been allotted time on the Order Paper. I think in that petition there are a number of issues that are highlighted, giving justifications and – Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct for us to first get the nitty-gritty of all the justifications for such a move before we can start debating it?

THE SPEAKER: No, they are not debating your petition, which has not been presented; they are just reporting their own arrangements about this issue.  Maybe when they started it, they did not know that you had a petition. So, they are just reporting on what they have done. It is not prejudicing it at all; we can hear what they have done so far.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Okumu Ringa): Mr Speaker, with the permission of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, I would like to respond to the issue raised by honourable Maj. Bright Rwamirama with regard to the proposal, which was put to Government to merge some institutions of Government.  

I would like to report that there is an inter-ministerial committee meeting, which has been put in place, that is Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, my ministry and the ministry, which is also responsible for other sectors. We have consulted and I think within the next three months, the Cabinet will decide on this matter. I would like to report that action is being taken.  Thank you.

MR AKAKI AYUMU: I thank you, Mr Speaker.  In my statement, I clearly spelt out the composition of an inter-ministerial national task force comprising of different specialties, different expertise.  A lot of concerns expressed here are indeed being handled by that task force, taking into consideration all the technicalities you mentioned.  

But I would like to respond to a few areas, which may not need a lot of finding out from further investigations.  Honourable Dr Nkuuhe, when these animals are attacked they actually die within a very short time; within 12 hours. So, they have very little opportunity of roaming all over trying to spread the disease; and particularly when you again bury them immediately, and this is why we handling it the way we are doing.  

On the need for linking with the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC); yes, we are doing that. Actually the DRC through their embassy is aware that an occurrence of anthrax is here in Uganda, and they themselves are surveying and observing and trying to see whether there might be a bit of problem in their own area, because they had an attack about two years ago.  But for some reason it rained quickly and the disease did not spread. 

The issue of whether anybody has died from anthrax as a result of this attack, I want to repeat what I said in the last statement –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: I want us to put record straight. What honourable Dr Nkuuhe said is actually the truth. Once the animal has got the infection, it does not necessarily die on the spot where it started manifesting clinical signs, it will move for some distance. I agree with you, it is a parachute disease; it kills within a short time. But from the time it starts manifesting clinical signs to death it will have moved, and from that spot to the next destination of death, it will have spread the bacterium all along. So, honourable Dr Nkuuhe is right.  

MR AKAKI: Mr Speaker, that is why we have put this highly technical task force to handle such fears you are expressing.  I do not see how else I could have answered that question.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why you have disagreed; these matters could be answered.  The technical team would be summoned; he would be there to answer all these questions, rather than the kind of questions you are trying to elicit from the Minister. I suggest that this matter be dealt with by the Committees on Trade and Agriculture; and it is the Minister who will come with the technical team.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE WHITE PAPER

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand it is Item 6.  You see, honourable members, this issue of the White Paper, I understand you did not complete, but now things have been overtaken –(Interjections)- Listen, things have been overtaken; we were talking about the White Paper before the Bill was drafted.  The Bill has now been drafted and it is with your Committee of Parliament. Why do we not handle the Bill itself?  

I know that a number of you have not been able to contribute to this general debate, but I have discussed this matter with my Deputy, honourable Kadaga. We have already typed out the list of Members who have contributed to the general debate.  Another general debate is coming when there is a motion for the second reading is moved and we shall start with those Members who are not on the list, so that everybody is served and goes on record.  (Applause). I think let us proceed that way. The list is there; anybody who is not there will definitely get the opportunity. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate your guidance on that matter and we are not contesting it, but I think it will be on record how we ended a matter of that magnitude. Do we just close it like that summarily?

THE SPEAKER: How are you going to end it? We were responding to the White Paper, now the White Paper is in the Bill.  The White Paper has been abandoned and now we are seeing the real thing, the Bill, and I have said you will be given the opportunity.  I will start with those who have not made any contribution, so that now we go to the committee, make whatever we want to, then come back when there is a motion for the seconding reading.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, what I was essentially saying was that we have our Chairperson –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can we move to another item?

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE PETITION BY
HON. MICHAEL MABIKKE ON PAYMENTS TO MR RICHARD KAIJUKA

THE SPEAKER: There is information I want to give before we start this report.  This matter came up of honourable Sir Richard Kaijuka because a Member here, honourable Mabikke, put in an objection by way of a petition. But I have received communication from hon. Mabikke in writing that he is satisfied of the merits of Mr Richard Kaijuka’s claims and he has no objection for necessary payment being effected. I thought I should give you that information –(Interjections)- Let me get it from the Chairman first, please. 

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, the committee discussed and made a report to this House and we are investigating the principle of paying hon. Kaijuka. Hon. Mabikke was not satisfied and he was asked to go and consult.  After consultation, he discovered that actually the recommendations of the committee where okay and he put it in writing and he wrote to the Speaker. So, he is actually agreeing with the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe I should read the letter so that it goes on record. This letter is dated 9th February: 

“Subject: Richard Kaijuka, Uganda Commercial Bank Terminal Benefits.

You recall that I was responsible for raising an objection in Parliament regarding Government payment of terminal benefits to Mr Kaijuka. Since the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development made sufficient investigations into the matter, I have since received relevant clarification and information in this regard. 

I am formally putting it on record that I agree with and support the overall recommendation from the parliamentary committee that, Mr Kaijuka be paid his terminal benefits for his services at Uganda Commercial Bank.

Thank you.
Hon. Mike Mabikke 
Member of Parliament, Makindye East”

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As far as I am concerned, there is no problem in hon. Kaijuka getting his money. What I am concerned about is a precedent to be made in this House that a person could raise a matter, that matter becomes a property of the House and the committee spends endless hours discussing a matter and reports to this House and midway, the person who raised the issue writes to the Speaker and says, “I am satisfied, I am no longer interested in this matter.”  

Is it not possible that you could have a situation where a Member can be compromised to come to the Speaker and withdraw the matter so that the matter does not get discussed? Leaving this matter the way it is - I am not saying that hon. Mabikke was compromised, I could still wait, I do not assume that. But it is possible that in future a Member could be compromised and instead of the House getting to the bottom of the matter, it is withdrawn midway.

THE SPEAKER: That is speculation. If you have concrete evidence you can say, “Yes, as far as I know, this has been prompted because of this.” But I am only reading to you because I have officially received the communication, and I thought it was my duty since he is the one who prompted, now he says there is no problem, what do you want us to do? Do we punish him for having taken our time?  If, yes, then we have to find rules to deal with that situation.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, when somebody raises a petition, that person should also appear before the committee to give it evidence to support his petition or his complaint. But, the way this thing happened as we reported on the 20 of December last year, it was just like a joke. The committee sat so many times, the subject, Mr Kaijuka Richard, was invited, he gave his evidence, but the honourable Member of Parliament did not follow up by coming.  

So, Mr Speaker, are we going now – I am following up on hon. Mwandha’s concern - to continue entertaining this kind of thing. That because we have the immunity as Members of Parliament, we will bring anything that we cannot substantiate and it becomes a matter of investigation. And then half way, when the committee has wasted time, paper and money to report to the House and to sit hours on end, somebody says, “Now I am withdrawing.” How are we going to deal with that in future, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think in the first place, if the matter was before the committee and it summoned a Member who had prompted the issue and he did not come, the committee should find a way of dealing with him and report. Short of that one, if you think it is a disciplinary matter, then you say so then we refer it to the relevant committee to deal with it.

But the other problem is, there are freedoms, privileges that you have and they may cause a problem. That is why I have said, you may have time to review some of these provisions to prevent the recurrence of such incidents. But as of now, what is the solution?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to briefly inform Members that the main contention was the time lag between the services of Mr Richard Kaijuka and the time he is being paid. The circumstance is that, while hon. Kaijuka was Managing Director of Uganda Commercial Bank, he was representing Uganda in Lusaka, Government was overthrown, his office was broken into and occupied by another person and he lived in exile up to the time he came back. Interestingly, when he came back he stood in his constituency, in such a short time he was elected and he was appointed a minister.  

So, his claim continued pending and he could not sue the Government where he was a minister. So, as soon as he was relieved of his duties, he resurrected his claim and when the claim was resurrected, the Minister of Finance sent it to Bank of Uganda because Bank of Uganda is the one, which handled the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank. And Bank of Uganda could not handle the payment because Uganda Commercial Bank was sold under Financial Institutions Statute and not PERD. So, it was sent to the ministry and then the ministry consulted the Attorney General, who okayed it.

Now, it was at that time when hon. Mabikke landed into - and said, “There is a lot of time, why is it taking so long, was it fraud?” But when it came to the committee, I want to emphasize the issue raised by my colleagues, hon. Mabikke was not cooperative and he did not appear to actually substantiate his claim. So, with that background, Mr Speaker, I beg the House to adopt the report. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the problem is for us to act emotionally; we jump on something without having examined it, without having looked in the mirror and so forth. You start the process without having considered it. This is the problem! Let us not be emotional, honourable members, by that –(Interjections)- there is a motion. I was just explaining that please let us not act emotionally. First consider the matter seriously and see whether there are merits before you raise it formally before us.

4.16
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Mr speaker, I thank you very much. Considering what the chairperson of the committee has just informed us, in as much as we have the privileges in this House, I think the honourable member should have been courteous enough to appear before the committee and deliver the same information he gave to you as Speaker, because the committee had been mandated by the House to go and investigate and the process had started. If in future Members of Parliament wish to continue this way, we may indirectly undermine the effectiveness of committees and the prudence of this House unconsciously.  

So, Mr speaker, I wish to support that we adopt the report, but in future we should provide in our rules that if a member disregards the provisions as has been taken, then something must be done against him. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The hon. chairperson has moved that we adopt the report; I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this disposes of the business we have had today. I thank you very much for the manner in which you have deliberated. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

