Wednesday, 14th February 2001    

Parliament met at 2.56p.m at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in my capacity as a Member of Parliament for Lubaga South, and also as Vice President of the Global Organisation of Members of Parliament who are committed to the protection of the environment. 

Following the allocation of Plot 64/86, Yusuf Lule Road, Kampala for commercial development early this year by the Kampala District Land Board, a lot of concern and debate by the general public, including Members of Parliament ensued.  

In Parliament, debate on hon. Okello Okello’s motion, seeking among other things, to stop any further development of the said plot of land was differed pending presentation of the report of the Committee of Natural Resources to Parliament to that effect.

In the meantime, notwithstanding the unresolved controversy on the matter surrounding the said land, construction and other developments thereon continue unabated. In fact, the building is rising day after day.  

Noting that that is so, is the hon. Minister aware that accelerated developments are still taking place on the said land apparently aimed at exacerbating encumbrances thereon?  If so, why has the Minister not stopped any further developments of the said land in public interest?  A lot of noise has been made and nobody has responded to it; the noise comes from the taxpayers who I greatly respect.

Finally, in the event of a successful halt to the development of the said land in favour of environmental protection, who will compensate the developers? 

As I speak now we have general elections for the presidency coming, suppose a person, other than President Museveni, wins the coming election, will the developing scheme go ahead? 

The tax-payers we represent – Mr. Speaker in conclusion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, as far as I can read, and I know how to read fairly well, your question ended long before three other sentences. So, I will give the Minister the opportunity to respond.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr. Baguma Isoke): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am aware that accelerated developments are taking place on the said land. But it is in accordance with approval given to the development by the relevant statutory bodies namely, NEMA, which studied the environmental impact assessment report by the developer and how the developer was going to mitigate against the adverse effects of such developments.  

The other body is the Town and Country Planning Board. I want us to recall how this plot came to be. The current structural plan under which Kampala is being developed was approved by Kampala City Council in 1994. It was tabled in the City Council and was made a public document and a public property. It was displayed for over three months in order for the public to give their views on what they thought was the proper way of developing the city according to the physical features of Kampala area and the developments in the place.  

Views of the public were received and the Technical officers; the Physical Planners of the City and the Town and Country Planning Board took all those views into consideration and approved the plan. This was in 1994 and developers went ahead developing according to it.

The Kampala Structural Plan will be reviewed in the year 2004, looking at the lay out of roads, the zoning of commercial, recreational and industrial areas, open spaces, taking into account all aspects of environmental consideration and human activities.

This plot was designated a commercial plot; it is not part of the Golf Course. Kampala or Uganda Golf Club has got a land title over its property where golf is played.  This is not part of their property.

This plot is not part of the wetland. In fact, we do not have such gazetted wetlands in Kampala. If it were a gazetted wetland, which we are seeking to protect, even present day, Government Central Purchasing Corporation, the Electoral Commission premises and the Centenary Park would have been part of that wetland. It does not make sense to gazette a wetland in the high ground and leave a lower ground for development.  

Even before the Centenary Park was developed as such, it had earlier been zoned and planned for residential and commercial premises, and individuals had acquired land titles over a number of plots there but later it was reviewed when Sheraton hotel was built. That recreational ground, which was lost at the Sheraton hotel area, should be compensated where Centenary Park is. So, the plan under which the Centenary Park plots were allocated is consistent with the present structural plan. As it was then, it is now. That area is not a protected wetland and it is not a green corridor, and its development conforms to the technical parameters of developing such land. 

It is true that there is a flood plain adjacent to where the development is going on and the Uganda Golf Club has taken that into consideration. You are more familiar about that than I am and a concrete drainage with its supply arteries is in place to take care of that drainage.

So in answer to part (a) of the question, I have this to say. I am aware that development is going on in accordance with the resolution of Kampala City Council and with the approval of the National Environment Management Authority, a Statutory body whose function it is to advise on developments, human activities which impact on the environment. The plot is also being developed in accordance with the plan approved by the Town & Country Planning Board.  

Part (a) says, "If so, why hasn't he stopped any further development of the said land in public interest"? Now, when is the public interest expressed? The public interest is expressed when the proposed structural plan is displayed and the public reacts to it. Subsequently the Kampala representative council, KCC - (Information) - I will take it.

DR.OKULO EPAK: I thank the hon. Minister for giving way.  But I would like to give him information that the expression of public interest does not start and end at the time the plan is put on deposit; it continues even when an existing development goes on. Public interest and objection can be raised and change of use can be changed on that basis, it is not a once for all exercise. Thank you.

MR.BAGUMA: I thank my uncle yonder for his advice. Indeed, how is public interest gauged? It is gauged in the reports of the representatives of the people in KCC, NEMA, the technical body and the Town and Country's Planning Board? These are the recipients of public interests. They have received these views and they continue receiving them. They technically evaluate them and come out with a recommendation for sustainable development. So there is no way I, as Minister for Environment, can stop this development unless these statutory bodies have changed their decision.
 
Part (b) of the question reads, "In the event of a successful halt to the development of the said land in favour of environment protection, who will compensate the developers?" I take that the successful halt can only come as a decree, an order of a court of law and no other way. 

Otherwise, I would have been the other authority to halt the development but I can only do so upon technical scientific advice from those statutory bodies. If it is a decision of court, then the law will take its course. I thank you.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. How can anyone gauge public interest without the public hearing atmosphere? Newspapers, radios, televisions have carried out a lot of debates on the matter and any reasonable person should not question the presence of concern over that development. I would like to know from the Minister who owns that hotel project? 

On 4th May last year, hon. Okello Okello tried to move a motion seeking to stop the Golf Course development, he was seconded by hon. Ekanya. Debate on that motion at one stage could not proceed because the Kajara report, which had been used as a yardstick to give green light support, had never been presented to the - (Interruption)

MR.KAJARA: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to hon. Lukyamuzi, MP for Lubaga South, in his submissions he has referred to a “Kajara report”. To the best of my knowledge and to the knowledge of this House, there is no such thing known as a Kajara report. Is he in order, therefore, to impute that I have a report when in actual fact it is not there?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you either substantiate or you do the needful.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I was speaking in terms of a summary. Otherwise what I was referring to is the Natural Resources Sessional Committee on that project of which he is chairman.

THE SPEAKER: And therefore?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: And therefore I think it was prudent for me to summarise it as the Kajara report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is there such a thing, to the best of your knowledge, as a “Kajara report” which you are prepared to substantiate and produce? 

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, let me clarify by saying that I was referring to the Natural Resources Committee chaired by hon. Kajara who prepared that report.

THE SPEAKER: So there was no Kajara report?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: There was no Kajara report.

THE SPEAKER: So you are out of order.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: And I am sorry for that.  

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Noting that this Parliament, in the presentation of the motion by hon. Okello Okello, dismissed any continued discussion of the matter until the Natural Resources Committee had come up in the plenary session, could the Minister tell this House whether it is proper for the project to continue when it remains to be decided on by the honourable House?

THE SPEAKER: No, I want to get that clear. You said there was a motion to –(Interruption)

MR.LUKYAMUZI: There was a motion moved by hon. Okello-Okello on 4th May last year to the effect that the development program of the Golf Course Hotel stops. As he was moving the motion, the Members here resolved that the only yardstick they would use to judge whether the project continues is the Natural Resources Committee; and that committee cannot determine the fate of the project until it has sought the approval of the plenary session. It has never been approved by Parliament, and therefore, am I wrong to request the Minister to understand that if we go by order of Parliament, the development on Yusuf Lule Road remains illegitimate and it should stop because Parliament has never sanctioned it. Is he offended if I made those remarks?  

In conclusion, is the Minister aware that the area referred to as a portion of a wetland and there is also a greenbelt? If he is, does he not know that Uganda has signed the RAMSAR Convention, which makes it obligatory for that wetland portion to be protected? Has the Minister forgotten that modern town planning cannot be distanced from green belt preservation? Can we have a meaningful town planning arrangement with the green belt?   Do you want to suffocate the Ugandan people working in Kampala?

Finally, why has NEMA, which I believe the Minister is conversant with, not organised a public hearing to discuss the environmental impact assessment? Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)    

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I want to remind you that your supplementary questions should be based on your original question and should arise out of the answers given by the Minister. You are now introducing things, which were not included in the original question and in the answers. Okay, proceed.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect, NEMA is part of the Ministry, and whatever NEMA does has the concerns of the ministry. So why has NEMA not organised the public hearing to discuss the environmental impact assessment for the Gulf course development project, as was the case with the Bujagali power project which was also a centre of controversy? The proposed spray of the water hyacinth using toxic chemicals like 24D also was subjected to a public hearing as was the case with the Karuma falls dam project. Right now there will be a public hearing on the proposed vegetable oil project in Kalangala on 15th of this month. I would like to get a proper explanation from the Minister. 

DR.OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like the hon. Minister to tell me if I got him correct. He stated that the area concerned is not a wetland and it is not gazatted as such. But he also told us that NEMA asked the developer to carry out an environmental impact assessment. May I know why it was then still necessary to carry out an environmental impact assessment if that development had nothing to do with environmental encroachment?  

Secondly, may I know why NEMA allows a developer whose development is being assessed environmentally to actually appoint and commission and carry out the environmental impact assessment on itself. Is that sound judgement?  

Thirdly, as required by law, the report of environmental assessment is supposed to be presented and seen, heard and reacted to publicly. May I know why in this particular case the environmental impact assessment was not brought up for public hearing?  I thank you.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few questions for the hon. Minister. First, when does a piece of land become a plot? Because the first instruction to survey this particular piece of land was issued in June 1996, but we are being told that the plot had existed since 1964. What is the problem? 

Secondly, when this development started, the Minister responsible for environment, Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo wrote to the developer stopping development. This letter was ignored. Can the Minister now tell us that this letter was written in error, that there was no intention to stop development?  

Thirdly, I prepared a minority report on this piece of land. I interviewed the chairman of the Town and Country Planning Board. The matter never reached their attention.  He had wanted to be invited to come and give his input on the matter but he was never invited. Was it deliberate?  NEMA does not approve development, NEMA’s report is just an advice, which can be accepted or rejected. It has no role in approving any development. I was, therefore, surprised to hear from the Minister that this development was approved by NEMA; that is not its role.  

I would like also to know from the Minister if there is another commercial plot in the vicinity of this particular one because it is not normal to have just one commercial plot in the middle of no where. As far as I know, all the area from Shimoni Demonstration School, Crested Tower, is planned for civic development and not commercial. Is there another commercial plot in this area, or this is the only one? If so, why?  

Lastly, I think the people of Uganda should know who are behind this development. Can the Minister tell us? Can the Minister remove the curtain and we see who are behind this development, who can even ignore a letter written by our own Minister of this country. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR.WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, I want to ask a supplementary question about this matter of the development along the valley. Is it true that the Nile Avenue road was supposed to connect across that valley with flyovers and bridges? Is it true that Hotel Africana is actually placed in the middle of what was an extension of Nile Avenue? If not, is the traffic flow in the Kampala centre going to be handled effectively with the northern by-pass? Thank you.

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, with all honesty, there are certain supplementary questions which I am not prepared to answer today. For example, I have not checked the register of titles to find out who the registered owner of this plot is, and I should have come here with a copy of the certificate because property changes hands. Today I may say it is company “A” when company “A” has transferred the property to company “X” or “Y”. So, broadly, these are environmental issues being brought -(Interruption)

MS.BABIHUGA: Point of clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member you will ask supplementary questions. The Minister is responding to all the supplementary questions and -(Interruption)

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, this was a clarification about his submission. I have failed to understand the communication he has put forward.

THE SPEAKER: Okay let us hear it.

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Minister for giving way. In your submission, you do not seem to have the capacity to remember the proprietors of the building.  Is it possible to clarify to this House when you would be ready to tell this House and indeed this nation who is building in this privileged area? I thank you.  
                                  
MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, I think my capacity to understand should not be judged by me remembering who owns various plots in Kampala and all over the country.  Having said that, I am at the mercy of this house to give me a time frame within which I could bring this information. But since it is a question of checking the register, I will be able to do so within 24 hours.  Really when the public raises its concern on a matter, an authority does not proceed the following day or instantly to follow what the public concern seeks to achieve. The authority proceeds to act in accordance with the law.  Any environmental concerns are addressed according to the National Environment Management Statute of 1995. If there are environmental concerns impinging on this development, we should handle them according to that Statute and both NEMA and the Minister for Environment will proceed according to that law. There is no other procedure

RAMSAR Convention which was instituted globally in 1971 does not cover the likes of Kitante Golf Course. RAMSAR Convention concerns huge wetlands, swamps the size of Lake George swamp. As you cross Katungulu channel from Kasese to Bunyaruguru on your left, that wetland is protected in accordance with this international convention. It does not cover Kitante Golf Course. Even in our national inventory of wetlands, this is not a wetland. Otherwise it does not make sense to gazette the upper section where the hotel construction is going on and you leave Government Central Purchasing Corporation premises, the industrial area and the Electoral Commission premises. So it is not protected under the RAMSAR Convention.  

Regarding environmental impact assessment reports, this question was raised by hon. Okulo Epak. Why does the developer write about the environmental impact of his or her development and not NEMA? This is the requirement of the law. That you, the developer, should think out the likely effect of your development on the total environment. Where you deposit refuse, where you deposit other effluent from your processes, the noise, the drainage and so on. Within the same report, you also indicate how you will handle the effluent, the drainage and so on. NEMA then technically evaluates what you see as the problem and what you propose as the solution to solving that problem because there is no development that does not impact on the environment. All developments, roads and all projects including agriculture, do. 

As such, NEMA is handling so many environmental impact assessments. If it were to write a report on each of them, there would be as many discs as there are developments taking place all over the country. And as such, even for public hearing, it is certain projects of a big size that are affecting the environment in a very big way, that are given a public hearing, not every single development on which we have got EIA. Otherwise this would halt development. 

But it is also a requirement of the law that NEMA always gazettes a public notice that look here the public, you are informed a development, industrial or commercial or civil works are going on in such a place. If there is any member of the public with a protest to this development going on, let it be lodged with NEMA and we take it into consideration. This is always done without necessarily hiring a hall and inviting people like we have done for Bujagali and the Pabo oil project.  

Lastly, hon. Okello Okello asked questions similar to the one on land ownership whose answers I have got to go back to my Ministry and get them, for example, when the survey took place. Hon. Okello Okello, having been a Commissioner for Lands, probably knows when the survey took place but the record I have here is that this plot existed after the Kampala Structural Plan was approved and I never mentioned 1964. I mentioned 1994. 

Regarding the letter my colleague hon. Kezimbira Miyingo wrote, my personal feeling is that this may be one of the areas where he did not consult the technical –(Interjections)- yes, offices I mentioned. These are the Planning Section within Kampala City Council and the section, which approves developments in the city, which is a decentralised service, the Town and Country Planning Board and NEMA. That is why, in spite of his letter, the development continued in accordance with the law. Even the report of the Natural Resources Committee on this development, its recommendations, and the resolution that will come out of that report has got to be implemented according to the laws passed by this House. There is no other way the Minister responsible for environment can proceed to implement these resolutions. 

Lastly, is there another commercial plot in the neighbourhood? This plot is named plot 64/86. This means it is a conglomerate of a number of commercial plots, and one commercial development – the hotel is enveloping a number of commercial plots serially from 64 to 86.  So, they are all there. I thank you, Sir. 

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move, under rule 44(b), a motion for the adjournment of this House so that we can subsequently, under rule 42, discuss a matter of national importance. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR.PINTO: I am grateful to you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to move in three sections. First of all, directly referring to you, Mr. Speaker, with your office as the fountain and custodian of the immunities and privileges of Members of this House, a Member was reported to have been arrested yesterday. I am referring to the hon. Lyomoki, Workers Representative. We have not heard from you whether you had been informed of this process before it took place. We failed to get from you information yesterday and up to now you have not informed us.  

The area where our hon. Colleague was arrested happens to be the area a registered property of the Parliament of Uganda. Under the circumstances, that property is enjoyed or is supposed to be enjoyed by the holders of that registration, namely Members of Parliament and the Speaker. One could argue that by all accounts, that is a precinct of Parliament. Is this a legal matter that these premises are a property registered in the names of Parliament? And if so, was the Member out of bounds to be in that area? This goes with the principle of good neighbourliness. Historically, the premises of Uganda Club was constructed close to the State Lodge to allow and enhance the good neighbourliness relationship –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I would like to move with you. If you are proceeding under rule 42, which you have not yet read, unfortunately, but may be I should read it out to show my concern about how you are proceeding. 
(1)“Any Member may move the adjournment of the House for the purpose of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance, and if –
(a) not less than five Members rise in their places in support; and 
(b) the Speaker rules that the matter is a definite matter of urgent public importance; the Speaker shall appoint a time on the same day when the motion may be moved.’ 

You have indicated that that is what you want to do. So, you have to indicate that your motion is for purposes of discussing a definite matter of public importance; then you proceed. 

MR.PINTO: I am grateful to you, Mr. Speaker, for your guidance and counsel. And to fulfil the requirement of 42(1)(a) as you have said that not less than five other Members rise in their place in support of this motion, I shall gladly request my hon. colleagues to rise. I thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank my hon. colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: For purposes of the Chair to rule that the matter is of urgent public importance, you should now focus on that matter so that the Chair is persuaded to go with that.  

MR.AKIKA OTHIENO: Mr. Speaker, I beg your guidance. I would have loved to amend that motion slightly to include other things. I do not know whether it is proper, or hon. Pinto would accept to include other important matters like the impending sale of UCB which has drawn controversy, and the Constitutional Review Commission, which Parliament has not been a party to. I beg to be guided so that we move –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that will be another motion, surely! Let us deal with the matter that is before the House.  

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, again I am grateful to you, but as I said, I had my concerns in three sections. The first one is the fountain of privileges and immunities of hon. Members of Parliament, which falls squarely in the hands of the Speaker. The other is that we are privileged since the Executive are here, they could throw some light on the eminent sale of UCB having known for a fact that the arbitration in England was ruled in favour of Uganda. But Parliament would like to be very deeply involved in a debate on the procedures and way forward in its sale so that this facility of national prestige and concern is not disposed of anyhow. Of course, as my colleague has said, we will be privileged to know how the Constitutional Review Commission has come about. 

Let me come to the fountain of the privileges and immunities of the Members of Parliament, Mr. Speaker (Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I request that you deal with one, and only one, matter of national importance under this Rule of Procedure so that I am in a position to decide whether it is a matter of national importance and I make my ruling and we proceed from there. If we bring in other matters, we shall have so many matters of national importance to be discussed in it. I think it would not be fair. You choose one and we deal with it.

MR.PINTO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I shall leave the other matters to my colleagues. Let me deal with the one, which deals with you directly. I appeal to you to be persuaded that you respond to this question concerning our colleague who was arrested and has not been charged. He was taken to court but the charges were withdrawn. My concern is in the area of privileges and immunities and the premises where he was, that these premises indeed are registered in the names of ‘The Parliament of Uganda’. We would like to know the circumstances in which he was arrested and whether you, the person we look to as our custodian, are aware of these circumstances. I plead that this matter meets with your approval so that you decide that it is a matter befitting national importance to be discussed. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the matter can be narrowed even without reference to the source of the fountain of privileges and so on and so forth. If what you are saying is correct, namely, that a Member of Parliament was arrested and released without being charged, that in itself is enough to cause some anxiety and concern. Members of Parliament might think that the same could easily befall them when they get out of here. But one thing, which I can say, is that the Police and the execution of their duties, especially out of the precincts of Parliament can arrest anybody including Members of Parliament suspected of having committed crimes or offences of various natures. 

But when it comes to a Member of Parliament being arrested and then he is left free, he is not charged, maybe without being told why, all these things cause concern. I think it would cause concern to all of us here as Members of Parliament. I do not know the circumstances; I have heard it from the intending Mover of the motion. 

In view of the fact that the matter has caused anxiety among Members of Parliament, and that they would like to know something about it, I rule that it is a matter which deserves further consideration in the national interest and, therefore, it is a matter of urgent public importance. You can proceed with your motion.

MR.PINTO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wait to give due respect to the Vice President first (Laughter).  

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, hon. Member.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, as you have observed, there is anxiety that has been mounting since hon. Lyomoki was arrested, and you have guided very well. If a Member has committed a crime, I think the legal process and law enforcing officers would be right to apprehend and interrogate that individual. So, we are not interfering with the due process of the law. We are only enquiring about the circumstances under which hon. Lyomoki, and it could be any other Member, was arrested. Was he committing a crime? Was he in places where he was not supposed to be? And this is what brought to mind that there is the property where hon. Lyomoki reported to the House and said he was arrested at Uganda Club, which legally is registered in the names of Parliament. 

I know that due to good neighbourliness, Parliament allowed the Executive arm, the President, to use it but what harm was hon. Lyomoki causing in approaching that facility to result in his arrest? As you said you have not known of these circumstances and we fear that maybe it is time we visited the relationship of Parliament, the privileges and immunities because these are well enshrined in the Constitution and other laws. Since Parliament enjoys these immunities and privileges, I think you would be the right person. If you do not have such information, I think it would be in our right, since we have the Leader of Government Business, to ask. 

It is unfortunate her Excellency, the Vice President, has just vacated her seat we ask that this matter be brought to our full knowledge, the circumstances that have caused us this anxiety. What should we do and what should we not do in the course of performing our duties? 

I do not want to prolong this but I brought out the fact that that property belongs to Parliament and we are entitled to enjoy certain rights and privileges of ownership. We can lend it, give it for some time but I think it is only on the understanding of good neighbourliness. Could you now respond and tell us the circumstances? If you do not, then cause the Executive to inform this House so as to allay the fears of the Members, the mounting anxiety. This is happening at a time when we are all canvassing for votes and I think if this question is answered, possibly you can assuage us as to what has happened so that the anxiety is toned down, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pinto, there is a bit of procedural technicality here. After you have been granted leave to move a motion, you should actually move a motion. You have talked to what would probably be a motion but I think it will help hon. Members if you structured the motion in such a way that it is seconded then people can debate and express themselves for or against.

MR.PINTO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having given this short preamble, I now move in accordance with Rule 42, that this motion concerning the immunity and privileges of hon. Lyomoki, be discussed as a matter of national importance. Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker, in rising to second this motion, I thank you for acknowledging that the temperatures are rising these days for obvious reasons. But Members of Parliament are a personification of the wishes and aspirations of the people of Uganda. If circumstances arise where a Member of Parliament can be arrested for no apparent reason in Kampala, then what guard do we have that a Member of Parliament going upcountry to do his normal parliamentary work will not be arrested on tramped up charges? 

I think this is a very important matter, which we, Members of this House, must come out clearly to state that whether temperatures are rising in this country for whatever reason, various arms of state must operate normally. And I state this with a very heavy heart because it is clear that certain arms of Government are overstepping the mark; certain arms of Government are taking it upon themselves to behave as if there are no laws in this country. Certain arms of the state are behaving as if, if candidate A did not exist tomorrow, then the state of Uganda will stop functioning. This must be condemned in the strongest terms possible. 

How can we, Members of Parliament, sit here and behave as if we do not know that people in this country are being arrested everyday and night without any cause? People are being abducted from their houses and then immediately reappear in the morning and people claim that they have been recovered, who abducted them in the first instance? Why are we behaving like this? People are being beaten up; young children are being beaten up by personalities that we all know. If we do not stop this sort of move, even you, Members of Parliament, will be beaten up and nobody will rise a finger. This is a shame. 

I have been in this country for long. I first witnessed the first election in this country in 1958; I can report to you without any fear of contradiction that I have never ever seen an election so violent like this year’s presidential election, and why? You put the laws; everything is in black and white and you do not want anybody to move because of fear that so and so is supporting so and so - are you serious? We Members of Parliament must rise up and say, “no, stop it”. Otherwise the country will slide into a big avalanche which will be difficult to retrieve. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR.OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank hon. Pinto for his motion. I am approaching this from a very technical point of view. First of all, let me thank this Government for having vacated some parts of Parliamentary Building and now we have a Parliamentary Building, which should ideally be occupied by Members of Parliament.  But as we share these premises, and arising from the recent case of hon. Lyomoki, it might now become necessary for us to define what constitutes parliamentary precincts. I could easily be arrested on the other side occupied by another arm of Government because it is not a parliamentary precinct. I think it would be important for us as Members of Parliament to get a clear definition of what constitutes the precincts of Parliament in this context.

Secondly, we have mutual properties. Parliament has its properties, which includes this building and I presume what was called, and I believe should still be called Uganda Club.  And as far as I know, unless it is known otherwise in other circles that property still belongs to Parliament whatever the circumstances. How come one arm of Government unilaterally decided to incorporate that property of Parliament within the properties of the Executive and debarred Members of Parliament from access to what is rightfully, if it is still true that that property belongs to Parliament, what is theirs? And it so happens, unfortunately for those who are not rich enough, that hon. Lyomoki while doing his own things actually found himself within the premises which rightfully belongs to the Member of Parliament.  And the waiting Policemen with the anxiety to execute their duties arrested him in the neighbourhood or within the precincts of a property of Parliament and therefore, implicitly violating his privileges as a Member of Parliament.

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to get clarification from the hon. Member. He talked of hon. Lyomoki doing his things. Would he just clarify to us what sort of things?

DR.OKULO EPAK: I presume hon. Lyomoki went to demonstrate in the interest of the people whom he represents in this House thus doing parliamentary work and fortunately, found himself, - I think he was aiming at demonstrating at the State House - but found himself in the property of Parliament. So, the over anxious Policeman, without checking his facts correctly, actually arrested him within the precincts of Parliament, if what hon. Pinto has moved is correct. But I think we are all subject to your clarification on this fact so that we can debate seriously and meaningfully.  

In addition to this, I would like also to say that we should save this country from receding backwards to situations we would wish to avoid as we move forward in our democratisation process. If we believe that we are bent on building a long lasting and sustainable democracy, then we should be seen to be doing that in practise. 

But the way we are proceeding in the presidential election leaves a lot to be desired. I am not implying that hon. Lyomoki’s arrest had anything to do with this process, but I believe that whatever the offence, we must exercise sound judgement. A Member of Parliament should not just be picked and marched to court like a chicken. This tantamount to eroding our integrity and respectability in the eyes of the public.  I would like the Police to do their job, but I also would like them to do it with maximum restraint. Otherwise, the integrity of Police itself will be subject to questioning.  If they arrest a person, match you to court and then as the court is proceeding, the file is removed from the table and the prosecutor says, I am still going to check the file, and you are dealing with an hon. Member of Parliament. Mr. Speaker -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF ECONOMIC MONITORING (Mr. Kweronda Ruhemba): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I take it that the Member holding the Floor knows that hon. Lyomoki is a reasonable man particularly, being a Member of Parliament. I would expect a reasonable man not to camp anywhere, because the Police have a duty to protect him. If he decides to go and camp outside Mulago Hospital, he is calling for protection and that is an extra burden to the Police. 

Similarly, when this reasonable man decides to go and camp in the middle of the street leading to His Excellency's residence, he should be removed simply and put in a place where he is secure. Otherwise cars can run over him, thieves can evade his privacy. So, in the first instance, I think the reasonable man should be reasonable enough not to indulge in full hard exercises. I thank you.

DR.OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I think we have been in this Parliament long enough and the hon. Member who has just contributed has perhaps been here long enough.  I thought that when you seeking clarification you are seeking it from the person who was speaking; but he stands to give me clarification. In other words to make his own points.  

Nevertheless, I think he should be grateful that he had stolen my time instead of catching your eye in order to make his contribution. I cannot blame him for his own interpretation of events, being a Minister in the office of the President. But I think he should also clarify to me whether I would be safe enough to do my parliamentary work or the representation of the interest of my people within the Office of the President, which is in the premises of Parliament. The question of whether hon. Lyomoki is a reasonable man or not is a judgement, which I am not in a position to do. But if he thinks he is capable to do that, I leave that judgement to him and the other persons who have listened to him.

The point of argument I wanted to sustain and which I think is reasonable is that even the Police, when taking action in their so called reasonable way should also take into consideration that the person they are dealing with is a Member of Parliament, a representative of workers.  Workers are the most important productive force in any country. I am yet to find a country, which tampers with the rights and privileges of a worker. It can only happen in this country.  That you come into office, create no employment but instead create retrenchment and unemployment and do not pay people living wages and you continue to be a President and want more terms for that purpose. You want more terms in order to complete that job of creating joblessness and low pay to workers in this country. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is sad to see that the organs of Government are running amok. Last night they went to Makindye at around 4.00a.m. Vandalised the home of an old man, they entered and smashed everything, breaking TVs and tables. They even went to the extent of cutting his bed to pieces. He was pulled out of bed almost naked before his children and his wife’s small clinic was also damaged including everything there. Some of the drugs were thrown away. They could not tell exactly why they were doing so. At the end, they bundled him -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether we are focussing on hon. Pinto's motion. My impression was that if hon. Members were concerned about the circumstances, and were focussing on the circumstances under which the hon. Lyomoki was arrested and left free without a charge, that should be the focus of the motion, although it was not structurally along those lines. I would have thought that hon. Members would be concerned about the circumstances under which hon. Lyomoki was arrested.  That seems to have been the original focus. As I said in my ruling, the manner of arrest and handling of a Member of Parliament definitely caused concern. My view is that while you may refer to other ancillary matters, I think that should be your focus. Proceed.

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  All I am doing is to show you that the organs of the state are deteriorating. They have not attacked only hon. Lyomoki, but they are even attacking people sleeping in their own homes. There is no privacy. This man was bundled into their vehicles and taken to Mbuya Military Barracks. The family started looking for the man; he could not be traced from the Police stations until one Chief of the Intelligence Services in the Army managed to trace his whereabouts. I thank him because we were all worried. We thought this man might have been killed with his children.  

So, this subject needs careful study, especially during this time of campaigns. When I went to inquire, I was told that some people at one time tried to put up the poster of President Museveni on his house and he refused. “I am not putting posters on my house. You can put them anywhere else”, he said. Who are you to refuse us to put up the President’s posters, they asked. So, because of his refusal, they went and punished him on Saturday, vandalising the whole place.  

Similarly, hon. Lyomoki is a very well known person. If he is moving about in the streets near the State House, I do not think he commits an offence. I thought every citizen of Uganda is entitled to see his President. He is even entitled to demonstrate, unless they tell us that the President is for a few men who are sitting on the Front Bench, but I think what was done –(Interjection)– I do not want the clarification now; he is an old man (Laughter).

MR.KYEMBA: Thank you hon. Member for giving way to a senior citizen of this country and thank you Mr. Speaker for allowing me to seek this clarification. I certainly sympathise with the concerns that the hon. Member is articulating regarding the privileges for Members of Parliament. But I would like some clarification from him, in view of the fact that of all the Presidents I have seen in this world, I do not know of any where one can just move to State House and say, I want to see you and be accessed. Obviously, the population would very much like to see their President as much as possible, but I think that would be anarchy if it were done the way the Member is suggesting. That is the clarification I wanted.  Thank you.

MR.NSUBUGA NSAMBU: To answer what you have stated, that is why I said this was a Member of Parliament who was known to every person, especially, the security officers.  But if he could be handled the way he was, I am worried that there is lack of responsibility in our security organs. I brought the other explanation of what happened at Makindye merely to emphasise that some people think that the law is exercisable to some people but to others, it is not applicable.  I do not think the President himself would be happy to hear that his man, somewhere in Makindye was treated the way this old man was handled. As far as I know him, he came here to bring peace but that should not be taken to be part of the peace he brought to this country. I will call upon the Ministers responsible to take a serious note of what happened in Makindye. 

Well, I understand hon. Lyomoki was taken to court, but it was even uncalled for. You cannot find somebody who has behaved himself and you say he is idle and disorderly. Everybody is free to demonstrate; it is a constitutional matter. He was not beating anybody, he was just moving and you say he is idle and disorderly! I call upon the Police to study the Constitution because whatever demonstration you hold here is labelled a bad demonstration, which is very wrong. That is why you see deaths have been caused unnecessarily. Thank you very much, hon. Speaker.

PROF.NSIBAMBI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I believe that we cannot have a balanced debate until the Minister in charge of this sector, i.e. the Minister of Internal Affairs, is here to explain the circumstances concerning the rebel Member of Parliament and also to answer some other areas of anxiety. I, therefore, propose that this debate should be postponed until tomorrow when the Minister of Internal Affairs will be here to give a researched position. I thank you.

MS.BABIHUGA WINNIE (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Pinto for highlighting this very sad occurrence. Indeed, it is important for the Minister of Internal Affairs to be around and answer back. But I think it is equally important for us, as Members of this House, to pour out our anguish and also to raise concerns, which are besetting us.

For an honourable Member found in the process of executing his work, his constituency is out there and I believe even on the avenue that goes to Nakasero State Lodge, they are his constituents; the workers are there. The hon. Member could have been consulting and for him to be bundled up and called idle and disorderly, in fact, one of the newspapers said that he is a vagabond; I think it is a demeanour.  

It shows that the centre has disintegrated and is not in control. Where an hon. Member who is well known and doing work in his constituency, is bundled up, the nearest place they could have brought him would have been Parliament, where he could have been assessed and given help. What if he had had physical or psychological difficulties?  Was Luzira the best place to take him?  It shows you how deteriorated the sense of judgement of our organs of state have relapsed into. 

I represent Rukungiri district in this Parliament. Last night, two vehicles from Rukungiri, which had escorted the presidential candidate, Col. Dr. Kiiza Besigye to Kabale, were assaulted as they came back. They were rounded up in the centre of Rukungiri town by the Presidential Protection Unit, which was deployed there. I do not know under which law PPU deployed in Rukungiri. Those individuals were rounded up, shot and bundled them up into the police cells and in fact kidnapped some of them. It shows you that this is a calculated move of terrorising this nation. It is within the hands of those people who hold power, the Government to ensure security in Rukungiri. The onus is on Government to protect and safeguard the integrity and life of the people of Uganda.  

The rounding up of hon. Lyomoki is the second within a period of four days. I am even surprised to see the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in the back here sitting silently. It is only recently that he was rounded up, also in the course of his work, and thrown into court threatening him with imprisonment and so on and so forth. Mr. Speaker, for us –(Interruption)

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, the Members of Parliament are part and parcel of the general public, which is under the Uganda Law. Is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to plead that when Members of Parliament violate the law they should not be apprehended according to the law?  

THE SPEAKER: No, I did not understand the Member to be saying that any Member of Parliament who commits a crime should not be arrested, charged and tried. That is not how I understood her.  What I understood her to mean in this particular case and that is her interpretation that the Member concerned was going about his lawful business.  That is her perception and therefore - You were referring to Lukyamuzi? All right, then that is different. If it was in reference to Police action arising out of what the Member is reported to have said, which according to the Police amounted to a crime, then I think the Member in saying that the Police should not have acted would not be in order. Because the law is that the Police or even you as an individual can arrest your colleague if you are satisfied that he has committed a serious offence or is about to commit a serious offence.  

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, I believe I was communicating very audibly and the reference I made regarding the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi was in regard to the frequency of occurrence of the assault against a Member of Parliament. I believe that it goes undisputed that within a period of four days this action has happened to more than one Member of Parliament.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, as you have correctly guided, the matter concerning hon. Lukyamuzi is already in the court of law and under the circumstances, such matters could be subjudice for us to discuss. I pray that the circumstances that govern us in that regard should be respected so that we deal with other issues. If the matter is already under a competent court of law, let the matter be handled and disposed off in that way.

MR.WACHA: Mr. Speaker I thank you and I beg the indulgence of my other colleagues. Under our rules, is there any rule, which says that we cannot make reference to the fact that a Member of Parliament has been arrested and charged?

THE SPEKAER: The rule is that if the matter is in court, it is subjudice.

MR.WACHA: What I meant, without making reference to the circumstances surrounding the arrest and the charge, can we not say hon. Ben Wacha was yesterday arrested and charged in court?

THE SPEAKER: You can say that. That is a factual situation and the matter of the court is still being investigated. That is the difference.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you for giving way. Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Babihuga that it is wrong for one to presume that so and so is guilty of having committed an offence until one has been proved so. 

It is on record that while I was addressing a press conference at Fairway Hotel I was dragged out of that press conference and inhumanly treated. And Bukedde Newspaper yesterday printed on the top page one Aisu pulling my shoulders and neck as if I was a criminal, as if I was a robber. I am a Member of Parliament; prove that I am wrong instead of mishandling me the way I was mishandled. I shed tears. That is bad.

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker for your ruling. Colleagues who so quickly make reference to the law of should be mindful that we are all under the same law.  It should be fair for all. For the hon. Lyomoki to be roughed up in the course of his work in his constituency and taken to court and Luzira is the most demeaning action that could happen to a Member of Parliament. I pray that time gives us the answer so that we know the truth.  Because Mr. Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it might help your colleagues to understand your line of argument and maybe move with you. If you say the hon. Lyomoki was roughed up in the course of his work in his constituency, why do you not come out clearly as to how this happened?

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, hon. Lyomoki represents the workers in this country and workers are everywhere including State House (Interruption)

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, we are Members of Parliament and we are supposed to be law-abiding citizens. Hon. Members are supposed to be where they are supposed to be. Should any Member be in a place where he is not supposed to be, the law takes its course. Is the hon. Member of Parliament holding the Floor in order to say that a Member of Parliament representing the workers can go anywhere he wants or she wants regardless of the law of trespass or any other law? 

THE SPEAKER: In other words, would the Representative of the Workers walk into your house hon. Winnie Babihuga simply because your house servants are workers? That is what he is saying. Has he got that freedom to just walk in? So, in short, I think you should confine yourself to the factual situation. That is why I am asking for the sequence of the events which make you state that hon. Lyomoki was unfairly arrested and mishandled in the course of his duty when seeing his constituency. If she came out clearly, this matter would have been clear. And unless you do that you might not be in order.

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. In developing my argument, –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: In other words, unless she can substantiate that the circumstances, which she is describing, actually happened, she would be out of order.

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker for your ruling. My plain argument was about a Member of Parliament who is exercising his freedom in representing his constituency to demonstrate against injustices meted against his constituents. That while exercising those rights an hon. Member is arrested, framed and dehumanised and called a vagabond, idle and disorderly, charged because of his action. I should also go on record as having stood up in this House and condemned this action against hon. Lyomoki and being –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think, you are now crossing the bar. He raised an issue that this is a matter, which is subjudice and you can only make reference to the arrest and not go into other matters. I will rule you out of order.

MR.PINTO: The point of procedure I am raising on is that, the Leader of Government Business, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that this debate be guided by the Minister of Internal Affairs tomorrow. In the circumstances, I beg my hon. colleague to accede so that this House may be further enlightened as to the circumstances that led to the arrest of hon. Lyomoki. We will have the opportunity of being informed of the circumstances and my colleague will be enlightened further, Mr. Speaker.

MS.BABIHUGA: Mr. Speaker, most obliged. I think all of us would benefit from more enlightenment, more facts of course our plight is that our integrity should not be so easily eroded by hasty actions. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is a proposal by the Prime Minister; unfortunately it was not in form of a motion. I was still trying to see what the mood is like towards this proposal.

MR.PINTO: I will move the motion, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR.PINTO: Considering the guidance given by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that this House is entitled to being informed by the relevant Minister, I move that this debate be postponed until tomorrow when the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Internal Affairs will fully brief this House. I beg to move.

MR.KYEMBA: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: The substance of the motion is that considering the fact that the Minister concerned is not available to deal with some of the issues which are being raised, the debate should be deferred until the Minister’s presence in the House as requested by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister.

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Speaker, I just want to add on hon. Pinto’s statement that until we also get a statement from hon. Lyomoki. He was even here; he had lunch with us. Actually, he should even been in this House. So I think it would make a good debate if we also got a statement from hon. Lyomoki.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Lyomoki is a Member of Parliament.  He will come here and he is free to do so. But how can you say until he makes a statement? Suppose he does not want the debate?

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, the amendment is frivolous.

DR.OKULO EPAK: I thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to add to the motion, the fact that the matter of the status of the Uganda Club and the question of the precincts of Parliament should also be clarified.

THE SPEAKER: Now how does that come about? It is so unrelated hon. Member. That can come in as another motion. I now put the question to hon. Pinto’s motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, procedurally, when I came to you I had three sections. Would the matter of UCB be appropriate to be dealt with now because it also is great concern and national importance Mr. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member there is only one motion you can move, and we have disposed of it.  

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Speaker, I am rising on a matter of concern. When I was entering Parliament, I found some names and figures concerning Members of Parliament displayed. Some members may not have seen because they have just put it up. I got concerned. Why should we be treated like that when we are hon. Members of Parliament?  We have our pigeonholes, we made the agreement for the vehicles confidentially and we have stationery. Could it not be made in a proper manner than displaying all our names, what one owes the Government and what has been paid? It is a concern and you are the Chairman of the Parliamentary Commission. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am not aware of this. You will give me an opportunity to look into the matter and may be respond tomorrow. I am not aware just like other Members of Parliament may not be aware.  

MR.RUZINDANA: It is a fact that these things are displayed outside there and she did not request it, but may I request that they be removed? They are displayed for no purpose at all.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall deal with the matter.

DR.OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I seek this clarification with an apology to you and to the House. I believe some reference was made on this matter about deduction of our emoluments. But I believe that was specifically in relation to the Motor Vehicle Loan Scheme. I seek guidance and clarification from you, on the generality of this matter of inordinate deductions from our emoluments.  

For some time now the administration of Parliament has at will deducted so much of our emoluments particularly subsistence allowance. Members have frequently ended up with a balance of Shs.50,000 only, sometimes nil. 

I would like to express a concern on the fact that the subsistence allowance is actually paid to us to subsist here in Parliament and to enable us to conduct parliamentary business. In the Public Service it is considered unfair for the remuneration of a worker to be deducted to a level where his income in that particular period or monthly is zero or to a level where he cannot subsist. We have put up with this phenomenon for some time now and I think it is high time we are clarified and a definite decision is made. If such deductions become necessary, there might be a need for individual negotiations between the administration and the person concerned so that they can agree on the manner in which those obligations can be handled. 

But arbitrarily and almost inordinately, you end up in a situation where for particular month – I will give my own example, this particular month my deduction comes to a mere Shs.60,000. How am I expected to subsist in Kampala and conduct parliamentary business? It is not only unreasonable but it is punitive and an encumbrance on my capacity to conduct business of Parliament here in Kampala. I think we are entitled to an explanation and an amelioration of this behaviour. Otherwise, you might find that because of the pecuniary embarrassment of this nature, the attendance of Parliament will be lower and it will be difficult for us to explain why there is such frequent absenteeism. We will have to look for alternative ways of subsisting in Kampala at the expense of participating actively in the parliamentary debate. I am raising this now on generality of the issue of deductions because I believe that you handled the issue of deductions concerning the vehicles alone appropriately yesterday. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member I understand the sentiments you have expressed. As you rightly recollect with regard to a specific item on the matter of deductions, I addressed Parliament yesterday. I also assured Members of Parliament in my capacity as the Chairman of the Parliamentary Commission that we are following the developments very keenly to ensure that whatever comes out of any negotiations or harmonisation as a result of the Committee which was set up by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister; that the interest and concerns of Members of Parliament, which had been expressed in a Resolution earlier on, are taken care of.  

But at the same time I appreciate the matter, which you have raised generally regarding deductions from the emoluments of Members of Parliament. Whether it makes sense to deduct to such an extent that you cannot even afford to buy yourself a cup of tea, I cannot make a statement on this except to assure you that the Commission will, at an appropriate forum, address these concerns. After we have received concrete information by way of documentation as to how the deductions are proceeding, we shall be in a position to advise the House.  

Hon. Members, I can see that we do not have any other item on the agenda so we will adjourn until 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 15th February at 2.00 p.m.)



