Thursday 18th February, 1999.
  
    (Parliament met at 2.35 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

  (The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair).

The House was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL BILL, 1998

THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Lt. Col. Mudoola):  Mr. Speaker,  let me take this opportunity to thank all the Members who have supported this report and who have participated by contributing to and commenting on it.  Before I wind up, let me answer some few questions that were raised.  

Hon. Kirenga said that non-citizens should not be allowed to work.  Actually the Committee is not saying that we should not allow non-citizens to work here.  We are saying that they should be limited,  and only when  it is necessary should these non-citizens be allowed to work here.  

People were concerned about identity cards,  and this too is a concern of the Committee.  When you check in our report, we recommended that the Government should go as far as even borrowing money to issue identity cards.  So hon. Members, your worry about identity cards is as good as ours.  

There was a query that we contradicted ourselves on the private and public sectors.  But when you read clause 36 which we are referring to in our report, it says: "From such a time as the Minister may prescribe by regulation, any person who is not a holder of a national identity card and who is not an expatriate in a Government service,  shall not be eligible for services in a public office."  Here we are saying that this should not apply only to public offices but also to private sectors; that is private investors.  These people should all have identity cards. 

I will go on to a comment about the years.  Hon. Mukula said that 20 years is a long time and we should reduce it to ten years.  But,  Mr. Speaker, when you look at the Constitution,  it says every person who has legally and voluntarily migrated to and has been living in Uganda for at least ten years or such other period prescribed by Parliament - in other words, it is ten years,  but Parliament can prescribe another period.  We are not at all going against the Constitution.  And when you go further down, they say that every person who on the commencement of this Constitution has lived in Uganda for at least 20 years.  These people saw it fit that 20 years is a good time to study somebody who is coming to live here.  

I do not see why Uganda should be hurrying to give its citizenship to other people.  Even in the old law it was 20 years.  That time, Uganda was not as heavily populated as it is now.  This time we should be more strict just as many countries are.  In Britain,  up to 1975, if you went there and delivered a child from there,  the child became a citizen automatically.  But now it is not the case.  Even if you are born there, you have to live there for some time before you become a citizen.  The Committee feels,  from consultations with the public, that for somebody to become a citizen, he should live in Uganda for at least 20 years.  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Speaker, the Motion under consideration is a very important law.  The point of order I am raising is that the House is not properly constituted to enable us discharge our duties.  Is it in order for us to continue in this manner - discussing such a very important Bill?  Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER:  I am sorry there is no quorum.  I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes.
 
(The House was suspended for 15 minutes).
                    
(On resumption_).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I have now been advised that we have managed to realise a quorum.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  As I was winding up, I finally wanted to warn Members that some of us are becoming irresponsible in our talk regarding security. I am sure that even in your homes, there is what we call limited secrecy.  I do not think you can do things which are not very good for your children in front of them.  That might hurt them and that is what some Members are doing.  I think some of us are uttering some things about security that are uncalled for,  and we should desist from doing that.  At this juncture,  Mr. Speaker, let me take this opportunity to again thank all the Members for the support they have given this report,  and beg them to adopt it. Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Butime Tom):  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  I am grateful for the support Members have expressed with regard to the proposals in the Bill as reflected in the Committee's report.  I however wish to respond to observations, comments,  remarks and suggestions made in respect of the following matters.  

Appeals:  that is entry permits and certificates of residence. Some Members of the House are of the view that appeals under clause 11 of the Bill should be opened to courts of law after the decision of the Minister has been taken.  Mr. Speaker, it is however noted that whereas genuine investors are welcome to Uganda, working in Uganda is not an inherent right of aliens,  warranting litigation.  If the Minister of Internal Affairs agrees with the decision of the board that a certain alien does not meet the requirements for a work permit or certificate of residence, there is no reason why that person should continue to live in Uganda by opening up avenues of appeal to courts of law. 

The reasons for rejection of an entry permit application vary from not meeting the legal requirements to the fact that the alien may be a subversive character.  Therefore,  Mr. Speaker, appeals to courts of law on entry permits would defeat the very essence of the draconian laws which were yesterday being sought by the hon. Members of this House,  and therefore the proposals of the Bill should be maintained.  
Some Members have proposed that the number of years required for one to be a citizen by registration be stepped up from ten to 20.  You may however note that the minimum constitutional requirement is ten years.  And the majority of the Members agreed yesterday that ten years would suffice as a minimum requirement, and the proposal in the Bill is intended to maintain the minimum constitutional requirement.  That is why we put it at ten years.  
The question of deprivation and cancellation of citizenship,  yesterday hon. Aggrey Awori yesterday was of the view that the board should not be vested with powers to cancel or deprive an individual of his citizenship,  and that that citizenship once granted should remain a right.  I however draw your attention to provisions of the Constitution, Article 16(3) which empowers the national citizenship and immigration board with the powers to grant and cancel citizenship by registration and naturalisation.  I further draw the attention of the Member to Articles 14, 15(3) of the Constitution which prescribe the grounds for loss of citizenship.  The Bill has reproduced these very constitutional provisions and the proposals still stand.  

On entry permits, some Members sought clarity on the policy of Government towards aliens in the employee category.  The Government policy has been to woo and encourage investors to invest in Uganda.  This has been our drive.  An investor who comes to Uganda is handled by the Uganda Investment Authority which assesses the investment introduced into the country,  and grants the investor a specific quota of alien employees.  This quota may include the non-professionals, it may include non-experts, it may also include non-credentialed but skilled employees.  

The board is obliged to grant those work permits to the employees as per recommendation of the Uganda Investment Authority.  And you remember,  Mr. Speaker,  that the Uganda Investment Authority is referred to as a one stop centre.  In other words, once a decision has actually been taken by the board of the Uganda Investment Authority, other line Ministries and sectors are encouraged not to oppose that decision.  Therefore the immigration department does not usually cancel recommendations or decisions taken by the Uganda Investment Authority.  As a matter of fact, the Commissioner for Immigration is a member of the board of the Uganda Investment Authority and therefore is already party to that quota or that number of employees given to the investor.  Therefore he cannot turn around,  in the board for immigration,  to oppose, cancel or reduce that quota.  

However, the law will be stringent upon those persons who masquerade as investors whereas they have nothing to contribute to the development of the country.  While the immigration department steps up its surveillance on the activities of aliens in the country, there is also need for other institutions such as the Ministry of Labour,  to take action against those aliens who refuse to adhere to the provisions of the Employment Decree and other Statutes,  in the employment of Ugandans.

The national identity cards:  the proposals of the Bill with regard to national identity cards were adopted by the Sessional Committee,  and our position is that Government should partly contribute towards national identity cards - provided the citizens pay a nominal fee.  This, however, does not preclude those very patriotic citizens such as Members of Parliament from sponsoring their constituents.  In fact the law is timely and will go a long way in providing commitment of MPs towards their constituents. 

Otherwise,  modalities for the administration of the identity cards are being worked out.  You cannot let your constituents move around without identity cards when you have a programme in one or two years to come.  You will have to go out of your way and try to assist them.  At least I will be obliged to buy an identity card for my mother, Mr. Speaker.

MR. TOSKIN:  I just wanted the Minister to clarify.  I am aware that the ordinary person will not welcome this charge that he is talking about.  I do not know whether the Minister is aware that this is likely to backfire against the spirit of this Bill,  because you will find people abstaining from registration.  And by that we shall not have achieved our objective.  I want him to clarify whether he is aware that we are likely to receive negative results - than positive ones?

MR. ADOME LOKWII:  The Minister said this is a timely Bill where the Members of Parliament have to take care of their constituents.  To give an example of Jie County, there are well over and above 200,000 constituents and if the nominal fee is about Shs 2,000,  I do not know whether the Minister wants me to surrender all my salary and all the travel allowances,  in order to pay for these identity cards?  And/or the hon. Members have to close the House and go become registrars in the constituencies,  to make sure that all of those above 18 years are registered;  therefore the identity cards being paid for by the Member of Parliament?  Can I get clarified?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker, unlike passports where the travelling of citizens abroad is optional, a national identity card is supposed to be an essential document for every Ugandan.  Would the Minister tell this House what plans he has for enabling the likes of the aged, children and disabled, to have that documentation?

MAJ. BUTIME: This thing will not backfire.  Registration will be as that when we are voting.  Every LC will encourage the people resident in that area to register for preparation to be eventually issued with a national identity card.  First you register,  then you get a number.  Every Ugandan will get that number,  including the Speaker.  You get a number which you produce to buy,  or get your identity card.  

When I say that Members will be encouraged to assist their constituents,  I am saying that you will have to carry out - in your tour of your constituency - you will have to talk to the LCs to make sure that people understand the need to have an identity card.  I was not saying that the Member of Parliament for Jie is going to buy an identity card for everybody who votes for him. After all that would actually be illegal,  and you will be prosecuted for bribing the electorate to elect you.   That was not what I was talking about.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption).

MR. NDEEZI:  Clarification, Mr. Speaker.

MAJ. BUTIME:  I was winding up.  Yes.  This debate was actually yesterday.

THE SPEAKER:  Unless the matter is really burning, I think we should allow the Minister to wind up so that we can proceed.

MAJ. BUTIME:  To wind up,  yes - I am not contributing, I am winding up.

MR. NDEEZI:  It is burning, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Proceed.

MR. NDEEZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I really think we must sort out this issue of identity cards,  without ambiguities and procrastination.  Traditionally people have identity cards - these are the traditional graduated tax tickets.  To acquire a graduated tax ticket you pay for it.  Now the Minister is telling us that on top of this graduated tax ticket,  our people will be required to buy identity cards.  If it is to buy these identity cards, it is better we get it very clearly now.  Because within our society we have people who do not pay graduated tax, these include very elderly people.  And I believe some of the people in my constituency do not pay graduated tax.  I want very clear clarifications.  I think it is not a good idea to propose  that Members of Parliament help these people who cannot pay for the identity cards.  Because this is not my implication here as a Member of Parliament.  Let us have a clear picture of who actually pays,  in case so and so cannot pay for the identity card. Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Well,  I cannot help the hon. Member.  If people in his constituency do not pay graduated tax,  and he is saying they will therefore not even pay for their identity cards,  I cannot help, because it means that sensitization and understanding of the duty of the citizen in his constituency is still lacking.  It is very, very important for a citizen who is able bodied to pay graduated tax and therefore, it will also be important for a citizen of this country to register himself or herself first, and secondly acquire an identity card and at the end of the day acquire a passport.  Because it is not going to be easy now to get a passport unless you have an identity card, and it is going to be difficult to get an identity card unless you have registered.  

On the question of visas, some Members expressed a general fear that the reinstatement of the visa regime will discourage tourists and investors from entering the country.  I however wish to point it out to the House, that visas will be maintained on a reciprocal basis.  Since the majority of Members agree that reciprocity is a standard law in the world of diplomacy,  the visa regime cannot discourage genuine investors from entering Uganda.  In fact effective March 01, 1999,  all aliens seeking to enter Uganda will have to obtain visas from the relevant missions abroad.  

We may also note that the reinstatement of the visa has partly been prompted by pressure from the international community.  The absence of a visa regime creates uncertainty in the mind of an alien.  The absence of a visa in his passport when he is travelling to a country,  actually creates uncertainty in his mind - whether he will be allowed to enter that country or not.  And this has been a complaint from outside Uganda.  When people are coming here,  they wonder whether they will leave the airport,  or be given visas at the airport,  simply because it is the norm all over the world that if you travel you get a visa.  So visas will be an additional vetting mechanism for aliens who seek to use Uganda as a hub for international crime,  and a transit route for drug traffickers.

Passports:  Mr. Speaker, the observations of Members on problems pertaining to passports in regional offices are highly appreciated.  By regional offices I am talking about the regions in Uganda.  Administrative measures will be taken against errant officers;  for example that officer in Gulu,  and any other undisciplined officer.  

Members are also assured that such officers will not be given an opportunity to serve in the new board, because the new board will have a right to take on any person or not.  And as for that officer in Gulu,  I am afraid his future in the Immigration Department is very, very bleak.  Under Article 29(2)(c) of the Constitution, "every Ugandan shall have the right to a passport or other travel document."   However, where an individual seeks to use the said right to infringe upon the rights of other citizens, the passport will be temporarily seized.  Also where a citizen will be endangered by his travelling to a certain destination, the board will restrain him from meeting the said danger,  by temporarily depriving him of his passport.  This will be the case where the activities of the individual are intended to hurt the reputation of our country abroad.  
The temporary seizure of a passport from the said individual or individuals would also assist in investigation of the international crimes such as drug trafficking and terrorism.  Here I would like to request the hon. Daniel Omara Atubo not to pursue this matter, because it is very, very important that we have to restrain some Ugandans who may meet danger where they go.  If you do not withdraw that passport,  the man can pass through Malaba, he can pass through Busia, Entebbe,  and all those outlets.  He would then meet danger in the place where he thinks that kind of situation would not develop.  Members should therefore not look at withdrawal of passports as a suppressive State action, but as a means of enhancing State security.  

Funding:  Mr. Speaker, I highly appreciate the Member's adoption of the Committee's recommendation,  which I think will be adopted,  for the board to retain 90 percent of the funds collected for immigration facilities, to run the bBoard operations.  

On the question of regional cooperation, the East African Cooperation Secretariat has reviewed the immigration policies of the three East African countries.  This was the concern of hon. Mukula yesterday.  Modalities are being put in place to harmonise the proposed Immigration laws.  This includes working out ways for easing movement within East African territories,  and issue of cross border travel.  

On the question of the relationship between the Commissioner and the Board, experience,  Mr. Speaker,  has shown that you cannot separate the Secretariat from the Board.  This is basically for the purpose of technical guidance and this is an administrative policy to establish a linkage between the Board and the Secretariat.  The Commissioner for Immigration is therefore required and obliged to sit on the Board to offer guidance on technical matters.  

And finally on eligibility of employment in Uganda.  Clause 36 of the Bill should be appreciated,  since the proposals in the Bill are not well represented in the Committee's report.  The clause provides for Ugandans to hold national identity cards and eligibility for employment in both the public and private sector.  

For certificates for permanent residence, one Member noted that the Bill should emulate the American system of the green card for those who pass the means test.  This has already been provided for under clause 55(3) of the Bill as, "a certificate of permanent residence can be granted to anybody who contributes to the social, economic or intellectual development of Uganda."  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Mr. Minister,  and the Chairperson.  Hon. Members, you have heard the Minister and the Chairperson's opening as well as concluding remarks.  Time has now come for you to pronounce yourselves on whether or not the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Bill, 1998,  should be read the second time.  I now put the question that the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Bill, 1998,  be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL BILL, 1998.

Clause 1, agreed to.
Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3.
MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am proposing that on page 6 - Commissioner, where under interpretation it reads: "Commissioner means the Commissioner for Immigration established under section (9) of this Act."   I am proposing an Amendment to read that, "the Commissioner means the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner."  This is for administrative purposes,  so that it takes care of any eventuality  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I would like to have a written text of your amendment.  Let me have the text of your amendment.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I will pass it on.  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME:  I will definitely oppose that,  because Commissioner - Deputy or not - means Commissioner.  And that is the spirit in which it is being put here.  There is no need of saying that Commissioner means Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner.  It will just be a repetition on something which is already clear.  Once you are a Commissioner or the Deputy, it means the same thing.  Therefore I do not think that hon. Okumu is right,  and I would like to oppose that.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I do not know, I am entirely in your hands.  But I thought there was a proposal somewhere where someone is talking about the office of the Deputy Commissioner.

LT.COL. MUDOOLA:  Yes,  Mr. Chairman, it is true we proposed that an office of a Deputy Commissioner be established.  It will come in later.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Okumu, may I suggest this?  When we get to the substantive aspect of the matter, then this will be taken care of at that point.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: I do accept that proposal,  if it will be under consequential amendments.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr.Chairman.  Clause 4(a), in Sub-clause 1, delete "not less than four other persons" and insert "not more than six other persons".  I beg to move.

MR. KIRENGA:  I rise to oppose the amendment as it is proposed,  because in the report of yesterday,  the Chairman wanted a maximum number and a minimum number.  But here when you say, 'not less than six',  that means the minimum number is seven.  Whereas the idea of what he was saying was that it should not be less than five, and not more than seven.  That is what the report says;  that the maximum number should not exceed seven.  But here as it is,  it means we are raising the numbers - the minimum number to seven and the maximum number is not catered for.  May be the Chairman can clarify on this?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: In our report we said that the board members should not be more than seven,  inclusive of the Chairman.  So, when you say six,  including the Chairman, then the number comes to seven.  That is why we said they should not be more than six.  

MR. KIRENGA:  In that case, Mr. Chairman, the wording should be, "not less than four and not more than six other persons",  so that the minimum is five and the maximum is seven.
THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, when you are reading these amendments of the Chairperson, you should read them into the actual clause. In order to get the proper import,  do not read them in isolation.  

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr. Chairman, if you look at Article 16(2) of the Constitution, "the Board shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than four other persons, each of whom shall be of high moral character and proven integrity, appointed by the President with approval of Parliament."  So, the Constitution is saying five, although they can be more than five,  which the Chairman is proposing;  that they be six - plus the Chairman who will be the seventh.  

We wanted to restrict ourselves to the constitutional provision. We wanted to leave it to the Minister to make them five if he wanted.  But once you say that they can even be seven,  you are inviting the Minister to go six to or seven,  since after all, it is mentioned in the law.  In other words if you appointed five, you would be within the law, but you would be tempted to even appoint seven,  since it is being mentioned in the law.  We are saying that if you have five members of the board, they could be better enumerated in terms of their small number,  and they can do a good job.  

But if you extend to seven in the law, you are actually inviting the Minister to go up to that number.  That is why I thought that we could say, let there be a Chairman, as according to the Constitution.  For plus the Chairman,  who is appointed by the President and approved by Parliament,  the Minister can now, if he wanted,  even go up to seven.  But why are you trying to invite him, through this law,  to go up to seven?  That is why I thought that I should persuade the Chairman to drop this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: It looks like a simple matter.  The problem with the Constitution is that, it is open ended as far as the maximum is concerned;  and I think that is the concern of the Chairperson and the Committee.  

The Committee is saying, if the idea is to have five members, then for the purpose of the Appointing Authority taking an action, you should not only limit the minimum, but you should also prescribe the maximum.  I think that is what the Committee is doing.  The question is - for purposes of your debate - whether you want it open ended as far as the maximum is concerned,  because it appears the minimum is already being given.  That is the issue.

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  Mr. Chairman, before I raise this point of order, I would like to draw your attention to the Article 93 of the Constitution which says, "Parliament shall not, unless the bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government - (a)proceed upon a bill,  including an amendment bill,  that makes a provision for any of the following - (ii)the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction."  

Is it in order that we should proceed to debate on whether the board should consist of five or seven when it is clear that when it is seven, we are going to increase a charge on the Consolidated Fund and on any other public fund?  Is it in order therefore,  to proceed to debate this proposal by the Chairman that we should increase the board to a number of seven when it is very clear that it is a violation of Article 93 of the Constitution, as I have pointed out?  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the Minister's  proposal is following the Constitution.  The Constitution provides for not less than five.  But the Constitution does not say that you cannot have 30 Members on that Board.  The Chairperson and the Committee in their wisdom are saying, why have, for example, 30 people on the Board?  Why do we not, notwithstanding the five we have - stick to a limit?  If anything,  I think the Committee is saving the Consolidated Fund.  So, I think we are in order.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all I must say that you correctly guided this House on the issue on the Floor.  But I would want to advise the hon. Minister,  in his bid to control the numbers,  to propose not more than four other persons.  That would put him in the figure of five which he wants.  But as he correctly said, the other provision of not less than four can even lead to 100.  But since he is interested in five, he could amend what is proposed by the Committee;  instead of six, insert four,  and that will give him the five he is bidding for.  

THE CHAIRMAN: It does not seem to be a very serious matter, hon. Members.  Can somebody do something about it?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, as you have said already,  that is what we are trying to seek - the Appointment Authority should not appoint as many people as they would wish to.  At the same time, when we say six, it does not mean that the Appointing Authority should appoint all the six.  They can appoint less than that - they must be between four and six.  

We are at the same time controlling the Appointing Authority not to appoint 30 as you have put it, or 50, but to at least limit that number.  I think this is a very reasonable number,  for the Appointing Authority to also have flexibility to work within those limits.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, in view of what hon. Kaggwa has proposed to the Minister, I think that would be unconstitutional because the Constitution - if you can allow me - reads:  "The Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than four other persons."   If we go with the proposal of hon. Kaggwa, using 'not less', would be violating the Constitution.  

The position of the Chairperson, in my view, saves us from violating what is put in the Constitution;   putting the minimum at five and the maximum at seven.  I would support,  and urge Members to support the position of the Chairman of the Committee,  because - I wish to say - the Minister is persuading us and after we have passed this proposal, we cannot restrict him from increasing the number to 30.  So, the position of the Chairman is saving the Constitution and at the same time putting a maximum of which the Appointing Authority cannot exceed.  I think that would be proper administration,  and being frugal.  In my view, the position of the Chairman would be better.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that in Sub-clause (1), the expression, "not less than four other persons", be deleted and be replaced with the expression, "not more than six other persons."  

(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Delete sub clause (2) and insert the following: "Each Member of the Board shall be a citizen of Uganda and a person of high moral character and proven integrity".  I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am seeking clarification from both the Minister and the Chairman of the Committee as to why we have restricted the mentioning of qualifications of these Members to just moral character and proven integrity.  Could the Minister and the Chairman give clarification?  

Otherwise, the aspect of restricting the membership to citizens of Uganda is quite acceptable.  I support that aspect of the amendment, but the aspect of only restricting it to moral integrity and character is not clear to me.  Thank you.

MR. RWAKOOJO: I do agree with both statements.  I am also wondering why we are not restricting it by age because if we go by this, if a child of ten is of high moral character and he is a citizen of Uganda, he could be a Member of the Board.  I think we need to go beyond this - we should state the qualifications, we should state the age, we should state the mental capacity and so on and so forth.

MR. KIRENGA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to clarify that Article 16, clause (2) of the Constitution, says that "the Board shall consist of the Chairperson and not less than four other persons, each of whom shall be of high moral character and proven integrity appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament."  So the words, 'high moral character and proven integrity'  are constitutional provisions.  We cannot delete them from the Bill and we cannot just expound on them,  because they are assumed to be known.

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr. Chairman, we thought that that could not be necessary since the Members of the Board are proposed from the Ministry then they go to Cabinet.  These names are sent to the President, the President eventually sends them to Parliament.  The Members of Parliament are the ones going to approve of these people,  and Members of Parliament are of high moral character and proven integrity,  and they cannot afford to appoint people who do not measure to the standard that the Members of Parliament would like to approve.  So, we left it to the Members of Parliament, to the President,  and to the Cabinet to turn these people out and appoint the people that are equal to the task.  I thank you. (Mr. Rwakoojo rose_).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Still on the same point, Mr. Rwakoojo?

MR. RWAKOOJO:  I am still on the same point, Mr. Chairman.  I thought that in order to help Members of Parliament,  and in order to help the President - because as you can see - even where we have had minimum qualifications required we still have people trying to sneak in through the backdoor.  So, in order to limit the choices and I do not think it would hurt anything here, one should have finished primary seven,  and should at least be 18 years old.  We should at least have limited it.   I would like to move that we should have 2(a) stating that the member should at least be 18 years and above,  and the minimum qualification should be senior six or senior four.  I have not written the amendment down,  but those are the lines I am thinking along.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  with your vast experience in the area of legislation,  you must have come across this particular expression in the Constitution - as it has been read.  But Bills arising out of such provisions have included more information in the Bill than what is stipulated in the Constitution.  For example, he has mentioned age.  In some cases,  they mention other attributes for example,  a person must not have been declared bankrupt, which normally do not appear in the Constitution.  But, the person who conceives the Bill normally has them.  

I am merely saying that this practice has been there so it should not appear as if it is something unconstitutional.  I thought you could take this into account when you are debating this issue.  But I would rather that if someone would like to propose an amendment,  let this amendment be written down so that the Minister and the Chairman can appreciate it.  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr.  Chairman,  I would like to propose that we stand over this so that we draft an appropriate amendment.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is accepted.  Is it?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Sponsored by hon. Rwakoojo and seconded by  Okumu-Ringa,  or the other way round.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think this standing over is only in relation to the composition of the board.  We can deal with the rest of the Sub-clauses.  

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Clause 4 sub clause (4),  add at the end, "for one term only."  That is, not more than two terms.  In other words, the board should not be appointed for more than two terms of four years each.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see,  the Committee is saying that the term of office of the same board should be restricted to a maximum of four years which can be two times.  Otherwise without that,  it is open-ended, and the same board can go on and on.  Because if you say eligible for re-appointment,  this can be indefinite - that is their quarrel.  Is that correct?

MR. KIRENGA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that the wording be as follows: "for a period of four years and he is legible for appointment for one more term only", add the word "more."

THE CHAIRMAN: My understanding of his amendment is that you get rid of "only",  and you insert, "one more."

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: I accept that.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that in Sub-clause (4),  add at the end of the expression,  "for one more term only."

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 5.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 6.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 7.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. chairman.  I am seeking clarification from the Minister and  also the Chairperson,  with regard to clause 7 which states that the Commissioner shall act as a Secretary to the Board and shall perform such functions in relation to meetings of the Board as the board may direct.  I am raising concern here because board matters are handled by secretaries who are qualified to handle such board matters.  You may have a Commissioner who may not necessarily be of legal background or who has never handled issues of secretarial matter; what happens?  

The proposal and the clarification I am seeking from the two is, why do we not have the Commissioner be a member of the board and we have a full time board secretary for this,  so that all matters of litigation, all matters relating to board functions would be handled by such a secretary?  I beg to propose, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: The point made is that let us have the Commissioner be a member of the board and let us have a secretary to attend to the minutes of the board.  Is that the understanding?

MAJ. BUTIME:  This is not a parastatal organisation to advertise in the press and call for a secretary of the board to have a legal background!  We are saying that for technical knowledge and technical assistance to the board on migration matters,  the  best person you have there is the Commissioner for Immigration who has worked and has stayed in the immigration department for a period that has promoted him or her to that post.  

We are not saying that it will be the Commissioner herself to sit there and write minutes of the proceedings;  it is an office we are talking about.  And in the immigration departments we have got a lot of lawyers.  One of the immigration officers there can sit there with the Commissioner,  if it is to take down the proceedings of the board.  But this should be under the direction of the Commissioner for Immigration.  
In Government today,  you have the head of the Public Service who is the secretary to Cabinet.  But he really does not sit there and write minutes of the Cabinet at every cabinet meeting.  He has got other secretaries in Cabinet who do the writing,  but he is the one who superintends over the minutes of the Cabinet.  And really that is the spirit in which I would like hon. Okumu-Ringa to understand it.

MR. MAYANJA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to supplement and agree with the hon. Minister on what he has explained.  I am doing this having served on a similar board for a period of about four years in the past.  Normally a Commissioner is a person who has developed and internalised the a,b,c and d of the department he or she is heading.  Ad because of his or her position,  is a very useful person to the board.  Normally when he acts as a Secretary,  he guides the board because some of these board members are new people and they are not technical people.  But this is a person who is technical and who has got adequate experience concerning the department.  So, having him as the Board Secretary is very useful to the board members who may not know the technicalities of a complex department like immigration.  As the Minister has said, Mr. Chairman, normally there are lawyers on the board and in the department who are always available to give legal counsel and advice to the board when need arises.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members,  let us not waste too much time on this,  because to me it is very clear.  You better accept the fact that the Commissioner as heading the Secretariat,  and the commissioner not sitting there as a minutes secretary,  he will service the Commission.  If you appreciate that, then you should consider this in the light of the proposal that we should have the secretary;  and should let the commissioner be a member of the board.  I think let us balance the equation along these lines,  and proceed.

MR. KAGGWA:  I would want to support the provision as put here,  because I make a distinction between normal company matters and administrative boards.  I see this board as an administrative board where the minutes and the dealings  are technical and the Commissioner is best served to do the job.  In fact, the Commissioner himself does not need to be there,  but somebody in the commissioner's office or any other office can do the job.  I would like to ask hon. Okumu-Ringa to distinguish this from the normal companies.  This is because the decisions of the board are going to be; 'are we allowing the man to enter the country, is he here illegally?'  They are technical issues and the Commissioner is the best person to advise on them,  if need arose.  So, I would like to support it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now propose the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).
 
Clause 8.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, it should be immediately after clause 8.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to). 

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Immediately after clause 8,  we would like to have a new clause which reads, "The funds of the board shall consist of moneys appropriated by Parliament to the board (b) appropriation-in-aid amounting to 90 percent of all the monies collected by the Board."  I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to oppose amendment (b) which states, "appropriation-in-aid amounting to 90 percent of all moneys collected by the board."  The basis of my opposition to this amendment is lack of quantum.  We do not know the quantum.  Maybe we shall be collecting money from every citizen of Uganda for the purpose of issuing identity cards;  90 percent of that kind of money will be too much to be retained by the board.  Unless we can be given the quantum and we are able to ascertain it,  then we can provide for this.  In other words, we should not provide percentage in term of what should be retained by the board.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In the normal budgetary processes,  when Parliament is appropriating moneys for departments, after the budget has been established,  the Parliament subtracts what would be collected by the department as an appropriation-in-aid.  Finally in the releases,  you only receive the balance between what you collected and what was budgeted for in Parliament.  

The question in this case is of moneys collected by the board.  They will not know how much money they are going to collect in a year,  unless you actually get it in advance.  What if at the end of the financial year or in the process of the financial year,  you end up by collecting much less than you expected?  You will have starved the board and its performance might be rendered inefficient.  
How are we gong to reconcile this idea that they will take 90 percent of the population aid but knowing very well that the Minister of Finance will subtract what you will have estimated from the normal collections?  I will give you an example. Currently the Minister of Trade and Tourism estimated that they will collect Shs 1 billion from parks.  But because of problems,  they are actually collecting less than Shs 200 million.  But according to the budgetary proposal,  Shs 2.9 billion appropriated to the Ministry was reduced by Shs 1 billion.  That means that the Ministry has almost come to a stand still,  six months before the end of the financial year.  What will happen in this case,  where they are saying that this will be money to support the board?

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually rise to oppose the  whole amendment.  We have just recently stated that this is an administrative board,  which means that the Ministry will actually budget for it.  To take it out of that line and make it more or less another parastatal,  is contradictory - to me.  Apart from the other things which have already been mentioned, if you say 90 percent of what they collect and you do not know what even 100 percent will be, you are either starving the board or giving it too much money,  which will only lead to misuse.  

In any case, the board will be budgeted for through the ordinary processes of budgeting, through the Ministry concerned.  I do not see the use for the whole of that new clause.  I think it is redundant;  it should not be accepted.  

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT:  I also want to join my Colleagues to oppose this particular amendment, 2(b).  I also find it very difficult to be convinced by this particular provision,  more so if we take into account some of the submissions by the hon. Members of Parliament here.  A few minutes ago, hon. Medi Kaggwa did point out that the Immigration Board is not a company, it is not a parastatal.  Given that kind of reasoning, I think it will be unfortunate for this House to pass this particular provision,  and give the board 90 per cent of all their revenues collected.  In my opinion, this particular provision is redundant and in a way may contradict other provisions of other Government departments.  Thank you very much, Sir.

MR. BUTELE:  I do not know what the Chairperson is saying, but I support this amendment.  You said that Parliament will give money to the board,  but you have seen the money which we approve here!  The treasury does not even give it to the departments,  and the same Parliament will complain that the Board is not performing!  

The other day you were saying that this thing should be decentralised.  Where are they going to get the money from?  Whatever you pass here is slashed by the Treasury,  and you want the same thing to happen to this board?  If 90 per cent is kept and they know how to budget for it,  they can even work harder so that they can raise more income to serve you.  So, I support this amendment.  Thank you.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you.  Members will remember very well that in our budgetary report, we said that this department is marginalised and is barely allocated money.  They are having a problem of funds to operate efficiently.  At the same time, we were informed by the board that last year, they collected Shs 1 billion and they were given appropriation-in-aid of 80 per cent of the collection,  which was Shs 800 million.  But even then,  they feel they cannot operate properly with that kind of money.  So we added another 10 per cent to make it 90 per cent so that the Board can run efficiently and effectively. 

CAPT. MUKULA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think Members of Parliament need to get the background of the problem.  The Uganda Immigration Board and the Immigration department that we are talking about has been marginalised to a point where they do not even have a vehicle to move with.  That is how difficult it is.   Mr. Chairman, the Uganda Immigration Board still continues to maintain the records of Immigration using ordinary files,  when other countries have got computers.  It also gets to a point where sometimes an Immigration Officer in Malaba, Busia or in Entebbe, cannot make a telephone call to the head office to report a very serious matter, purely because they do not have the capacity.

The Committee,  having reviewed the grants and support from Government,  in its own wisdom, and with due consultations with the Minister of Internal Affairs, did recommend that the best way to go round it is to give this 90 per cent.  Mr. Chairman, if we create this institution - and remember yesterday I said that we pass laws but implementation of the laws is the problem.  If we leave this Immigration institution that we are creating now, without the recommendation that the Committee has evidently under due internalisation of the problem come out with,  we are going to operate in a very ad hoc manner.   I very seriously urge that my Colleagues, hon. Members of Parliament,  do submit to this proposal;  then we can review it in the next financial year.  I beg to move.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  We are running a risk of contradicting the Constitution, because we are making a law which will allow the department of Government to automatically get money and take it away before it arrives in the consolidated fund.  Under the Articles related to finance,  from Article 151, the Constitution will not allow a law that automatically takes money from the consolidated fund without using the appropriation account, without us passing a budget.  

What the Ministry of Finance was doing before was that as an interim arrangement,  it was allowing the department to take 80 per cent,  and was electing the same amount which would have been authorised that month for release.  But to make it part of this law, would probably require us to review and make sure that we do not pass a provision that will contradict the Constitution.  Nevertheless, I believe the department should be given enough funds,  but it should be arranged in such a way that it passes through the many budgetary proposals.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Why the Minister of Finance is not volunteering is, he knows that what we are really talking about is that it is correct,  and we are not passing a law for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to spend without authority of the Ministry of Finance,  or the law.  We are saying that the money they collect, given the experience of Shs 1 billion for 1997/98 financial year collected by the Immigration department, 80 per cent was Shs 800 million.   We are now giving an indication that in the next financial year, after this law has been passed, 90 per cent should be projected for appropriation-in-aid to the Immigration department.  That is what we are only saying and the Minister of Finance knows very well.  

Yesterday hon. Mukula was complaining about the obscurity of the Immigration department in terms of funds, in terms of where it is situated,  and the Minister of Finance knows very well that there was no money in this financial year for the printing of national identity cards. Is it not?  This money was not put in the Budget,  and we are saying that the department would continue to operate,  if this 90 per cent is authorised.  It does not - (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN:  I see two people on the Floor and it is not proper.

MR. KUTESA:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I think the position that is being stated by hon. Manzi Tumubweine and that of hon. Tom Butime are totally different subjects.  Even appropriation-in-aid goes back to the consolidated fund.  Simply because it is appropriation-in-aid does not mean that you must retain it. When we talk about appropriation-in-aid, it is that money generated in the department, but it does not mean that it must necessarily be retained by the department.  

Therefore, it is important that we avoid contradicting the Constitution and I agree entirely that there was no money for making the identity cards.  That is a separate matter;  we must budget for money to make identity cards.  It does not have to necessarily be retained from what you collect from immigration.  It is important that you make identity cards, it is necessary the country budgets for it, we must find the money.  We must also find sufficient funds to run the Immigration department,  but that does not necessarily mean that the money collected by the department must be retained by the department.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, the Minister of Finance used the words 'contradicting the Constitution'.  I do not think we are in position to do that, when we are so properly advised.  I think we better take that into consideration;  if it is contradicting the Constitution, I think lawyers would call it breaching the Constitution.  (Mr. Wambede rose_). Hon. Wambede, is it burning?

MR. WAMBEDE:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I know the Minister of Internal Affairs could be right and genuine in his demand.  But right from the beginning,  I had a mix up with regard to the contravention of the Constitution. I know Immigration is terribly under-funded along with its activities.  People are complaining that we have many aliens who are here, and there is no method of tracking them down.  That has been fundamentally a result of under-funding of the department, but if it were not that we have contradicted the Constitution, I would take it.  

All the same, I would be comfortable if we had a clause which will make it in a way mandatory that a certain percentage is given to the department of Immigration, other than leaving it open, and go against the Constitution.  I would feel comfortable if we put in that clause.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, Mr. Chairman, wind up.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  In our proposals here, we are not saying that this money should be retained at the source,  or when they collect the money.  We are just saying that when they collect the money and it is put on the consolidated account, they should get 90 per cent of the total collected.  I do not see anything wrong with that,  because, Mr. Chairman, this is being done in Prisons, this is being done in Police.  They are getting some appropriation-in-aid,  but we do not want to leave it to the Ministry of Finance to determine any amount it wants.  We want a certain percentage to go to this department - from the funds they collect. (Mr. Rwakoojo rose_).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you convincing the Chairman?

MR. KWAKOOJO:  I am sure he will be convinced, because I want to remind him that we sat here last year or there about,  and passed monies for the Uganda Trade and National Sports Council - in this Parliament.  But it so happened that because it was either illegal or we did not have a provision for it - just like what we are trying to do, the money collected has first to go to the consolidated fund, then it is appropriated.  

You remember, Mr. Chairman, when we passed the law that governs this Parliament,  although we wanted the money taken directly from the consolidated fund, we still had to come back here and make a separate law to enable us to do that.  As you know,  we cannot tell the Ministry of Finance how much it should set aside for which Ministry - that too, would be unconstitutional.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, let us take wise counsel.  We have been advised that we are about to contravene the Constitution - to put it mildly.  To me, that would mean breaching the Constitution.  Let us take wise counsel from that.  I was about to put the question but do you want to do something about it?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  How about if we left it as, 'money is appropriated by Parliament and appropriation-in-aid?'  Can that work - without putting the percentage?  Because this is the only way by which the Board is going to get funds.  Is that contradictory to the Constitution?

THE CHAIRMAN:  But the legality seems to be that Parliament did pass - I do not know whether it was by resolution or some other means - that certain monies be automatically retained on account of certain listed institutions.  And upon further reflection, the Minister of Finance found difficulties in implementing that decision,  and we are about to make a similar decision!  Why do we not steer clear until you have done consultation and then you can come back another time?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I think we could stand over it and do some consultations.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I do not want to put words in your mouth, but I did not hear you saying that after taking wise counsel, you have withdrawn.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  After taking wise counsel,  Mr. Chairman, because you get it from consultations. I said that after consultations, we shall come back to you; after getting the wise counselling.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Withdrawal accepted?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I did not withdraw.  I said, 'let us stand over it and come back later after consultations.'

THE CHAIRMAN:  Well, if that is the case, I am going to put the question.  I was trying to help you have an easy way out.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  The Chairman,  who is a lawyer, has advised that the proposed amendment is in breach of the Constitution.  Therefore, to me a layman, it appears incompetent.  For that matter, Mr. Chairman, I do not see why the Mover should not withdraw the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Chairperson, there is a point of procedure from hon. Kagonyera,  on the Floor.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman, I take heed and withdraw.  Thank you very much.

Clause 9.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Clause 9 sub clause (1), immediately after Commissioner for Immigration we insert the words, "the Deputy Commissioner for Immigration."  I beg to move.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Maybe we shall get the advice of the Minister of Public Service who is here.  Because in the re-organisation of Ministries,  where there were total changes in departments and Ministries, the post of Deputy Commissioner for Immigration was abolished and I think professor Nsibambi should remember that.  I do not know whether it can be created again,  unless you have consulted with the Ministry of Public Service, the consultants and so on.  I am not very sure whether this one can be possible, Mr. Chairman.

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I understand that these amendments were circulated in time and the Minister received them.  I do not know whether it is procedurally correct that he should conduct a Cabinet meeting here - for the Ministers to consult on something he should have done before he came,  so that we are not entertained to discussions between the Ministers across the Floor.  I was wondering whether it is procedurally correct for us to be subjected to that discussion, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member,  the Minister's Colleague was not forthcoming,  by way of information.  The Minister was trying to jolt his memory into doing so.  I think this is in order,  except when they engaged into individualistic dialogue,  as if they were in Cabinet.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I was wondering as to the rationale behind the Committee's coming up with this amendment.  In the restructuring which Government paid for at a high financial cost, the position was abolished.  Now we are trying to reinstate it!  Does it mean that the Committee found that this post was so critical that the restructuring and the reform process had made a total blunder? Can we then be educated by the Committee Chairman, to find out more about this very important post which they would like to reinstate,  in contravention of the restructuring process?  I would be persuaded, because as we said,  Parliament can create anything.  But what is the rationale behind contradicting a rational and streamlining process?  Maybe the Minister can inform us and then the Chairman can tell us what was behind all this, so that I can know how to vote.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Article 171 of our Constitution reads: "Subject to provisions of this Constitution and any Act of Parliament, the President may,  after consultation with the appropriate service commission,  establish offices in the public service of the Government of Uganda."  The point being made here is that technically it can be done,  but it requires a lot of consultation.  

When restructuring the public service,  it was realised that a lot of functions went to the districts - especially under Schedule 6 of the Constitution - which largely left policy to the centre,  apart from certain areas like Defence.  We therefore realised that many posts at the centre were unnecessary.  My appeal would be that whatever was abolished should not be revived, until a sub committee of Cabinet chaired by the Vice President goes through the process.  The best we can do,  if you feel strongly for a revival of this process, is to basically have some conversations - if you like - outside the microphones here.  That would be my advice.  But let us regard the streamlined position as being extremely necessary, because we also lack resources.  I thank you.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you,  very much.  Maybe I can throw more light on why we came to this decision.  When we asked the staff working in Immigration, they said that the restructuring programme was not approved.  In other words, it is not in effect yet.  They also said that in their recommendations, they indicated that they would like to retain the position of the Deputy Commissioner for effective running of the department.  Now they are going to have a lot of work:  they are going to register the nationals, they are going to issue identity cards, they are going to issue passports, they are going to issue work permits; and they feel that the work will be too much for just the Commissioner,  without a Deputy Commissioner.  Maybe you can clarify on that - whether the restructuring of this department has been approved or is still pending.

DR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member that the restructuring was confirmed.  As for any anomalies which were left, a Committee was created under the Chairmanship of the Vice President,  and members including Minister for Public Service,  and the Prime Minister, entertains any other issues related to the restructuring.  So it was approved and is being put in place.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Of course we realised that when restructuring any system, you have to cope with what I call the contingent element.  Certain issues may have been overlooked here and there and the contingent element tends to be ubiquitous especially under our circumstances.  There is provision for Ministries to appeal and that is why if they feel strongly for their position to be reviewed, we would not bulldoze them.  There would be mechanisms for reconsidering certain issues.  Currently, some Ministries have made special appeals to that sub committee.  I would suggest that they go through that institutionalised forum,  to revive some of these arrangements.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The information I would like to give is in support of what hon. Prof. Nsibambi has just stated.  The Ministry of Trade and Industry was thoroughly trimmed in terms of human resource needs.  When the Committee recommended that they should be reconsidered, indeed the posts which were abolished without knowing the functions which could make the Ministries effective were reinstated.  Consequently, I would like to support this amendment as proposed by the Chairman.  Thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that in sub clause (1) immediately after the expression " Commissioner for Immigration" the following expression should be inserted "A Deputy Commissioner for Immigration."

(Question put and negatived).

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Clause 11, sub clause (4),  at the end add the following "and forward to the Board any additional relevant information on the matter."  I beg to move.

MR. MED KAGGWA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to oppose that amendment, because I do not see the purpose it serves.  The Minister is duty bound to communicate his decision to the Board any way.  Why do we add this and waste words?

MR. WAMBEDE:  Let me take this opportunity to appeal to the Members to seriously take into consideration that clause as proposed by the Committee. There are many situations where an applicant puts in his application before the board, and the bard finds the application quite incompetent.  The applicant then goes ahead to appeal to the Minister,  like the previous law stipulates.  The Minister then takes up his pen and approves against the decision of the Board?  

This proposal is aimed at two things.  One; to eliminate conflict between the board and the Minister.  Because if the board rejected and the Minister approved, that is already a conflict between the two.  I know there are superior orders,  but,  Mr. Chairman, the more fundamental point is we have had cases where the board has rejected an application,  but the applicant goes to the Minister and he just approves it.  As a result we have had an influx of the non wanted immigrants.  

The aim for this proposal is,  we do not refuse superior powers from the Minister,  but let the Minister go through the application and indicate to the board that,  'you did not consider this or the other.'  With this comment I am sure the Board will be considerate enough to consider the grounds of the Minister to grant the application.  But to leave the powers to the Minister and he just dispenses with his signature like we have had in the past, we shall not be doing any service and we shall not be protecting our interests here.  Mr. Chairman, I thank you. (Maj. Katirima rose_).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you clarifying to the House;  because he has sat down?  Or are you seeking clarification from the Chairperson?

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  I would like to seek clarification from the Chairman of the Committee regarding the usage of the words "refer" and "forward',  in regard to the communication between the board and the Minister.  What does the Chairman and the Committee understand by the statement that "the Minister may on appeal under this section confirm or reverse the decision of the Board or refer the matter to the Board?"   Why the use of the word "refer", and later on in the sentence,  the Chairman is proposing that the Minister forwards it to the Board!  I get a bit confused there!

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, this is a very simple matter,  if you look at the amendment.  What the amendment of the Chairperson is saying is that the Minister should be required to forward any additional information to the Board.  Is that not what he is saying?   But surely, when the Minister refers a matter to the Board, what is he going to do?  I would like you to balance the equation carefully.  There is already a question of reference.  The Minister is given that leeway to refer the matter for reconsideration.  You balance the equation there.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Let me explain, Sir,  what really happens.  If the applicant applies for a work permit, the board sits down and considers the qualifications, the work et cetera of that applicant.  When the board rejects the application,  that person is informed about that rejection, and if he is not satisfied with that rejection, he sits down and writes an appeal to the Minister.  That appeal does not come to the desk of the Minister, it actually goes through the Commissioner for Immigration and Permanent Secretary.  That person whose application  has been rejected includes more information which he thinks the board did not consider.  

After all those minutes on the appeal, it eventually comes to the desk of the Minister,  with comments on that appeal,  comments from the Commissioner, comments from the Permanent Secretary.  The provision here is that the Minister can now refer to the board saying, 'look! Here is fresh information about the application which you rejected.'  There is no point in the Minister withholding other information and send only limited information to the Board.  He sends exactly what was sent to him, which came from the Commissioner, and the PS.  

It is therefore superfluous to say that he will refer the matter  forwards.  Once you refer, you have actually forwarded,  and there is nothing for you to withhold, if you are to impress the matter upon the Board.  I think that it should remain as it is.  So this amendment, Mr. Chairman, is really not necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is the point the hon. Kaggwa was making;  that the words which are being proposed to be added are not necessary.  That is his submission.  

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Chairman, with your permission and with the permission of the Chairman of the Committee, allow me to move an amendment to that proposed one.  This is, in particular, to clause 11, sub section 4.  "The Minister may,  on appeal under this section refer the matter to the Board for reconsideration."  

My amendment seeks to delete, confirm or reverse.  With your permission, Mr. Chairman, I may give reasons.  Hon. Members have not got my amendment.  The clause is that, 'the Minister may, on appeal, under this section,  confirm or reverse the decision of the Board or refer the matter to the Board for reconsideration.  It is to delete, "the Minister to confirm or reverse".  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, this is a legal document.

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Chairman, this amendment is directed to this clause.  
THE CHAIRMAN: I agree, but let me explain what is here.  We are talking about appeals - people who are not satisfied with certain decisions by certain institution are now appealing to the Minister, and the Minister cannot escape by saying, 'yes,  I agree with you or not, I do not agree with you,  or let me look at it again,  or let me send it back to the Committee to look at it again.'  He cannot escape that.  If you have appealed he has to decide.  Now, which one do you want to move?

MR. WAMBEDE: May be I am at a loss.  Does this refer to the appeal by the applicant or to the reversal or confirmation of the decision by the Board?  I am asking for some direction from the Chair.

MISS. BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In a way, I would like to agree with hon. Wambede because I find it quite unacceptable for us to put a provision whereby a Minister will unilaterally override the decision of a board.  I would like us to give him a provision to recommend a reversal so that the matter may go back to the Board for reconsideration with the additional information from the Minister.  I think that is what my hon. Friend, Wambede,  was trying to get.  I would not be comfortable giving the Minister unilateral power to override a board decision,  and I would like the Chairman to allay my fears over that.  

THE CHAIRMAN: In the meantime, hon. Wambede, I want your amendment in writing.

MR. KIRENGA: It appears that hon. Wambede does not appreciate that this is an appeal.  If there is already a decision  by the Board, you are trying to appeal against it so that it is reversed or confirmed,  or another decision made according to the opinion of the Minister.  But if what the hon. Member is saying is that the board's decision should be final so that when you go to the Minister, the Minister merely ratifies the decision of the board.  So hon. Members,  do you want the decision of the board to be final or do you want another decision - perhaps a better decision - of the Minister, on the matter?  Because, Mr. Chairman, clause 11(1) says, "Any person aggrieved ..." that is a person whose application has been rejected, is the one who appeals.  That is to answer the question raised by hon. Babihuga.

MR. WAMBEDE:  I have been referring to something different, not the appeal.  But having listened to the legal advice, I withdraw the statement.  Although my concern is for the Minister not to have unilateral powers to take decisions against the Board.  Thank you, Mr. chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I really wanted to help my Friend, Wambede.  The section 11 (4) as it is, is an excellent provision; it is absolutely excellent because -(Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wambede has withdrawn that statement.  Do you want to reinstate it?

PROF. KAGONYERA: I understand the frustration of the Chair, Mr. Chairman, but it is better we take due caution and make a good law.  I was once a Minister and I would love that Ministers continue to enjoy powers.  But concepts like these - and I hope hon. Karuhanga could listen to this - the concept behind this is based on the British tradition where Ministers are given powers to perform certain duties.  But in fact they are not the ones who do the work.  They have technical teams which do the work and the Minister just signs his name on the documents.  

The fear that is being expressed by some Members is based on our past issues.  There are people who have advised us to forget history, but I in all prudence,  we cannot forget history because it is important - a point of reference.  So, the fears expressed is where you get the Minister who may not be cooperative with the board he is dealing with,  and definitely you can have the authority of the board undermined.  That is why I think that if a Minister has got good reasons why he thinks the decision of the board should be reversed, then he ought to counsel the board to reconsider.  That is my only opinion - I am not moving an amendment, but I am just advancing a word of caution.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is your amendment, "and forward to the Board any additional relevant information on the matter?"

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, the fear of the Committee has been expressed by hon. Kagonyera, that we should not leave all the powers to the Minister to decide and do whatever he wants,  and overlook the board.  What we wanted is to have a check valve for the Minister so that if he decides to reverse the decision of the Board, he should explain it or have some additional reasons why he has done it.  That is why we want to put that clause there - that they should have additional information as to why they should reconsider the decision they had made.  That is what we are going to do,  because as the hon. Member said, we have seen Ministers frustrating Boards and doing everything without being touched.  That is what is behind this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that in sub clause (4) at the end, should be added the following words:  "and forward to the Board any additional relevant information on the matter."

(Question put and negatived).

Clause 11.

MR. KIRENGA:  I propose that after sub clause 4 of clause 11, we add another new sub clause as sub clause 5 to read,  "Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Minister under this section may, within 30 days after the decisions is communicated to him or her, appeal to the High Court against the decision of the Minister and the decision of the High Court under this section shall be final".   I beg to move that amendment.  

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

MR. KIRENGA:  What I am saying is that the party aggrieved should have a right to challenge the decision of the Minister,  in case the Minister gives an unfair decision.  The reason for appealing can be that the Minister was biased against the applicant,  or he did not even look at the papers - there may be good reasons why the matter should be taken to Court.  

If you look at clause 8 of this Bill which we have passed, you will note that the functions of the board are:  1(a)"The registering and issuing of national identity cards to the citizens of Uganda."   If a citizen of Uganda is refused a national identity card by the Board, he should be able to appeal to the Minister.  If the Minister also refuses, he should be able to appeal to the Court;  to show that he is actually entitled to the identification card.  If his citizenship is cancelled for a wrong reason, this should be challenged in Court.  

The hon. Minister said earlier that there should not be an appeal because this matter is dealing with work permits, immigration entry permits, et cetera.  But if you look at section 8, the board's powers extend to so many things as they are enumerated there,  and they touch the fundamental freedoms of a citizen,  his fundamental rights.  So, the decision of the Minister should be challenged in a Court of law so that the High Court can make a decision after hearing from both parties.  I am submitting that the decision of the Minister should not be final, but should be challenged by an appeal to the High Court.  In fact I am going to submit later that there should be another appeal from the High Court to the Court of Appeal.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAGGWA:  I want to support this amendment, except that I want to advise my Senior Counsel.  Once you open up to the High Court, you cannot limit it.  So, I would propose that it goes up;  you can appeal to the High Court against the decision of the Minister under this section.  But what stops me from - if I have lost in the High Court - going to the Court of Appeal, if I have the means;  and to the Supreme Court for that matter?  I would support it, but I do not want to limit it to the High Court's decision being final.  

MR. KARUHANGA: I stand to support the amendment moved by hon. Kirenga,  on additional grounds that the person who is not a citizen of Uganda and is being deported,  has a right in this Statute, on his way to the Airport to say, 'I want to go to the High Court.'   But the citizen of Uganda who is aggrieved because they have refused him a passport or they have cancelled his registration on the grounds that he was not five years old when he was picked on the street to become a citizen, he is not allowed to go to the High Court.  

I do not think we would be good legislators to take care of the interests of foreigners and then ignore the interests of our people for no reason at all.  Especially when you look at 11(a)(i) - it says:  "Any person",  that means any Ugandan citizen "aggrieved by any decision" and any decision has been any of the decisions enumerated in clause 8 all the way down.  Because earlier on,  Mr. Chairman, probably you saw me moving to the Minister to consult on why this provision was not there, and he had wisely advised me.  But I really think that the reasons he gave me were not taking it to account the points raised so far.  I would like to persuade him to abandon the ideas he was giving me,  when we were talking together.  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME: This particular clause,  I am not very sure that it was intended necessarily for Ugandans and I would like us to get the difference there.  But I want to say that it appears that we do not have a quorum and I do not know whether it would be in order for us to proceed when the quorum is not there, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: There are only 47 of us, therefore, we do not have a quorum.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Butime Tom): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report there to. I beg to move.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Butime Tom):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered parts of the Bill entitled Citizenship Immigration Control Bill, 1998, up to clause 10, and passed it with a few amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Butime Tom): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in spite of difficulties,  I think we have done some useful work.  I will therefore adjourn the House until Tuesday, February 23, 1999 at 2.00 pm.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose and adjourned until Tuesday February 23, 1999 at 2.00 pm).

            
