Wednesday, 13 February 2008

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you, and in the distinguished stranger’s gallery, we have two educationists visiting from San Luis Obispo, California USA: Jan Petring, a teacher and Ekki Petring, a retired professor from Seattle University Washington State. They are here to familiarise themselves with Parliamentary proceedings. You are most welcome to Uganda.(Applause)

2.32
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of public interest and national concern, of the increasing congestion and traffic jam in our capital city. This problem has far reaching implications to the extent that right now, even ambulances from Namirembe Hospital can no longer access Mulago Hospital. The jam has reached a level whereby it is becoming acceptable in Uganda to fail to meet an appointment and you say that it was because of the jam. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we need to look at the economic cost of this problem in terms of the private sector, which gives us the taxes which finance our budget. 

I was one time caught in a jam when I was going to Hoima, and it took me two and half hours from Statistics House to Nansana. If we are going to lose one and half hours just to come to town, then another hour for lunch time and an hour to go home, that means four hours off the day; how do we intend to cope with the other world? The transporters are complaining; the business community is complaining. And right now, if the fire brigade is called upon across the town, it cannot make it. We do not have to wait for an ugly scene where even our Head of State gets stuck in the jam; the situation is very bad. 

I, therefore, bring this matter as a matter of importance. We would want to know if KCC has a plan to decongest this city. Do we still need the taxi parks and bus parks where they are? Should we tolerate a situation where there are more than seven roads around the taxi park: Arua Park, William Street and Johnson Street are no longer passable; they have become loading areas. 

These are matters of national concern and I thought that we would need the ministries concerned to give us a comprehensive plan on how we intend to decongest the city. Who is in charge of UTODA? Must we have taxis loading and off-loading everywhere in the city, must we have boda bodas everywhere in the city? 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleague, I thought the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of works, which is concerned with the by-passes in this city, should come up and help this country –

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your point. 

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Do we have to discuss this? Why don’t we get a reaction from the minister; he has stated the facts. Okay, hon. Wacha.

2.36
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on the issue of how we relate to each other in our functions as Members of Parliament. Last week, hon. Crispus Kiyonga, Minister of Defence, led a high-powered delegation for a meeting in Lira. This delegation comprised hon. Gen. Aronda, hon. Lokeris, hon. Wakikona, hon. Musa Echweru, and hon. Father Lukoda. The others were chairpersons from the region of Karamoja. 

The delegation went to Lira  I understand to meet with the leadership of Lira and Pader to ask for cooperation from the two districts to allow our brothers from Karamoja to graze their cattle in those districts. 
Sir, although the delegation was made up principally of Members of Parliament, no Member of Parliament from Lango was informed about this meeting. In the last two Parliaments, the Rt hon. Prime Minister initiated a move that whenever a minister is visiting a constituency, the area Member of Parliament must be informed. But even if this were not so, it is only courteous that a Member of Parliament from an area, which is going to be visited by a minister or by such a high-powered delegation be informed. 

The matter which was going to be raised in this meeting is of great import to the Langi; the matter of the Karimojong grazing their cattle in their areas. None of us was informed. Whatever answer was given to them; I am not going to get involved in that. But I think we should go back to the way we used to cooperate, because short of that, there are going to be a lot of gaps in the way we do our things. 

Specifically in this matter, our people heard about this meeting; our people are asking us, what came out of it; our people are asking us as to whether we are going to accept what the delegation went for. We have no answer for them because we were not party to this meeting. I thought, Sir, I should raise this matter in case the honourable gentlemen might have forgotten how we used to operate so that they go back, rethink and start operating normally. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought that hon. Ben Wacha was contributing on what the other hon. Member had raised on traffic congestion, but you have made the point. I know we agreed that when there are such visits, Members concerned of a constituency should be advised. I do not think we have to debate. It is only maybe the Prime Minister to look into the matter and again remind the Executive that that should be the practice which we agreed on sometime back. I do not think we need to debate. The matter, which we had was from him and I want to complete then see how to proceed. It is his matter; let me get a response from the minister concerned.

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hear my colleagues calling me the minister for traffic jams. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: But in responding you should remember that hon. Akena is trying to solve that problem for us -(Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, first, I want to thank my colleague for raising this important issue of the Kampala traffic jam, which I do not usually call traffic jam but traffic confusion within Kampala - because when you look at the number of vehicles we have in this town and the roads we have, then you look at the congestion, completely, it is traffic confusion. 

Mr Speaker, most of you remember what happened in January 2007 when the Central Government had to intervene in repairing some of the roads in Kampala which were by that time deteriorating and the traffic jam by that time was at the highest peak. Then came in CHOGM, we took up other roads in Kampala, which were repaired; some were repaired, some were rehabilitated; some were reconstructed and these have helped to ease the traffic congestion in town. But here we have a problem that even the intervention we made in 2007, we did it outside the law; because the roads in Kampala are totally a responsibility of Kampala City Council. During CHOGM we did the same. We have decided even to light the city. As you go through the city you notice that it has been lit by the Central Government.

Mr Speaker, two or three weeks ago, we released Shs 5.5 billion to Kampala City Council to repair some of the access roads within the city. I am yet to find out which roads they are going to work upon. But the real problem we have is lack of proper management of the city - number one - by KCC; two, by the so-called UTODA, where by commuters stop anywhere they wish to stop and lack of big buses –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, I think this is a serious matter and it is a matter that touches on the management of the city and there are various responsible authorities, not only Kampala City Council but also the central Government. I think it requires a comprehensive statement to come here and we get the nitty gritty of what is happening in the city and why we have the confusion hon. Mukitale is talking about. 

As a mater of procedure, I would be of the view that let the minister get time to sit down, prepare a thorough statement on this matter, it comes here so that we can get a clear picture rather than the minister telling us, “No, it is KCC, which has failed to do its work.” I think we shall not get the real facts from that off-the-cuff statement. I think that should be the correct procedure. I humbly pray, honourable minister, that we go by that procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, what we need is a comprehensive solution to the problem. If the minister does not have the answer and wants time, definitely he will be given time but he did not ask for it. But definitely we need a comprehensive answer.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, hon. Lukwago was ahead of me because when you look at my notes, which I have on my paper, that was going to be my last prayer.

THE SPEAKER: We expect a comprehensive statement to come arising from hon. Lukwago’s suggestion. Let us be brief on this and then wait for a comprehensive statement as to the solution.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I wanted to go through the history, then at the end I was going to bring the issue of Kampala master plan. And that is where I was going to come in to say, why can’t I bring a comprehensive paper here, incorporating Kampala master plan, which the central Government wants to implement and this will ease the congestion within the city and also it will improve on the city roads. This is going to the cabinet first- our ministry has already developed the Kampala master plan, but the statement I can bring it within two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: No, what the honourable member stated are facts. There is no dispute about the congestion, the traffic jam. What we need is how do we solve it? Is it possible to solve it? That is the statement you come with and then we debate it. I think so.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I agree with you, Mr Speaker. But part of this solution is embedded in Kampala master plan.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, and you tell us in that statement.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

2.47
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. I am just making a brief response to the point raised by hon. Wacha. It is true that on Friday, 8 February 2008, I, together with other colleagues, went to Lira to hold a consultation about the drought situation in Karamoja. This was done rather urgently but I did make attempts to talk to some of our colleagues on phone and I was able to reach hon. Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Otto from Pader and hon. Omara Atubo. 

As hon. Wacha has said, it is an agreed procedure that if we are going to a particular area, it is only courteous and more useful that we involve colleagues from those areas. So the programme changed rather suddenly because of two factors: the emergency drought situation in Karamoja- On Monday, this week, we had a meeting to launch the committee for Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) and yet our colleagues from Karamoja were on pressure to move animals into the neighbouring districts. The Ministry of Defence and the Army had made it clear that they would not allow animals to cross into the neighbouring districts until a specific formal request had been made to those districts.  

In fact, we had taken a decision last year in July urging our colleagues, Members of Parliament from Karamoja to start dialogue with our colleagues from the neighbouring districts. We just went to put the matter on the agenda so that leaders in the neighbouring districts are aware of this need, and indeed we agreed at that meeting that we needed further consultations with the MPs and the counties that are neighbouring Karamoja. 

In summary, this was not intended in any way to undermine our colleagues; it was rather urgent and I did call some of the colleagues and informed them. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The hon. Member for Kaabong met me on Thursday last week and asked, “Are you travelling to a meeting that is going to be held in Lira?” I told him I was not aware of the meeting and did not know what the meeting was about. He said, “We are facing a severe drought in Karamoja; the grass is finished and we need assistance so that the animals can move to the neighbouring districts”. I just told him that I was not aware and I would be in another meeting. 

On Friday, in fact when you were opening the committee meeting in Entebbe, you saw me walk out to answer a phone call. That phone call was from Minister Crispus Kiyonga and he was informing me that he was on his way to Lira. We discussed the issue of the drought in Karamoja and access to grazing areas in our sub-region. I said I was not aware of the meeting but I had been told by the hon. Member for Kaabong. 
I requested that I be allowed to say something on two grounds. One, that the issue of the Karimojong moving their cattle to the neighbouring districts is an issue that must be critically dealt with because if they have no grass and they have no water, it is just obvious that somehow they have to graze in those areas. It can be agreed upon that they can have access. The biggest problem that the neighbours of Karamoja have is the question of the cattle raiders and the Karimojong warriors killing people and destroying property. 

When hon. Crispus Kiyonga called me, I said as a matter of principle - and it was reported that you told the meeting that I had agreed that the Karimojong can cross to our areas. That was not what I agreed to. What I agreed to and recognised in principle is that when our neighbours have problems, as a matter of principle we must find a way of helping them. I did mention two things related to that possibility of helping: The security roads to ensure that the wrong people do not cause problems and we have talked about this so much. If we have security roads, we deploy people in critical places; you deal with this.

Then I mentioned the issue of water for the cattle corridor of which Pader is part. I think much of Teso is also part it. Instead of waiting for the local people to request that those valley tanks be built, as a strategic investment, Government should have done that.  

Finally, it will make everybody’s life very easy if we are coordinated because the problem of the Karimojong is a problem that will be there for quite sometime and it would therefore be important that we institutionalise how we relate on such matters. Drought has been there for some time, a weekend of emergency will not help. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker for the opportunity. I just wanted this clarification made because a wrong impression may be sent that I had the authority to allow the Karimojong to go to my constituency. In fact, I told the Minister that I would talk to the chairman. I do not know if he came for the meeting because we never talked to him.

THE SPEAKER: The main reason hon. Ben Wacha raised this was lack of information to the representatives in the area. We have agreed that unless there is a special reason, where a minister visits, members concerned should be informed. I think that is agreed upon. The details of what you discuss would come out later.

2.55
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also rising on a matter of great national importance and it is urgent in nature. It is about the chaos we have in Kiseka Market right now. You will realise from the press reports that it is now two days since this chaos begun. Yesterday, we witnessed a battle between the Police, the SPC as well as other security agencies on the one hand and the vendors in the market on the other. The situation is so serious and as an area Member of Parliament, I have all reason to get concerned. I call upon all Members and particularly the government to look into this matter.

Yesterday, four people were injured in the scuffle and one of them was left in a critical condition. He is a gentleman called Gonzaga. He was shot on the left side of his chest almost near the heart, but was operated upon last night in Mulago Hospital and luckily enough the bullet was removed. We are not so sure whether he is recuperating very well. There were other people who were also injured. 

I thought Government would intervene and bring the situation under control. Unfortunately, as we talk now the battle is still on. When you look at the situation at Kisekka Market, it is like a war or battlefront. The whole area is devastated and this can be seen from the pictures that have appeared in the press today; it is like Baghdad. Surprisingly, when you look at some of the pictures it seems the Police and other security agencies are not helping the situation. For example, when you look at a police officer like this one in this picture aiming at a particular target - certainly this is not shooting in the air - he is aiming at a particular target. Mr Minister, this is unfortunate. 

If this situation is not brought under control, it is likely to escalate to uncontrollable levels and since it is in the central business district, we might end up in serious danger. I am saying this because we are likely to get into a situation where the whole city might be put on fire, which will be grossly unfortunate. 

As I have said, you cannot pass that place now because the whole market is in chaos because people have run away with the roads getting closed. 

Mr Speaker, there are two issues that I want to raise. One is that the source of this chaos is known to Government; it is about the proposed re-development of the market and the wrangle is arising out of the choice of the developer; who should develop the market? Is it the vendors or a private developer? 

I thought this matter had been settled when a statement of a government plan to redevelop that market was issued. The policy of Government was that first priority should be given to the vendors to develop their own market. So I think Government owes us an explanation as far as this situation is concerned. If the position of Government was to give first priority to the vendors, why do we still have this chaos? If Government were to stick to that position and implement it or enforce or work out the modalities of handing over all the necessary documents to the vendors to continue with the development, I do not think there would be this chaos.

Secondly –(Interjections)– I was winding up. Anyway, you can give the information.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Member holding the Floor. The information I want to give is that whereas there is freedom to demonstrate, we should look at the consequences of demonstrations. How you organise the demonstration matters because I also watched what hon. Lukwago is talking about on television and saw how tyres were being burnt while school children were going back home. I saw how scared these children were yet they have their rights. So, demonstrators should conduct their demonstrations in a way that does not interfere with the rights of others; or a way that does not infringe on other peoples rights. I thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you for the information –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, what do you want to be done? Are you simply reporting?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, while I was about to present my case she came in to give the information about demonstrations. Anyway, the issue is that there are no demonstrations in Kisekka Market. This was a spontaneous uprising by the vendors in that market, which is the very reason we are calling upon Government to give an explanation. 

I want a clarification from Government regarding its official position on this matter. If the position of Government is that priority be given to the vendors and it made an assurance to those vendors that they would be given the opportunity to redevelop their market, why this uprising? Why this chaos?

When recently a similar incident occurred in that market, I had the opportunity of going there with the Minister of State for Local Government, Mrs Hope Mwesigye. She explained to the vendors the government policy very clearly, in the presence of the RDC, the Inspector-General of Police and all the other Government authorities who were present. So, if Government is still sticking to that position, why the uprising? 

Secondly, let me talk about the shooting. Is the shooting a solution to this chaos? I think the use of force is not a solution. I am saying this because as we talk there are a number of SPCs down there shooting people and it is largely them and not the ordinary Police officers, who shoot these people. So, does the solution lie in these SPCs unleashing terror on the vendors or you can get a different solution to this chaos? I think these are questions that call for urgent response from the government minister. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us first have the Minister of Internal Affairs before the one of Local Government.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Lukwago for raising this important matter. I have also received reports about this incident. The background you have given about why there is confusion and that there is contention over who operates and manages this market, is essentially correct. The two contending forces started fighting yesterday at about 3 O’clock in the afternoon and the Police Post at Kisekka Market was overwhelmed by those who were fighting. The Police constable at the Police post called for reinforcement. When reinforcement came, they were able to subdue and suppress the fighting. 

It is true that in the course of the fighting, four people were injured. However, five Policemen were also injured, and one of them became unconscious. So, it is a situation of concern but I am happy to say that the Police have really subdued the situation and are deployed to make sure that anyone who tries to cause trouble is handled.  

It is true that of the four civilians that were injured, three were discharged and one is still in hospital. This one was injured around the shoulder and is being operated upon, and the condition of the patient is reported to be stable. I agree with hon. Lukwago that the answer is to solve the administrative management primary problem so that the Police does not have to come in to do the quelling of rioters.  

Mr Speaker, I have just received a report from the Police. It is a short report and with your permission I can read it to the Members.  I do not have copies for the Members but I think it is useful for them to get it from the horse’s mouth. 

This is a report from the Police on the Kisekka Market riot on 12 February 2008:

There has been a long standing conflict on Kisekka Market between the vendors and Rhino Investment, which leased the market from Kampala City Council. The conflict arises out of a misunderstanding on the management and leadership of the market.  Police has been working with the leadership of the market to ensure that the disgruntled people do not resort to violent means of attaining solutions. In fact, the Inspector-General of Police was scheduled to meet some of the market leaders anytime now.  

Yesterday, 12 February 2008 at about 1530 hours, Police received information that there was chaos at Kisekka Market involving vendors burning tyres and blocking roads. Consequently, the Police at Kisekka Market called for reinforcement after their quick assessment that the situation was getting worse. Immediately the Anti-riot Police came in to suppress the rioter situation, order was restored at the market by about 6 p.m. and Police has provided security to the market up to today. Nine people, including five Police officers, in the encounter with the angry mob, were injured by stray bullets and stones that were being thrown. This was prior to the arrival of the Anti-riot Police. 

The identities of the injured civilians are Alice Kanema, Nangobi Rose, Mugerwa John - who sustained slight injuries and was discharged after treatment at Mulago Hospital - and Gonzaga Ssekumba who was injured on the right hand side of the chest and was admitted at Mulago Hospital, ward 3B. His condition is improving. The Police officers who were injured include Jarua, attached to the CPS, who was assaulted by vendors to unconsciousness, PC Okello of CPS, Agone of CPS and Onyago of the Patrol Police Unit. So, these were the Police officers who suffered injuries from the riots.  

In the sequence of events, property was also damaged. It included two civilian motor vehicles and three Police vehicles all damaged by the riotous vendors. Notably, motor vehicle UAE 087M, a saloon car was burnt; two patrol vehicles sustained some damages; a fire tender of the Uganda police was damaged on the front screen. In the process of restoring order in the market, a stray bullet also hit a screen of the motor vehicle whose number has been given. It is a Mitsubish, Delica Wagon, which belongs to Beyaga Zirimenya.  

The Police and indeed the government of Uganda, condemn the acts that occurred yesterday, that is the rioting, the hooliganism and violence. We want to take this opportunity as a government to reassure the general public that the situation is now under control and that deployment has continued at Kisekka Market to ensure that law and order is enforced. Inquiries are going on to ensure that the perpetrators of the violence are brought to book.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS AOL:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise up on a point of clarification. I am seeking this clarification because when we went for a rally in Kitgum one time, we found that the Anti-riot Police had already been deployed. So, I just want to understand at what stage the Anti-riot Police were deployed. Because sometimes when the Anti-riot Police is deployed prematurely, you cause more chaos instead of quelling things. It is very unfortunate, and we all regret what is happening in the country- the rioting that sometimes even takes people’s lives. Sometimes it is the government’s mistake to deploy these Anti-riot Police prematurely. So, I need this clarification.  Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I need to be informed by the Minister of Internal Affairs on why it has become common practice for Police officers who are supposed to maintain law and order to come to a situation pretending to suppress what they consider a riot by a group of Ugandans. In many of these occasions where the Police come in to help so that a situation does not get out of hand, we hear of live bullets being shot at Ugandans who are not armed with any weapons. People are probably carrying stones or clubs but the Police officers come with their superior guns - the very guns, which are bought by the taxpayers of this country for better protection. 

Many times we hear of these security agents claiming to fire into the air to scare the rioters, but just as hon. Lukwago has demonstrated with the newspapers that he has, you see a police officer or a military man directly aiming at a human being, a fellow Ugandan, who is not armed in any way at all. 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I thought that when hon. Lukwago made the statement, it was not largely that the Police was there. I think he was saying that there is a problem in Kisekka Market that has caused the people there to start rioting. I think we should concentrate on what the cause is and what Government is trying to do so that this does not happen again. 

The reason the Police went there was because internal strives had started. So, how do we stop these internal strives that will cause the Police to be there? We should not really concentrate on why the Police was there; they were there because there was a riot. But we are not going to make this a fully-fledged debate because the intention of hon. Lukwago, when he came to see me, was to just report this matter so that the responsible ministries can find a lasting solution to the problem. 

MR ONZIMA: But, Mr Speaker, - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude –(Interruption due to technical problem with P.A. system)- I think we should suspend the proceedings for five minutes, so that the technical people can come in. 

(The House was suspended at 3.19 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.32 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

(The House rose at 3.34 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)




