Tuesday 13th February, 2001

Parliament met at 3.05p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I was informed that last week the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was asked to update you about the progress in dealing with the issues raised earlier in this House regarding the Motor Vehicle Loan Scheme and in particular, the monthly deductions from the hon. Members’ emoluments. The House was then informed, and quite rightly, in my view, that the issue of the monthly deductions under the Loan Scheme was a matter for the Accounting Officer of Parliament and the Parliamentary Commission to deal with, and therefore not the Prime Minister. In this connection therefore, I wish to say the following:

The position of the Commission is that for the time being the normal monthly deductions as par the agreement between Members of Parliament and the Central Purchasing Corporation should continue but without increasing the deductions for fear that the time of the 6th Parliament is running out. That is the position of the Commission, no more deductions. 

As to whether the deductions or were based on a proper formula, I think hon. Members know very well that the case of this matter was referred to a Committee which is now, I understand, chaired by the hon. Minister of Works, Housing and Communication, hon. John Nasasira. I believe that when the report comes out, which most probably towards the end of this month or early next month, the Commission will ensure that it is implemented. The interests and concerns expressed by hon. Members and as contained in the Resolution referred to will be taken into account. This is our position as the Commission. I am sure as soon as hon. Nasasira comes up with his report and recommendations regarding the harmonisation of these contentious issues, we shall be in a position to deal with the matter. 

Maybe, the hon. Nasasira might wish to throw light on the progress in his Committee. 

THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS (John Nasasira): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker for allowing me to inform Members of the progress of our Committee’s work. Hon. Members will recall that after the Resolutions were passed here on 11th of August, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister selected three Members from Cabinet, that is, hon. Prof. Edward Rugumayo who was chairing then before he went on leave, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and myself. We were joined on the Committee by hon. Salaamu Musumba, hon. Lt. James Kinobe, hon. Charles Egou and hon. Akika Othieno. This Committee was known as the Political Harmonisation Committee on the way forward concerning the Motor Vehicle Loan Scheme for Members of Parliament. We were trying to harmonise this.  

We meet on 30th November last year and studied all the documentation that was availed to us at that time. From the documentation we decided that the best way forward was as follows: 

One; we realised that there was need to look at each individual case separately. There as a tendency to mix up dealers and Members of Parliament, but each case had to be analysed separately because you found that sometimes you had two similar vehicles, with different prices and so on and so forth. And at the same time, the Auditor General also accepted to look at his report which was discussed here and where hon. Members expressed some of their observations and concerns in that report.

We also decided that Parliament needed to hire a consultant to advise each Member of Parliament and help to sort out the legal and financial complexities that were in that purchase.  

There were also hon. Members of Parliament mainly who had bought trucks and were querying the tonnage. Through hon. Musumba, we asked the Commission to ask all hon. Members with the trucks to send them to the Chief Mechanical Engineer of my Ministry so that the tonnage can be decided on, whether it was the correct tonnage or there was a problem.  

So what has happened since our meeting and when we decided on that way forward? The consultant has produced a draft report, which I have here. But I am not laying it on the Table since it is still a draft. The consultant interviewed over 54 Members from this report, each case has been analysed with respect to the CIF Dealer and CIF, URA and the prices. The consultant is waiting for the final report from the Auditor General to finalise his report and also the issue of the tonnage.  

With respect to tonnage, hon. Members have been on recess and the Chief Mechanical Engineer has only received two vehicles that have been checked. So I am appealing that those who still want their records checked should send them within the next two weeks so that the chief mechanical can finalise his tonnage report.

The Auditor General’s report will be ready and he will send it to the Prime Minister. He has assured the Rt. hon. Prime Minister that he will send it by 23rd of this month. When all these reports are in, then our Committee will finalise its report, present it to Cabinet and we shall discuss it early next month and then we shall finalise the report which will be presented to the Speaker for the benefit of hon. Members. Thank you Mr. Speaker. 

MR.ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you for the brief and hon. Nasasira as well. Mr. Speaker, I would like to get clarification as far as the reductions are concerned because in January, we had the deductions stepped up. According to my own investigation, even for February the same thing has applied. How are we going to recover this money? Likewise, how are the strong instructions of the Chairman of the Commission being abided to by the people in the Accounts Section?

THE SPEAKER: Well, there have been some misunderstandings here and there, but I wish to assure you that the matter is being pursued. I am sure the conclusion will not be that unpalatable to hon. Members. 

MR.PINTO: Could you be a little more specific, Mr. Speaker?  What do you mean will not be unpalatable?

THE SPEAKER: I had already said that in the implementation, the Commission would take into account the interests and concerns expressed by hon. Members here and contained in the Resolution. That is the meaning of not being unpalatable.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I just want to get clarification from hon. Nasasira about the consultants. I heard him say that the consultant was asked to talk to each member but then at the end he said they had so far talked to 64 and they have made a draft.  Now what happens to those who have not been interviewed?  Is that it, if I heard you right? I thought I heard you say that the consultant was to talk to every member who benefited from this scheme before they make their report. Then at the same time you said they actually have spoken to 54 members but have already made a draft report. So what about those who have not been yet talked to?

MR.NASASIRA: No, the consultant was supposed to interview or to talk to any hon. Member who had a query. You see in this exercise, there are hon. Members who are not querying any of the transaction. There are those in fact who have finished paying. There are different issues. So the consultant was talking to those who wanted to give him more details and in this report I have seen about 54 hon. Members who have talked to the consultant and assumed may be the others did not have any need. But if there is need, they can still talk to this consultant who is actually hired by Parliament through the Commission.  So I think we can easily find out from the Commission.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think let us take it that something is happening and when all is done, we will get appropriate information. Because as of now things have not been tied up in their entirety and we should give the opportunity to the Nasasira Committee to come up with the appropriate information.

MR.NYAI: Mr. Speaker, mine was only a related financial matter. I am very glad for the Minister’s explanation but this House made a Resolution to establish a Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the collapsing banking system long ago. That Commission was to write a report to the Minister for Finance, who will hand it to Parliament and the time has long past. I am only asking whether the Minister has given your office that report. If not, can you please call the Minister to avail that report to Parliament so that as this is in the interest of the largest society of Ugandan people and they will know that their interest has been handled properly. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is of a general nature regarding Resolutions of this House. My information is that last time when the issue was raised in generalities, you were assured that the Clerk would compile a report regarding various Resolutions of this House. It will indicate which Resolutions require follow up, to what extent some, if not all, have been followed and the fate of the others. That is my understanding and I think your issue could be tackled when the Clerk comes up with that report.

MR.NYAI: But Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is, the public knew that Justice Ogola Commission was set up and the public also knows that the Justice Ogola Commission has reported to the Minister for Finance. I am only asking you to use your good offices to make sure that this House gets that report instead of it being put under the carpet or something like that.

THE SPEAKER: Okay your point is taken. So can we hon. Members –(Interruption) is this still an issue or is still –(Interruption)

MR.ONGOM: It is still the issue of the consultant, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The consultant?

MR.ONGOM: Yes on these vehicles. You see the matter was left rather vague. Some of us are hearing about the consultant only today. We did not know there was a consultant to be contacted and any complaint given to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Minister can you ensure that the identity of this consultant is known and his term of reference are known to hon. Members who may wish to interact with him? Is that okay?  

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: Mr. Speaker I have a supplementary question on the consultant. There is talk going on that the Members of Parliament will have their money deducted to the tune of Shs.50,000 per member to pay the consultant and we are not aware of the existence of this consultant. How can we pay for somebody we have not employed? 

Secondly, my query was quoted by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister. I have not been informed to appear before the consultant. What is the consultant all about Mr. Speaker?  I thank you.

MR.NASASIRA: Mr. Speaker, I was assuming that a member of the Commission would come and assist this House in this matter. As you see, this Committee combines those Members of Parliament mainly from the Commission and also Ministers. It is a Joint Committee. When this Committee discussed their assignment of the consultant, an independent consultant that Resolution was given to Parliament and the Commission went ahead and hired this consultant. And the report was given to the consultant.  So I had assumed that the terms of reference of that consultant together with informing members of the consultant was done and when I received the draft report, I found only the Members of Parliament who were interviewed were 54. So I think this is a matter the Parliamentary Commission could handle better. Of how the consultant was hired, what terms and how the Members of Parliament should be informed to come and discuss this matter with the consultant.

THE SPEAKER: Let us leave it at that (Interruption).

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural point regarding the Communication Floor between the Commission, which you chair and the rest of us. I think there is absolute lack of communication. I do not know of any point whether we have received Minutes or Newsletter or whatever on decisions that have been taken. Even I think as far as the Budget formulation for Parliament is concerned. Could you throw some light? Even if it is the Commission representing Parliament, how can it be obscure from us?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know what exactly is meant by “lack of communication”. If you are talking of general communication, I do not know what exactly you mean, whether there should be some periodical issue of say, bulletins, to say what is going on within Parliament and so on. If that is the case, then it is a matter, which we can be taken up. I think there is need to keep the Members of Parliament informed about what is going on in their own House, the point is well taken. I will discuss it with my colleagues on the Commission and the official of Parliament who is responsible for publications and circulation of publication.  But for the time being, hon. Members, let us leave it at this point.  

If there is any other point, which needs to be clarified in respect of which Members must be informed and especially the one that has been raised, namely, “who is this consultant, what are his or her terms of reference and who appointed him, and so on and so forth”, that information can be made available to hon. Members either tomorrow or the day after by a Member of the Commission.

MR.LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, it should also be noted that most of us do not know about this consultant, we do not even know that we are supposed to go and meet him. It is a pity!

THE SPEAKER: I am saying that that information will be made available. Is that all right, hon. Lwanga?

MR.LWANGA: Since you are saying so, Mr. Speaker, it will be accepted. But really it is a sign of negligence on the part of the Commission.

THE SPEAKER: Whatever information is required to be given to Members of Parliament will be given. I think it is only then that you will be able to judge whether there has been some negligence on the part of the Commission or not. So, if you can wait until then, hold your fire.

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to take you back!  There is something you mentioned and my mind kept on asking – I did not understand well. Could you throw more light on the deductions? You talked about normal deductions, and then you said, “but depending on”, can you throw some light?

THE SPEAKER: I did not say, “depending on”, I was really emphasising what normal deductions are. You remember there was a problem, which arose when deductions were almost doubled or tripled? That is what I meant. I take the point, but the matter is being pursued as of today.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With due respect to you, I am standing on a point of procedure.  Before I go to that, I would like to thank whoever prayed for me not to go to Luzira.

On a point of procedure, I would like to wage a form of protest. For about four months now, I have had two standing important questions, which I was supposed to present on behalf of the people I represent, namely, Lubaga South. One is questioning the issue of a repossession certificate by Minister Ssendaula over a company, which was not expropriated in 1972, that is, East African General Insurance. The second one is challenging the Golf Course Hotel Development on Yusuf Lule Road. Ever since I put up those questions, I am not hearing any response and we are about to go for a recess.  Is there a hidden agenda that those questions be not answered?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you will recall that when I interacted with you last week, you told me that your questions should not be on the Order Paper because you were not going to be available, and I think you told me that you are indisposed, you remember?

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with due respect to you, during that communication you said I was supposed to report at a certain place, so, I could not certainly come to the House.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Lukyamuzi, you should be fair. Did you not say that you were sick and that the matter of your questions should be postponed to when you are available? I have not yet received a communication to say that you are now well and ready to ask those questions.  When I receive that communication, your questions will be on the Order Paper.

Hon. Members, the next business is to proceed with the Local Governments Act (Amendment) Bill, 2000. I think last time when you considered this matter you were at the Committee Stage where we were supposed to take decisions, and I think we went up to Clause 7.  I have unfortunately been advised that we are not in quorum and therefore, I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes so that we realise this quorum and proceed.

(The Proceedings were suspended at 3.34p.m due to lack of quorum)

(On resumption at3.55p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: If there are hon. Members in the Lobby, can I request them to come in so that we can proceed?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

Clause 3.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members you had reached a stage where Clause 3 was stood over to allow the hon. Members concerned to harmonise their positions. May I call upon the Chairperson to inform us how far they have gone.

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Rwabita Deo): Mr. Chairman, I want to remind Members that it would be better to have the amendment Bill and the Local Governments Act of 1997 so that we follow very well. In the amendment Bill, under Clause 3 we found out that subsection 7(2) was not only over protecting the local councils but unfair to anybody who would be wronged in case a trader or supplier is not paid. Therefore, hon. Omara Atubo brought in an amendment and I also consulted the Local Government officials and we have agreed that 7(2) be amended and the following be put in its place. 

"Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of the section, no execution or attachment or process in such a nature shall be issued out of any court for enforcing payment by Local Government of any money or costs against its fixed assets – (Mr. Chairman there is another small amendment I am bringing in) - and statutory transfers- This has to come in because some of these Local Governments get money directly from Central Government to cater for health, education and other development projects. If they are not saved, they can be attached and, therefore, the community will lose those services. That is why we are bringing in these statutory transfers. - provided that execution or attachment shall only be made against any other property within six months from the date of judgement, order or decree". Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: The copy I have does not have a proviso.  Can you read it again? Mine reads as follows: "Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of the section- Hon. Omara Atubo is that good drafting? But the substantive point I am trying to seek clarification is after the words "assets" - (Interruption)

MR.OMARA ATUBO: There was nothing yet.

THE CHAIRMAN: There was nothing and then he went on to read "provided", mine is “and”.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, later on, with the intervention of the Minister of Local Government, he also brought to our attention this important funding, which the Central Government gives to the Local Government, which I conceded to. I thought it was very important that services in the Local Government should not be paralysed.  Some of these transfers are really for health, education and salary of staff, as the chairman of the committee has said. Originally it was not there. It has been added.  

The purpose is that you cannot, under any circumstances, attach fixed assets and statutory transfers; they are protected. If you want to move against the Local Government you can attach other things, which are there, and these of course are accounts for graduated tax. Nobody else comes too soon to remove it. So it reads as follows: - after the fixed assets add "and statutory transfers". So these are prohibited from being attached.  From there you have a proviso to that prohibition and it says, "provided that execution or attachment shall only be made against any other property within six months from the date of judgement, decree or order”. Any other properties are the moveable property such as the vehicles of the Local Government, office computers and so on.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Atubo, before you explain, I would like to get the text correct. Is it like this, after the expression "fixed assets" - "and statutory transfers provided that no execution or attachment shall be made against any other property within six months from the date of judgement, order or decree". Is that the text?

MR.OMARA ATUBO: That is right. You can attach -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Provided that “no execution”?

MR.OMARA ATUBO: No provided that “execution”. You may execute.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. "Provided that at execution or attachment shall be made against any other property within six months from the date of judgement, order or decree.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Actually it should be "may" because it is optional. You may proceed after six months - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No I think we have not got the text correct. That means you have not harmonised - (Interruption)

MR.OMARA ATUBO: I think the important thing is the idea, the draftsmen are there. I think let us get the idea correct. What do we want to achieve by the amendment?  The first part is that you do not attach fixed assets and statutory transfers. What you are allowed to attach is any other thing except those. Even there you give Local Government six months after you have obtained the judgement decree or order because you do not go and execute suddenly after obtaining the judgement. You give them time to prepare in their budget to satisfy the judgement; those are the ideas.  

MR. CHIARMAN: Now read out the proviso. “Provided that –”

MR.OMARA ATUBO: “execution or attachment may be carried out-”

THE CHIARMAN: “May be made against any other property within six months from the date of judgement, order or decree.”

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Exactly.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga Philip): In general terms, I do not differ very much from what the hon. Member has just said. But if we are putting a time frame of six months then we have got to take into account the budgetary process of these Local Governments. I would prefer a minimum of 12 months; that gives the Local Government time even if something has to be planned for whether somebody has sued and has got to be paid. The budget framework within which the Local Government maybe able to afford even from what he is talking about like graduated tax and so on.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members the text I have captured is as follows. The so-called harmonised position. Amend Clause 7(2) as follows: “Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section, no execution or attachment or process in such a nature shall be issued out of any court for enforcing payment by a Local Government of any money or costs against its fixed assets and statutory transfers provided that execution or attachment may be made against any other property within six months of judgement, order, or decree.” This is the amendment. You said you accept it and we say, ‘why’ or you do not; and that is it.

MR.RUZINDANA: Mr. Chairman, is it “within” or “after six months”? From the explanation of hon. Omara Atubo, it seems it is after six months but the text says “within”.

MR.OMARA ATUBO: You are correct it is “after six months”.  You give them a minimum of six months to prepare to pay you.

THE CHAIRMAN: So “within” is replaced?

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Yes “after six months”.

THE CHAIRMAN: With “after”?

MR.OMARA ATUBO: “After six months”. But let me add, Mr. Chairman that, the hon. Minister of State for Local Government, it took us a lot of discussion and compromise even to arrive at this position. As you know, to wait for six months for a debt to be paid and also to protect a Local Government in having its fixed assets and statutory transfers protected, I think it is a concession that I would like you to appreciate. It was originally one year, even that one year what came out from Local Government the fixed assets and statutory transfers were not included. It was from our proposals that we have brought this. For you to come and say we go back to the original position of one year, I think if you can consult your two other Brothers there in front, they will agree with you that it is actually six months not 12 months.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kaggwa, do you still have a point? 

MR.KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, I am happy my original complaint was like what hon. Ruzindana raised, but I want to comment on the 12 months the Minister is raising. I think he should appreciate that this is even changing a precedent. You cannot have your cake and eat it too. You are a corporate body; by even allowing you six months, we are closing one eye. So to come and say 12 months, then I would say we better remove it completely because this is a body corporate. Supposing it was a Local Government suing, would it allow the individual to wait for 12 months?  We are being very, very considerate to allow six months and I think the Minister should consider this. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, before Clause 8, there is a Clause after 7 which amends section 24 of the principal Act, and that one is dealing with the chairmen LC 111s of sub-counties. Those who have got the Local Government Act should refer to section 24. After 5 we are putting a 6 and we are saying, 
“A person is qualified to be a chairperson under this section if that person –
    (a) is ordinarily resident in the area of jurisdiction; and 
    (b) has completed a minimum formal education of ordinary level standard or its equivalent.”  

The justification is as follows: We want to ensure a minimum qualification for the chairman LC 3 council because this person is full time and is in charge of the activities of the sub-county. We have consulted the Minister of Local Government, we had even a re-treat in Jinja and we discussed this thoroughly, and in good will we thought it was necessary, especially, when the Local Government Ministry had made some studies and consulted very many Local Governments upcountry about this issue.  The LC 3 chairperson is receiving a lot of resources from Central Government for development and poverty eradication. 

The same council is receiving a lot of money from grants and, for your information Mr. Chairman, already some sub-county chiefs are graduates. The Assistant Chief Administrative Officers at county level are graduates and many of the extension service officers like agriculture, veterinary, fisheries are also graduates. We find ourselves in a terrible fix if you say the chairman can be anybody with as little standard as primary seven. But then how will this man monitor/supervise all these resources? How will he guide the making of a three-year plan program of his sub-county? How will he interpret and internalise Government policies, which are normally written in English.  

So, for all these reasons, Mr. Chairman, the committee was of the opinion that at least, the chairman LC 111 should have a minimum education of ordinary level or its equivalent.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, there is a new Clause being proposed by the Committee that immediately after 7 you have a new Clause which should read as follows: - It is on page six your document. If you have nothing to say, then I will put the question. 
 
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali): Mr. Chairman, I know why some people are laughing -(Laughter)- anxiously waiting for my comment on this, and I would like to make this clarification. When we were consulting on all these amendments, there was a problem regarding the qualification of a chairperson of LC 3.  This was mitigated by the reasons given by the chairperson of the Committee. A person who is in charge of a budget which will soon be up to Shs.1 billion in some places, a person who will be co-ordinating and administering graduates and doctors and so on. 

When I consulted my Prime Minister, he advised me to consult further and higher. I did consult and the President gave me an assignment. He said he was still opposed to attaching qualifications to the office of a chairperson for the sub-county, unless I consult the Local Councils themselves. Because of the time factor I carried on consultations in two sub-counties of every district in Uganda, one rural and one near the headquarters. It is on the basis of that, that I am supporting the amendment.  

However, I plead guilty on one thing. When the President gave me this assignment of consultation, I did not report back to him, unfortunately, up to today. So, he still has the position as when he gave me the assignment. Since I have not gone back to report to him my findings, that is what brings about these apparent smiles and laugher about what I was going to comment. So, in short, I support the amendment but I have the duty of briefing the President over this.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, I would like a clarification from the hon. Minister and perhaps the Leader of Government Business on what the position of Government is on this matter. Is it the individual opinion of the Minister? After he had consulted, did it go through Cabinet or are we going to have a problem where the President is of this view and individual Ministers are of that view? 

MR.KARUHANGA: I am raising this clarification again because the very last time we discussed this matter when we passed the original Bill, I also raised it. The issue is, taking into account some areas in Uganda, which may not have candidates with that qualification –(Interruptions)- excuse me; I am just saying –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you allow him to develop his point.  You will have your opportunity.
 
MR.KARUHANGA: Some of us come from areas, which were not favoured by a lot of education in the past. In my own constituency and in my own sub-county, we failed to get a candidate with senior four qualification or an equivalent. It is not to say that they are not there but there was nobody who offered to run for the office and in the process –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you just hold on. I want order in the House please. If you must maintain the description of being hon. Members of the august House, then you should live and measure up to it. Can you proceed? You will have the opportunity to give a contrary view. That is the way we are supposed to proceed.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and also the House of a situation in my constituency. I know all the advantages we are trying to assume and I know the weaknesses we are suffering in my own parish by having someone who is not that qualified; and I am disappointed. But we failed to get a candidate who had these qualifications. To make matters worse, when there was a vacancy at LC 4 because they had passed a vote of no confidence in the previous chairman, the LC 3 council elected my sub-county chairman to be the county chairman when he does not even have this qualification as we talk. 

My constituency maybe the unfortunate one in the whole country but there could be some other constituencies which may be facing this situation. We can pass this amendment as supported by the Minister and as proposed by the Committee. I moved last time and it was rejected but I want to move it again as a cautionary provision and a good legislative practice. We should add, “unless there is no candidate who offers himself with these qualifications in that sub-county”. Because if there is a candidate, whether the candidate is unpopular or not but has S.4, then that persons passes. But if there is no candidate with those qualifications and I am thinking about areas like – maybe my Friends from Karamoja can speak for themselves – but I am talking about my constituency. So I was wondering, could we not for legislative and legalistic purposes use the word unless?  Unless we say we can hire people from other areas and as expatriates.

THE CHAIRMAN: I take it that you have not moved a formal amendment to this amendment.

MR.KARUHANGA: I wanted clarification first from the Prime Minister and then we can see whether there is any other supporting position because if my constituency is the only one, I do not want us to legislate for it.

MR.RUZINDANA: I have six LC 3s, only two of those have chairmen who have S.4 qualifications. It is not that there are no people with S.4 in others, but what do you do if they do not offer themselves? If those with S.4 qualifications do not offer themselves, how are you going to handle it? The proviso he is putting, I think, would be a reasonable way out. The S.4 can be there and there is a proviso for a situation where no candidate with that qualification offers himself.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want clarification from either hon. Karuhanga or hon. Ruzindana. This lack of people with S.4 qualification in the case you have quoted, could it have been that nobody offered at that level because in any case there was no such a requirement in the law at the time? You know it is possible because there was no requirement in the law, they did not find it necessary to offer themselves, so they allowed the more popular people to go. 

MR.KARUHANGA: It is absolutely possible. In fact, hon. Ongom may be right that because there was no such a requirement, people who to offer could not do so. But it is also possible that there was no actual candidate. In my particular sub-county, there was no particular candidate who could offer. What we have are people who after getting S.4 they disappear to Kampala, and do not live in the constituency, and so we have a problem of people going to going to urban areas like Kampala and Mbarara. They do not like to be residents in the area. 

The good thing is that if provided that if there is no candidate with this qualification, I am very sure that the hon. Minister will have no problem whatsoever in persuading his President for us not to get vote. I am sure that that will satisfy all doubting Thomases, and everybody will be accommodated. At the same time we will have processed our laws in a very straightforward manner.  If that is the case, then I would like to make an additional amendment. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us hear from the Prime Minister before you make a formal amendment. 

PROF.NSIBAMBI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The point we must grasp is that we launched Universal Primary Education (UPE) recently, and as I speak the bag is bulging, which means that they are many people who have embraced it. We are now considering what to do with regard to post primary education. In fact, I am chairing an inter-ministerial meeting in which we must consider the absorption of so many people who have embraced UPE. There are a number of very bright people who do not have money and who at the moment have, actually, only stopped at P.7. Therefore, my plea to you is very simple. Before we have put in place facilities for bright but poor people, we cannot become rigid because if we are rigid we may, actually, be creating an impossible position for very talented people who have not accessed secondary education. This is the point we have always stressed that as we grapple with problems of development, we need flexibility. 

So, without any hesitation, the Government position must be that we do not require “O” levels yet until we have put in place facilities for people to access secondary education, and they are not there yet. In terms of those who are very poor, I have come across a very bright person, who has not accessed secondary education. I am still looking for assistance for this person. So, I make a special plea to you that we should not rigidify because those unique people who may not have formal credentials sometimes perform miracles. That is why you have the Winston Churchill and others. So, I would like to make a special appeal that –(Interruption).

MS.BIKORWENDA: I am seeking clarification from the hon. Rt. Prime Minister. I do not know from his if we are trying to create jobs for UPE leavers at that level. I know a child is about 12 years old by P.7. Imagine employing a 12-year old child at that level where most of the Local Government activities take place; that will be very unsound. 

Secondly, there is an hon. Member who said that in his constituency they could not afford a candidate at that level. How many examinations of “O” level have they sat since then, and how many S.4 leavers are floating there?

PROF.NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the point was missed. I was speaking of “O” level requirements and by that time many people are mature. In fact, for late starters, we have people, who are slightly even over-mature at that level. And also speaking from my experience, I studied with people, who were old but did not even access Kindergarten but they are very bright. 

So, my final plea is that regardless of what the President said, we should not suffer from credentialism as hon. Babu said. People who suffer from credentialism do not realise that there are unique people, and I want to inform you that some people have been made Professors without a degree. There are some universities where people have become Professors without a university degree because they are unique. So, I want to call upon Ugandans to embrace –(Interruption)

LT.COL.MUDOOLA: Thank you very much Mr. Prime Minister.   I remember very well the Rt. hon. Prime Minister was in the Constituent Assembly, and with all these bright ideas, why did they accept to put qualifications for Members of Parliament in the Constitution? (Applause)

PROF.NSIBAMBI: As you know, I am a Professor of Political Science and I was so at that time, and I opposed it. You can revisit the proceedings. I opposed it. You can check these things. I regard myself as a permanent student.  For example, since I joined this Parliament, I have gathered a lot yet I am a Professor of Political Science.  I am a student of practical politics so I do not suffer from credentialism. I am always a student and I want you to become students and do not close doors using the so-called formal qualifications.

DR.NKUUHE: I seek clarification from my learned colleague about what you said. For us we are trying to establish the best way out and in my view, hon. Karuhanga’s is the best way out. But I have followed Professor’s argument and I have also listened to your argument. I would have expected you to do some sort of study. His is the only one where there is a basis for us to make a decision because they did some sort of research and on that basis they made a recommendation. The post we are trying to establish is just one in a sub-county. There are many others, they are still open so really Professor, I think we should try to harmonise and come to hon. Karuhanga’s position.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nkuuhe, are you contributing or you are interrupting the debate?  

DR.NKUUHE: The clarification I am seeking is, should we not put more faith in one where there was a bit of research throughout the country and then if possible we harmonise our position with hon. Karuhanga’s so that we move out of this impasse?

PROF.NSIBAMBI: Mr. Chairman, I would be in for standing over this clause and we carry out further research. I want also to mention that I edited a book on decentralisation and local governance and I am aware of situations where people may not have those formal credentials but who can efficaciously perform. I thank you.

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I am really disturbed.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, what we are debating is this amendment, whether we should go with it or not, or whether it should be - you know –(Interruption)

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am really disturbed when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister says he hates credentialism yet just recently when we passed the Presidential Act, we were talking of UNEB verifying the equivalents. I wish he had stood here to say everybody should stand even for President because there are people who have not acquired any education and they can be good leaders of this country.  

Secondly, I always hate exceptions to be the general rule. If there is one gombolola or two without an “O” level person, why should we make a law to protect only those two people? I think we can modify this. When I look at the Committee report, it talks of somebody being ordinarily a resident. I would rather we make it a provision like we have in the parliamentary elections, where somebody willing to go back could go and stand and if he is willing to be permanent there. 

Thirdly, the Minister has categorically told us that when he consulted his Excellency, the President, he told him to go and research. He has given us the results of the research and he has said his wrongdoing has only been not to have reported back to the President that what you told me about has been supported by the Councils. 

Fourthly, as of now, the issue is unemployment. There are so many graduates, so many diploma holders. I think these people will be willing to go and work as gombolola chiefs if only they were empowered. What do I mean? If now you say no “O” level is required, I would say, ‘why should I go and fight with these old people in the village?’ But if I know I have “entandikwa” of having a minimum of “O” level, may be some people will be willing to go. 

Lastly, if we are modernising, we are not going to be modernising when we are moving backward. I thank you.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I move this amendment with a lot of difficulty because I am persuaded about the qualifications of S.4 for leadership at sub-county level. I hope this provision will never be used because the way I am going to propose it will be such that it may never be used. But it will solve the problem of an eventuality of an impasse and there is a vacuum of leadership in a place. I am keeping the words as proposed by the Committee in full without any amendment and I am saying that “unless there is no candidate who has offered to be nominated for this office by close of the official nomination day. In the event of such an eventuality, new nominations shall be called and candidates must possess at least primary seven or its equivalent with relevant experience within seven days thereafter.” I accept any amendments to my proposal.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, first of all, let me take this opportunity to -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I want to know whether you are moving a formal amendment to the Committee’s amendment. Let us dispose of that.

MR.KARUHANGA: I am moving a formal amendment to the Committee’s amendment.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, it is an amendment, so we will deal with your amendment first.

MR.KARUHANGA: There are some Members who are uncomfortable with “equivalent of P.7”. I am prepared to drop that if it is not necessary but I want to know if there is any Member who wants to amend this. He is free to do so.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Karuhanga, I do not have the text to go by. Can you write it out? In the meantime, we are standing over this provision; we will come back to it.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, I feel it is important that I give this clarification. The Members should not go away with the idea that the Minister of Local Government is diametrically opposed to the Prime Minister’s views. The point missing, which I want to emphasise, is that when I was given the responsibility to carry on research, which I did, I did not report back to the Prime Minister or the President. So, this debate of amendment of this law catches me at a point when I have not yet reported. But I have the results of the research so I took personal responsibility to give the advice I gave. So, it is not that the Prime Minister and his Minister are diametrically opposed.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Clause 8.

MR RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, we are standing over that new amendment –(Interruption)

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Chairman, I did not know that they were going to move a new Clause. I also had a new Clause 8 to move something different from the Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, proceed; let us hear the amendment.

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Chairman, I want to move a new Clause to amend section 24 and add that ‘there will be one elderly person above 60 years on LC 1, LC2 and LC3.’ Mr. Chairman, I would like to give the reasons why I am moving it, if you allow me.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, you tell us where you want to put the amendment so that we can guide the House. Where is the text of the amendment? Where do you want to put it?

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Chairman, I want to provide a new Clause 8 because I did not know that the Chairman was moving a new 8.

THE CHAIRMAN: A new 8 to read as follows “there will be one elderly person above 60 years of age on the lower councils.”

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, your amendment can only be understood in relation to the Principal Act. You should take us through it so that we appreciate it.

MS.KABASHARIRA: The Principal Act on section 24 –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Reads as follows –(Interruption)

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Chairman, they are too many, Local Government Councils, but the last one –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What has it to do with the composition or -(Interruption)

MS.KABASHARIRA: The composition, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Section 24 of the Principal Act deals with the composition of –(Interruption)

MS.KABASHARIRA: Of lower Local Government Councils.

THE CHAIRMAN: Alright, and it is as follows; 1,2,3,4 –(Interruption)

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Chairman, they are too many.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, the last but one?

MS.KABASHARIRA: The last one is (e) women Councillors forming one third of the councils, so I wanted to add (f) that one elderly person above 55 years of age. 

I am bringing this amendment because of the competition of our elections today; we miss out the experience of these people. Most of them are very well educated former civil servants; they have gained experience. Some have served in the army and get pension. So, we miss their experience and wisdom. And at times it is difficult for these elderly people to compete, so they stand to be disadvantaged. So, if we could allow them just one elderly person.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, you need to clarify this to the house. You are making a provision for improving upon the composition of the lower council but you must be prepared to make a provision for how these elderly people of 55 years plus will get elected How does he get there, where do you get him from, and so on.

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Chairman, when –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, can you clarify that?

MR.RUZINDANA: No, no, I do not want to clarify that; I want to amplify the point you are making. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I want to be clarified, I am not debating.

MR.RUZINDANA: Yes, the question of the elderly, where I am about to reach –(Laughter)- would arise if there was a specification of age in (a), (b), (d) and (e). There is only a specification of age in (c) that is, two youth.  The other people (a), b), (d) and (e) is open; those of above 60 are free to compete for all these and there is no age limit. The other one –(Interruption)

MR.ONGOM: Can I be clarified –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but he is still clarifying.

MR.RUZINDANA: I am still clarifying, Mr. Chairman, that the two councillors who are disabled could be above 60.  The one chairperson could be above 60, and I know one who is above 60, and the others. But then her proposal would also bring another problem. You may need a man and woman who are above 60 and you are going to get into the problem of how you elect this man or this woman as you have raised. I would like to persuade my colleagues that this amendment should be dropped.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I stand to second the amendment (Applause). In the history of Africa, society has survived more on the elders. Survived, meaning elders have held together the society, they have kept us close to the family and have kept the respect for the old. And now elimination tactics are being used to keep out wisdom, to keep out the accumulated knowledge, to keep out tested knowledge by certificates knowing that we are what we see and what we hear and we become what we see and what we hear. The elderly in this particular case have seen more years and that is why perhaps the point of putting a limit in the years is important or a baseline. 

I think if we are vigilant, the wisdom on the ground; that has been neglected by colonialism; that has been trampled upon by new ideals, which do not take into consideration what they have found on the ground; that has destroyed the knowledge of medicine, of science, of technology -(Interruption)

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thought the issue was, ‘how do we get this?’ As far as I understood you, it will involve how these people will be elected. I think the House was agreeable to the amendment raised, but you asked how they would be elected and I thought the Major General was going to help us in that area.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I was asking the Mover of the amendment to bear in mind that once you make this amendment and it passes, you must also ensure that there is a provision as to how to bring this person, and that is the point he was trying to clarify. But his clarification was tantamount to not supporting her amendment by saying that why bother in any case, these other people, the 60 year plus could be among these others except the youth. I think that was his argument, all right? Therefore, we have to take a decision; we have to pronounce ourselves on her amendment. I was cautioning her that if the amendment passes, we make a provision for bringing this person, and the hon. Major General was still debating. He said he supported the amendment, and if he had concluded quickly, I was going to put the question.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was coming to number two, but before I do so, I think the principle and the need to have an elder person on the councils is the most important. And I was giving reasons why I strongly support it. I will give a few examples.  

We are concerned about the environment, we are talking of planting trees, many of the young educated generation do not know the names of these trees and how they can be planted, and they cannot easily push for planting the local indigenous trees. That is just as an example of how much knowledge is being destroyed by just following formal education without laying emphasis on tested wisdom of the community. And when you are referring to an elder of the community, it means you are looking for somebody who is very respectable, who is recognised, who is already a leader in the community regardless of his age.  

DR.NKUUHE:  I would like to inform hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine that in my constituency, informally, all the LC IIIs have decided to have an elder on the council. They did it, they said it may be illegal, but for us we shall go ahead because these are very important people. So, I would like it to be legalised.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Thank you for that information. I actually have heard from many people who are saying -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, can you come to your conclusion?

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Yes, Mr. Chairman. My conclusion is that I strongly support this idea for those reasons. 

On the point of how the elder could be elected to the council. We have used two methods; universal adult suffrage or electoral college. I propose that to simplify matters, we use the electoral college of the lower councils to elects an elder to join the council. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me clarify this. Her point has to do with five types of lower councils. So, the (e) she is just been talking about is only in reference to a town council, that means the other councils like Municipal, division, will have an (e) to take care of this elderly person. Is that clear? So, this amendment is in reference to all those lower councils.  

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Tumwine, how do you get this person on the council? First of all, address your mind as to how we get these others on to the council, then from there you will be able to.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, others are elected through delegates’ conferences, electoral colleges or universal suffrage. But I was thinking that since we do not have an established structure for the elders yet, and since we would like to simplify it, the electoral college of the lower councils would be the best to nominate names and then the electoral college votes on them.

THE CHAIRMAN: Which electoral college?

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: The electoral college of a lower council. For example, if the LC IIs are going to elect the elder who will go on LC.III, the LC.II could meet and elect among the elders proposed one who will sit on the LC.III. And if it is at the LC.II, similarly the LC Is elect. The lower councils form an electoral college, who elect among the nominated leaders, up to LC.V.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can somebody help us on the way forward on this? How is this person to be elected?

MS.KABASHARIRA: Mr. Chairman, although I appreciate Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine's proposal, I think it might be complicated. I propose that the elders form a council of above 55 years of age in any given lower council, those elders who are 55 years of age form a college to elect the elders at any given lower level.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you moving a formal amendment? Not yet? Her proposal is that the elders of 55 plus should form an electoral college and elect their own to be on the council. We are trying to narrow the principle.

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: Mr. Chairman, it is very difficult to legislate for ambiguities. First of all, to establish that I am 50, when I claim to be 50, you can say, ‘no, you are not 50’. That is an area where we will have a lot of problems. People who may be 48 will claim to be 60 because they see that as an area of a special concern. 

I wanted to sell to you the idea that, much as we have these elders, we should provide for a woman elder and a male elder but you refused. Since we have decided, that is too bad, but we will have that problem. I am just thinking aloud. Otherwise, as we stood over other issues, we could as well stand over this one. But since it is the issue of elders, could we after forming the full council authorise the existing council to nominate or elect among those who will have presented themselves for that request. That one has the advantage of minimising the cost of the exercise, the different quarrels, and the like. It will be that, anybody who wants to apply to be a member applies to the Council, the Council goes through all the names and comes out with that name.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think we should stand this over until this idea is concretised. We have already agreed on representation, it is only the method of election which you need to deal with. Can we proceed to the existing Clause 8.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, there is a new Clause, but before I talk about it, let me advise the Mover to also prepare a definition of an elder. I think we need it (Interjection). Yes, we need it; the elder must be defined. The new – (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Those who are going to deal with this other matter, what is an elder? Proceed.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, before we come to Clause 8, there is a new Clause concerning Section 24 of the main Act, which deals with the work of the Local Government Councils. We want to allocate Speakers and Deputy Speakers throughout our Local Government Councils. This is because some LCIII chairmen do not sometimes call meetings and the Councils are in an impasse.  

So, section 24(A)(1) reads, “A sub-county, Municipal, Town and City Division Council shall have a Speaker and Deputy Speaker elected by the Council from among members of the Council”. Mr. Chairman I beg to propose. I think let me read the whole amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, proceed.

MR.RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, now (2) of that amendment is again about the Speaker. It reads, “The Speaker and Deputy Speaker, shall be elected through a secret ballot”. 

(3) I will ask you to change the term Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) into a Returning Officer, because as we shall see, it is the Returning Officer who is in charge of elections. So, (3) is also amended. Instead of a CAO, we put Returning Officer. So (3) reads, “The Returning Officer shall convene and preside at a meeting for the election of Speaker under this Section”.

(4) “At the election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, the person who gets the majority of votes of all the members of the Council shall be declared elected.”
   
(5) “If during the election of Speaker or Deputy Speaker, only one name is nominated, that person shall be declared elected Speaker or Deputy Speaker respectively.”  

(6) The provisions of sub-section (6) - again Section 12 applies here, that is, the Speaker at District Council.  So, this provision shall also apply for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in lower Governments especially under – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I suggest that you read the text as it is.  

MR.RWABITA: “The provisions of sub-section (6), (6A), (7), (9) and (10) of Section 12, shall apply to the sub-county Speaker and Deputy Speaker”.
 
(7) Again the terminology CAO will change to Returning Officer. “The provisions of sub-section (6C) of Section 12 shall apply under this section, except that the Minister or his or her representative shall be substituted by the Returning Officer.”

(8) “The Speaker and Deputy Speaker under this section shall be part time and shall only be paid allowances in accordance with the First Schedule”.  

The justification is that the new section will provide for clear separation of powers between the Council and the Executive at the sub-county level. It also provides for procedures for electing the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.
   
MR.RWAKOOJO: Thank you Mr. Chairman. Whereas I agree with the principle, but considering that the Councils at LC.III meet about once in three months, I did not think that it will be necessary to have a Deputy Speaker. I think the Speaker alone is sufficient especially when there is a provision for allowances. If he sick or something like that, at least, within three months, there should be a way of arranging for the meetings to take place with the Speaker in place. Thank you.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, as we said, this is going to be a part-time job but we do not want to allow again the chairman to take advantage of a Speaker being sick and he does not call meetings. So, the allowances are very minimal, the Deputy Speaker will remain, he may even not sit, or even call a meeting if the Speaker is always there. The Deputy Speaker is provided for in case of any problem with the Speaker. So, I would convince my Friend that we keep it, it does no harm.

THE CHAIRMAN: And, finally, before we pronounce ourselves on this, when you say you are replacing the Chief Administrative Officer with Returning Officer, what happens to where you say Assistant Chief Administrative Officer? Do you also have to say Assistant Returning Officer or you delete that in its entirety?  

MR.RWABITA: We delete it; we only remain with Returning Officer.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: The original (8). Have we not got there yet?

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, the original Clause (8) refers to section 25 of the main Act and we are making a few amendments again. In Clause 8(4) of the amendment Bill, we shall delete the words “Assistant Chief Administrative Officer” and replace them with “Returning Officer”. Then we shall also insert a new paragraph (f) which reads, “report to the Council on the state of affairs of the respective areas of jurisdiction.”  

Now, we have to go back again to section 25 of the principal Local Governments Act; the functions of the Chairperson of lower Government Councils. We shall delete the word “council” in (b) because the Chairman is no longer presiding over the council; it is now the Speaker. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I suggest that you just read the text. If there is any need to explain, it will come later. You see; you are reading a bit, then explaining, and reading a bit, and we are all getting confused. Just say Clause (8) is amended as follows: (1) by making the existing provision to be amended – you see, that is why we are running into problems. What is your amendment?

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, this is in reference to section 25 of the principal Act. We are making the existing provision to be amendment (b) and inserting the following new Clause (a): “(a) In subsection (1) by the deleting the words ‘Council and’ appearing in paragraph (b) and by adding a new paragraph (f). So the words “Council and” appearing in paragraph (b) are delete. 

Paragraph (f) reads; “report to the Council on the state of affairs of the respective area of jurisdiction, at least once in a year.” This is going to be one of the functions of the Chairmen of the Lower Councils. Mr. Chairman I beg to move. The justification is that, this will act as a check and balance to ensure accountability of the taxpayers’ money and possible excesses of the executive. 

We also have another amendment in subsection (4). We are replacing the words “Assistant Chief Administrative Officer” with “Returning Officer”. This is Clause (4) in the amendment Bill. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with one amendment at a time.  Clause (8) is amended by making the existing provision -(Interruption)

MR.MEDI KAGGWA: Mr. Chairman, the chairperson should have mentioned that they are seeking to amend section 25(1)(b) of the Principal Act. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So read it out, because I want people to follow, otherwise they will pronounce themselves on something they do not know.  

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, Clause (8) is amended referring to section 25 of the principal Local Government Act amending 1(b) and deleting the word council.

MR.MEDI KAGGWA: Clause (8) is amended, first of all, by amending section 25 (1)(b) of the Principal Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes. Read it.

MR.MEDI KAGWA: Clause (8) is amended by amending section 25(1) of the Principal Act by deleting the words “council and” appearing in paragraph (b).

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 8 is amended by amending section 25 (1) of the Principal Act by deleting the words “council and” appearing in paragraph (b) and by adding a new paragraph (f) as follows: Alright; are we there? So let us deal with that.

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are on that amendment?

MR.TOSKIN:  Yes, an amendment to the new (f).

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but we are dealing with the first one.

MR.TOSKIN: Okay. I will come to that one.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are deleting the words “council and” in 25(1)(b). I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, paragraph (f), you said it by –(Interruption)

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, we shall add a paragraph (f) by adding a new paragraph (f) in the main which reads “report to the council on the state of affairs of the respective area of jurisdiction at least once a year.”

MR.TOSKIN: Mr. Chairman, on this new (f), I think the provision for the chairman to report about the state of affairs of the sub-county once a year is too long. You know as a small area of jurisdiction, there are a lot of activities which take place. I am sure the chairman would like to explain to his council about issues which have arisen or new issues taking place in the sub-county. So I would like to propose that we amend once a year to twice a year. I beg to move.

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.  Yes hon. Minister, are you troubled?

MR.BIDANDI SSALI: This idea was tickled by a whisper behind me. The chairman may choose to report in January and then in February. So could we say, “at least once in every six months”?

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I now put the question to the amendment of the Committee as refined by the hon. Minister.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Item 2.

MR.RWABITA: Yes, Mr. Chairman, there is Clause 8(4)(ii) of the amendment Bill which talks of “Assistant Chief Administrative Officer” in the third line. We are substituting that terminology with Returning Officer because they are the people in charge of elections, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9. 

MR.RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, Clause 9 is amended by making the existing amendment of Section 26 amendment (a) and adding the following amendments: We add at the end of subsection (4) the following: “and another for persons with disabilities and the elderly”. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move (Interjections).

Yes, Clause (9) we are amending - Section (26) is amended by adding the following amendment: (a) adding at the end of subsection (4) of Section (26) –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We have the same problem like the other one. It should be Clause (9) is amended by adding at the end of Section 26(4) of the principal Act the following: – Are you with me.

MR.RWABITA: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: “And another for persons with disabilities and the elderly” – Are you with me?

MR.RWABITA: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10. 

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I am proposing an amendment to the principle in Clause 28(2) of the principal Act by adding at the end of sub-clause (2) the following words: “provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not refer to councillors representing people with disabilities.”  

Subsection (2) gives restrictions on people who have been elected to councils not to hold other offices in the Local Government. Apparently this is Government Policy in the sense that once one has been elected to a council, the council is the employer and therefore to have the employment within the Local Government it will not be right.

This particular provision has greatly disadvantaged people with disabilities. A number of them who got elected to councils were the few educated disabled people and some of them were already holding some positions either as teachers in schools or nurses or other positions. These people were made to resign because the law provided that you could not be a teacher in a school and at the time be a councillor. Therefore, I am moving this amendment in accordance with Article 32 of our Constitution, which gave affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups. That this particular law has greatly disadvantaged people with disabilities because those few educated ones had to leave and were replaced by people who were really uneducated. Therefore they were not able to follow issues and effectively fight for the rights of the disabled persons in councils. 

I have consulted widely and I understand that this is not against the Constitution; it is a matter of Government Policy and it can be accommodated. So Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Mover of the amendment is saying that 28(2) of the principal Act will read as follows: “A person shall not hold a political office or a full time office in the service of more than one Local Government provided that this Sub-section shall not refer  - I think the word should be “apply”, do you consent to that?

MR.MWANDHA: Yes.

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank you hon. Mwandha for bringing this up. We earlier on quietly agreed on this and thought I would be supportive together with members of the committee. But when you look at Article 205 of our Constitution, you will see a direct contradiction clearly difficult to separate this category of representation inasmuch as it is recognised in the earlier Article of the Constitution. When it comes to holding a public office, it is purely on that matter that I oppose this amendment. Thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA: I wish the Minister could read out the Article so that I can appreciate why my proposal is collapsing. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I do not know. “No person shall hold concurrently on a full time basis political offices –” So I think this provision seems to have been lifted from there. A person shall not hold political office on a full time basis in the service of more than one Local Government and he continue with the amendment.  

Are you referring to Councillors holding those political offices on full time basis within the meaning of the Constitution?

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Mr. Chairman, the Mover of the Motion referred to that category because once you resign the other office, you are coming to hold the fate of the job at the level of the council.

THE CHAIRMAN: And a political office is defined in the Constitution meaning the office a Minister, a Member of Parliament or a member of a Local Government Council or any other office prescribed by Parliament. So, hon. Member for persons with disabilities, do you have any comment on that?

MR.MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman of course it would be wrong for me to pursue a matter, which goes against our Constitution. But without mentioning names of people’s position, I know that that particular constitutional provision has not been strictly followed. And I thought that in that spirit, this House would also close their eyes like they have done to other situations and permit to remove that particular – but I understand that it is a constitutional provision. But I hope that it can be applied all the way to everybody. I thank you.  

THE CHAIRMAN: May be that can only happen if you do so mistakenly. But if your attention has been drawn to the provision, then it will be hard to pretend to circumvent.  

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. Byaruhanga P.: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House and reports thereto.  

 (Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled "The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2000" and completed up to Clause 10 and passed those Clauses with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

DR.BYARUHANGA P.: Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think this is a convenient to adjourn. The House is adjourned until 2.00p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.40p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14th February 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)
