Tuesday, 12 February 2008

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

Parliament was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you from the weekend. There is some information, which I want to give you and it is a communication I have received from the Opposition Chief Whip; you might as well hear it.  It reads: “Assignment of duties on Sessional Committee. I would like to inform you that following the by-elections held in Bugweri County Constituency, December, Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) Party won and brought into Parliament, hon. Abdu Katuntu.  In accordance with Rule 159(1) and 162, I am designating, hon. Katuntu, to serve on the Sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.” So, this is to announce that hon. Katuntu now is a Member of that committee. I am expecting the Government Chief Whip to also assign, to the new Members who were sworn-in last week, the various committees on which they will serve.

PERSONAL STATEMENT
2.27
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura):  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have a personal statement to make and with your permission, I would like to do it. It regards an article that was published by the hon. Beti Kamya on Monday, January 28. The article particularly talks about the Bahima as a community for which I represent -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, the point that the hon. Member is raising is a matter in respect of which hon. Beti Kamya has been formerly charged before the court of law.  I wonder whether procedurally, it will be right for us to discuss a matter, which is already in court. I think it will be subjudice and I request that the hon. Member withholds her personal statement since this matter is already in court. I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  You mean that particular issue is a subject of court? Okay, hon. Mugyenyi the position is that this is matter now before court. Maybe you did not know, but hon. Wadri is telling you that it is already a court matter against hon. Kamya.

MRS MUGYENYI:  Mr Speaker, I obviously did not know that it is a subject of court when I sought your permission to make this personal statement in respect of it. Anyway, I wanted to make this statement from a political rather than a legal point of view. This is in respect of the fact that the people that she mentions in this article, insensitively and politically incorrectly, are people that I represent in Parliament.  So, I thought, Mr Speaker, that I deserve an opportunity to make –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think some Members resent what you are going to say, the problem being that it is now a subjudice matter.  Otherwise, when you said that you wanted to make a statement you did not know; neither did I know of it. But they are telling you that hon. Kamya is charged in court because of that particular article she wrote, which you are referring to.  Maybe for the time being, let us just hold on.

MRS MUGYENYI:  I accept your ruling, Mr Speaker.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER:  This is Public Service Commission Annual Report for the year 2006/2007. Who is laying it?  There is no minister.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
2.30
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is to inform the honourable Members of Parliament - regarding the strike which took place at Lira Regional Referral Hospital and Health Centre IVs, in Lira District.  The strike lasted from the 5th to the 9th days of February this year.  It arose from delayed payment of hardship allowances to the said staff.  I would like to update this august House on the current development and action taken by the Ministry of Health.  

This strike was sudden and came in without prior notification; there was no discussion prior to the strike.  

Mr Speaker, during the strike, vital areas in that hospital like the emergency or casualty ward, maternity ward, theatre and all the other areas were covered by a skeletal staff.  A skeletal emergency staff remained on duty -

THE SPEAKER:  Can I have a copy of your statement? 

DR MALLINGA:  The skeletal staff remained on duty and was supplemented by the student nurses and volunteers within the hospital.  As a result of the strike, we had seven deaths that occurred during the strike: Four deaths occurred on the female medical ward and one from the male medical ward; one from the surgical ward. Details of each of these patients are at the back of the statement. 

The reports we have from Lira indicate that these deaths after review were what medically is called unavoidable; that means that these were patients who were going to die. However, as reported in the press, there were no deaths that occurred in the maternity as a result of delivery or during delivery. Absolutely no woman died as a result of delivery or after delivery. 

All children were transferred from that hospital to another hospital in the town called Lira Clinic - there was no death in the pediatric ward. Unfortunately one of the deaths occurred on the last day of the strike - soon after a patient was brought into the hospital and that was when the press arrived at the hospital. They took a picture when that man had just died and it was wrongfully reported that that dead body had stayed there for two days. That was a male patient who had just died soon after arrival. He died of Meningitis; supposedly, he came in when he was very sick. 

I have directed and we are going to set up an inquiry in the Ministry of Health to prove two things: one, we are going to look into the cause of the strike extremely carefully. Two, we are going to set up a review to look at the deaths which occurred in that period and see if all the deaths were unavoidable.

Mr Speaker, the strike has been resolved and all the members of staff at Lira Hospital have gone back to work since Sunday. Work in the hospital and Health Center IVs is running normally. As I have said, we are going to carefully investigate the cause of this industrial act. This was not a salary; I would like to emphasis that it was an allowance. Salaries have been paid regularly to the employees of this hospital but there was a suggestion that the medical workers in areas, which were affected by insurgency, should have an allowance paid to them –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Since you are going to make an inquiry, why don’t you wait to know the root cause?

DR MALLINGA:  But the Ministry of Health would like to assure the general public that and health workers from the Lango area that everything possible is being done to address the issues that led to this strike.

Mr Speaker, at the back of this statement is the list of the patients who died during this strike. And the medical superintendent tells me that the average number of deaths in that hospital is about five or six per week, and that is what happened during this strike but we are going to carry out very careful investigations. Thank you very much.

MRS BYENKYA:  Thank you very much. Well I just wanted to request the Minister to throw more light on the five female patients that died in the hospital in order to prove the press reports wrong. Because the details that we have show that five out of seven patients were female and he has not -

THE SPEAKER:  No, since there is going to be an inquiry, all these details will come out. Since recess, the Prime Minister has not been with us; he is now here and looks fit. You are welcome. (Laughter)

2.40
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have heard some people say here that since the Land Bill has been tabled, I am going to appear - (Laughter)- but Mr Speaker, thank you for your kind words. 

As you know, I did write a circular to you in particular, your deputy, Clerk to Parliament and all my colleagues that I was going to South Africa for a medical check up – I did. And while I was there, I heard these wild allegations that I was running away -(Laughter)- it must be a joke; It must be one of these useless jokes because you know, Mr Speaker, when a Bill is tabled for the first reading, it is not discussed.  It is just taken to the appropriate committee. So, it was neither necessary for His Excellency the Vice President to be here nor was it necessary for me to be here. But, of course, I would have been here because I am the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and they had been on recess. 

I take this opportunity, Sir, to inform the House and the country at large that I am perfectly healthy now- (Applause)- and I also wish to ask all those people who have got concrete amendments to make, to go to those committees and make amendments. They should not talk generally; they should say, “amend section so and so of the Bill”-(Laughter)- Is that clear? So, whatever you want, you may ask for deletion but you must give reasons. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to very warmly welcome back to the House the honourable Leader of Government Business, the Rt hon. Prime Minister.  

Mr Speaker, we in the Opposition had not actually known that the Prime Minister had gone to South Africa. You know, Mr Prime Minister, that we are always very concerned about your well-being and the life that you bring into the House, and so we were also quietly asking ourselves whether you took an early leave -(Laughter)- not a permanent one of course -(Laughter)- But now we know that you had been to South Africa for medical checkup and you were declared fit. We only wish you very well and we will enjoy engaging you on matters including the Land Bill when it comes. Thank you.

2.44
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for timely coming up with the statement about the strike, which has caused, in my mind, the death of these seven people. However, when the Minister comes up and tells us that he is going to conduct an inquiry into the root cause of this industrial action and yet in his own statement, this strike came into being as a result of the medical staff not getting their allowances. 

I thought and I think I know that with all these allowances that have been paid to civil servants, especially, the medical level, these are usually consolidated. What could have happened?  Was it a breakdown in the Ministry of Public Service? Was it a breakdown in the office of the District Administrative Officer? What was it? I think it will be in our interest to know as to what could have happened because in as far as I am concerned, these allowances, like the hardship allowances, are consolidated and they come along with the salary. What happened this time?

Furthermore, the Minister seems to underplay the death of the six people, that these deaths were unavoidable. One of the major reasons why patients are taken to hospital is not necessarily for curative purposes; it is, among others, for humane treatment so that a person dies in good care, and in which case if these people died without care and yet according to whatever disease they had that death was inevitable, they lacked that service or care. Because as a medical personnel, he knows it better than all of us that when a patient is taken to hospital, even if he or she is about to die, it is the duty of the medical staff to make sure that this patient dies humanely. So, underplaying the fact that these people died and after all their death was inevitable; I think the Minister and his medical team need to be a little more serious on that.  

At the same time, this industrial action, which has occurred in Lira should be a learning lesson for the ministry and for all of us. Because I know that there are a lot of bureaucratic difficulties at times in carrying out issues of preparation of remunerations and allowances. This has happened today in Lira and even under education, Makerere is still also on strike. I believe these are things, which with good management - good enough we have got the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister here and he is a Minister for Public Service, he might in the course of the day give us counsel as to how some of these things can be avoided.  Because if today this has happened in Lira and we cannot ably address it, I am afraid it might happen in other hospitals too.  

So, my concerns in this statement are only three: One, the inquiry, why this consolidated allowance did not go on time. Two, I wish to inform the Minister that, yes, even if these people died, they should have died more humanely as this is one of the purposes of hospitalization. Three, a person receives humane care even if he or she is about to die.  Thank you.

2.47
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to assist the ministry in its inquiry into the causes. Clearly as the minister said, the staff went on strike because of not receiving their hardship allowances, but it appears that other areas who were entitled to this hardship allowance did receive their allowance but in the Lira case, the medical staff in Lira did not receive it.  So, looking into that aspect of why the staff of Lira Referral Hospital and the surrounding health centres did not receive the hardship allowance yet other areas were able to receive that hardship allowance- I think the root of this problem is how we treat medical personnel. 

Our members of the medical service are in the frontline in the war against disease. If we do not treat and equip them properly to fight that battle, we are losing. Clearly, for people to go on strike over 30 percent of their hardship allowance, clearly that means they are in difficult situations. Their salary possibly does not meet their needs, and especially this time when children are going back to school, they were unable to meet those needs. So, we must take this battle against disease with the utmost seriousness in this House. My personal view is that more funding needs to go into the medical field for the staff so that they are able to perform and save the lives of our citizens.  

The information I get from Lira does not quite agree with what the minister said in that the numbers, which have been attributed to those deaths in Lira, seem to be a little bit higher. I hope the minister in his inquiry would be able to ascertain exactly how many have passed away and the circumstances under which they passed away. The information I get from Lira is that 12 to 16 people passed away in this week of striking. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.50
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like through you to thank the Minister of Health for the statement he has given. I would like to make observations on two issues. The honourable minister stated that the average deaths in Lira Hospital, he was informed, are five a week. If you take this statement, and note that the strike started on the 5th and ended on the 9th, on the 8th towards the end of the strike, four patients died in one day. Was this not due to the strike? Was it unavoidable death?

The other observation I would like to make, is that for me I thought paying of allowances is automatic and should not be delayed because there is a budget which covers this. What was the reason of delaying these payments, leading to the strike in a hospital? I would like to state, Mr Speaker that - you know strikes can take place in other places but taking place in a hospital, where life is being catered for is very unfortunate and I think the Ministry of Health should try its best to avoid this type of strikes. Thank you very much.

2.53
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also have some contribution to make. I would like to thank the Minister of Health for having given this statement but I would also like to add some information, which you have not included. You sent communication to Lira hospital in June 2007, indicating that UNICEF had given funding to cater for the risk allowance of medical workers. They have been trying to communicate to you after a number of months had passed but there is no response, which was clear to the medical workers. The Chief Administrative Officer of Lira tried to communicate but in vain; the RDC of Lira who is the representative of the Central government also tried to get some information from the Ministry of Health but somehow she was frustrated.

I would like to say that it was after a long struggle of the medical workers and the leadership of Lira district that the staff resorted into strike. I would like also to remind you that since Lira was declared a regional hospital, we have never got enough equipment. You have been moving there and you see the skeleton of the equipment, which is there and you know that as we are coming out of war, the casualty ward especially is very busy; we have had many cases of landmine blasts and sometimes we do not have enough equipment; maybe in your report that should also be put in place.

Mr Speaker, may I also inform the minister that the people of Lira lack transport up to now. There are some members of other districts who decided to take away their patients but it was very difficult. Like Oyam, the chairman had to move around to pick the accident victims who were not supposed to be moved. I still insist that most of the women who have died, died because of the problem related to maternal health. I want that one to clearly be brought out. 

I am disappointed when you say that five is usual. Don’t you think the number five in Lira referral hospital shows that there are too many people dying in a week? We are talking of a minimum of twenty people in a month and to me I feel that is not so good. 

My disappointment, Mr Speaker, when this strike was going on, we had ministers in Lango and one of them was a senior minister although he is now in another ministry; he is a senior medical person. I was disappointed that they did not show the spirit of teamwork to go and check on what was happening in Lira hospital. 

I would like to urge the cabinet that it does not mean you, as a minister of a particular ministry to be there yourself but if you get a problem in an area where you are, even if a colleague is not there, it is a good courtesy to check and report back to your colleague. Thank you very much.

2.57
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas this crisis remains regrettable, I would like to salute Government through the Ministry of Health for trying their best to ensure that the crisis was averted. But as a representative of the young people of Northern Uganda, where Lira falls and as a living product of Lira hospital and with specific reference to what transpired regarding this strike, I would like to give my observations and provide the ministry with some information. But before I do this, permit me to salute hon. Musa Ecweru, who personally visited the hospital; he almost cried at the hospital when he saw the way people were suffering.

Mr Speaker, when the minister says that the strike has been called off now, what remains a big question in my mind is, has the principal problem been sorted out? That is the aspect of paying these people their 30 per cent allowance. If it is not paid and they have made a promise, it is my humble prayer hon. minister that the promise be fulfilled within the time that the ministry has specified to the staff of Lira referral hospital.

Two, the minister says that the strike was sudden, without prior notification or discussions. As far as I know, two weeks ago when a group of Christians were coming back from a convention and they got an accident, that was the time that this strike was planned. When we had a meeting in the district council hall of Lira, the district administrator had left to inform the ministry about the planned strike by the staff of Lira Regional Referral Hospital. So, when the minister tells this Parliament that they were not notified and yet I know all regional referral hospitals in Uganda fall under direct supervision and management of the Ministry of Health, hon. minister, are you being honest to this Parliament?

Three, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I would like to seek from you – [Hon. Members: “Clarification?”] okay, two in one. The information I would like to give and the clarification to make is this, the minister is responsible for the regional referral hospitals like Lira, Arua, Fort Portal and others. But due to this contradiction of decentralisation, the way I see it, there is that tendency of saying the ministry is too far, the district is to take care. Therefore, the minister is not in charge of that place the way I see. Practically, he is not working there. But the clarification I want to hear is the solution that has been given: What is it? Is it a temporary ground or a permanent ground, temporary or durable solution? How long have the allowances not been given because we have some information here but the duration of time over which the hardship allowance is supposed to be paid is not stated? Can you clarify on this as well as how much it is?

MR OBUA: Thank you, hon. Member for your information. My third issue is on the third paragraph where the minister states that a total of seven deaths occurred during the strike and the details of each patient is attached. Mr Speaker, when you look critically at this list, I see the number of the ward, the sex, age, parish, district and the date of death. I am a typical son of Lango and in Lango we have names; you are either Obua, Omara, Okot, Ogwal or Akello. Where are the names of these seven people who died? Were they nameless patients? I believe strongly that they had names. If the minister is providing right information, where are the names of these people? 

THE SPEAKER: Your time allowed in the rules is about to expire.

MR OBUA: Finally, Mr Speaker, the strike lasted for five days. My question to the minister is why did the ministry allow this strike to degenerate to this extent? I thank you.

3.03
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for his statement. I want to first give information to my colleague that from the professional point of view, it is not ethical to start putting names and the causes of death on a document like this. So probably that is why the minister didn’t put the names and diagnosis of the patients. 

Secondly, I want to agree with the minister that when patients come to hospital, you try to do whatever you can but some deaths are unavoidable. So whether there is a strike or not, patients die; even today as we are here, patients are dying in Mulago and other hospitals. So, it may not be correct to say that these deaths must have been as a result of the strike. With or without a strike, some patients die even when medical workers put all their efforts. 

Mr Speaker, I just wanted to say that much as the strike is occurring in Lira, generally there is a problem of motivation of health workers in the country, which the ministry and the ministers should know and always attempt to address. I have talked to health workers in Kanungu and they told me that they are on a silent strike. So, we may have this overt strike but there are many health workers who are quietly striking and sometimes those kinds of strikes are even more dangerous than the ones, which come out clearly like what we saw in Lira. 

Therefore, there is a problem of motivation of health workers and I think Parliament and the Ministry of Health must address this concern because most health workers are not happy. In Kanungu for instance, we have failed to attract medical workers; we have only two doctors who are running the services. Kambuga Hospital is supposed to have at least seven doctors but we have only two. We also have Kihiri Health Centre IV, which is supposed to have a doctor but there is none and the same applies to Kanungu Health Centre IV. In total, there are only two doctors who are doing the work of over 10 doctors. 

There is a problem in this country and it must be addressed; not only in Lira but in the entire country. These include issues of motivation and facilitating health workers to be able to do their work. When I go to Kanungu, I transform myself into a health worker and start seeing patients instead of doing parliamentary work. It is a challenge and we want to call upon the minister and the ministry to assist health workers out there. 

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, hon.Member for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I send my condolences to the families of those who have died during this strike. 

My information is that it is not just a question of motivation to government, it is simply a question of salaries. At this point in time, let me make mention a section of government employees who have not had salaries for five to seven months. This includes, the SPCs and AFTUs. Therefore, the information I am giving my colleague is that we need to move from the point of just considering the motivational aspect to government employees and look at workers’ rights in terms of their salaries. I hope that at an appropriate time, the responsible minister will also make a statement in this House regarding the fate of the salaries of SPCs and AFTUs. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: The information I am giving you and the House is that what happened in Lira will happen elsewhere. It is just a symptom of the mismanagement we have in Public Service of not paying these public servants on time. This is why we are having another strike ongoing in Makerere University. We have another pending strike in Kabale Hospital as well; They have threatened to resign. So when we are looking at the problem in Lira, we should realise that it is a cross cutting one that is yet to happen anywhere, at any time, in any ministry. It is not only in the Ministry of Health. 

Actually, the person who should be answering this issue is the Minister of Public Service. Why does Parliament appropriate money to the Ministry of Public Service when salaries are not going to the people. Where is this money going? That is the question that should be answered. Why are people not being paid on time? Why are there strikes in every department? Why is it happening? I hope the Minister of Public service is here to give the answer.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last Thursday we were unable to deal with two important items on our Order Paper. Our Rules allow us to debate for an hour and we are about conclude. Since there will be an enquiry, we will have an opportunity to discuss the report but for now, I am about to end this debate. I wanted to give opportunity to a representative of workers to say something.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Can I wind up, Mr Speaker so that the record is very clear? As I wind up, I want to appreciate all the information. To my friend, when I talk of motivation, it encompasses allowances, salaries and even the environment where these health workers are providing the services. 

In Uganda, we are losing around 120 doctors every year who go abroad. Those are the ones who formally inform the Registrar of Medical Council when getting the certificate of Good Standing. So many health workers are leaving because they are poorly motivated in this country. Therefore, the message I want to give the Minister is that this is a serious issue, which must be addressed, but I also know that we need to increase the allocation of resources to the health sector for them to be able to address some of these challenges. Thank you very much.

3.10
MS MARY TUUNDE (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for his statement, but as a Workers’ Representative, I would like to say that strikes in Uganda are so rampant; it is not only in the health sector. So many strikes are going on just because workers’ problems are taken secondary and are not considered to be highest on the agenda. Right now, we are seeing so many strikes going on, one is in Makerere University where it has rendered our children to loiter in the streets because of some of the things which government as the biggest employer is not fulfilling, for example, they are giving empty promises. The Makerere University workers - not the non-teaching staff- the lecturers have been always promised a lot of things, which they are not being given. 

Then the nurses and the others – if you see someone working in Uganda this time without going to the diaspora, you must know he has Uganda at heart. In the health sector, workers are selling like hotcakes outside Uganda, but those people have remained around to serve their mother country. They should not be taken for granted –(Interruption)

MS SSENTONGO: Thank you my sister for giving way. The information I want to give is that Uganda is being applauded by the whole world; when you go to the International Organisations of Labour, you find that they appreciate the labour laws that we made. But the unfortunate part of it is that the first culprit to mismanage and even fail to implement the law is the government. Please Government, let these labour laws be implemented and make the Labour Industrial Relations Officers be enough in districts. It is a terrible situation when any labour issue comes up in districts and nobody is able to attend to it because they are not properly facilitated. Government, wake up and implement the labour laws that we passed here because they are the best in the world.

MS TUUNDE: Thank you my sister for this information. 

THE SPEAKER: It was not information but it is okay.

MS TUUNDE: I would like to say that as workers, we are not happy with this business of forming ad hoc committees to look at workers’ problems. Workers’ problems should be solved once and for all. They should not be settled; they should be resolved. For example the Makerere issue or the nurses issue, if somebody makes an emolument promise, one should be paid in time. 

Lastly, as Uganda’s representatives, we are looking forward to seeing Government fulfilling whatever it promises the workers in this country and all employers at large should make sure that the workers’ plight is looked at and no rights are violated at all. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am winding up by giving opportunity to the Minister of Public Service and that will be the end.

3.14
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will comment on the issue of payment of salaries. As far as I am aware, we have not failed to remit salaries to the entire Public Service. If there has been a hold up, I will have to find out because now, just as with pensions, we remit these monies electronically. The cheque is written, it is sent to the Central Bank electronically, transferred to the appropriate bank and the appropriate branch and then the account. We would like to know, in fact, we can benefit from you as to where the hold up is. But we remit funds punctually and every civil servant should be able to get his salary by the 28th of the relevant month. But if there has been a break down or inadequate transfers, please advise us and we shall take appropriate action. 

THE SPEAKER: Well this ends the contribution on this matter. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.16
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Mr Speaker, I rise to make a personal statement under Rule 41 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of this House. The substance of this statement is on my personal initiative of modernising an ordinary bicycle with an engine. 

The importance of bicycles cannot be over-emphasised. My late father narrated to me how he would travel from Akokoro to Gulu High School by bicycle; a distance of about 170 kilometres. When I returned from exile, I went to Akokoro and later to Lira. There, I discovered that the major means of transport was the bicycle and people are still using bicycles to cover long journeys. During the final journey of my late father, throughout the East and North, I was touched by the thousands upon thousands of bicycles that received and escorted us with the casket for miles upon miles. I witnessed that the major means of transport in those areas are largely bicycles. 

In Lira, the business town of Lango, thousands of bicycles are used to access the town daily. A bicycle in the sub-region is everything; it is used for, among other functions, as an ambulance to transport patients to hospital - hoping the staff is working, transport to markets either to buy and sell various products; transport to the public to private and public functions; transport to work places by public and civil servants. The above scenario left me wondering whether there could be means to reduce the invaluable time spent commuting.

I also discovered that more time and energy is wasted on hills where most people have to roll their bicycles instead of riding. I then imagined that if a mechanism could be designed to enhance a person’s capability of riding a bicycle throughout the journey, then the valuable time could be saved. Knowing that it worked in the 1980s, I embarked on avenues to find a more suitable engine to put on the bicycle. 

At this point, I must applaud the parliamentary initiative for the Constituency Development Fund. With resources from the CDF, I managed to secure some engines. After overcoming the challenge of getting the engine into Uganda, the next challenge was how to assemble and attach it to an ordinary bicycle. Over the first two days, with the help of my cousin, Ronnie Birungi, we tirelessly worked to get the basics done and the engine started with a road test. Thereafter, we worked to iron out the glitches and improve on its working. The tests so far conducted have shown that on a levelled ground, the bicycle can be ridden as a motor-cycle. On a steep hill, one requires both the engine and pedalling, but it is possible to ride up the hill. To cover a distance of about 30 kilometres, you only require a single litre of fuel.

I am in the initial stage of developing a technique on whether the bicycle can be used either on petrol or bio-ethanol or a mixture of both, and this is derived from locally brewed Waragi, which should substantially reduce the running cost of the bicycle. Since we shall be using locally brewed Waragi for this purpose, on a positive note, the alcohol will be used productively. 

At this point, I want to regret a statement attributed to my colleague, hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, during the requiem mass of the late Latigo Olal at St Augustine Church in Lira Municipality. It was reported that during his speech, he denounced my active involvement with the women involved in brewing Waragi, who by and large are engaged in its brewing to feed, educate and support their families. Unfortunately for the Minister, he thought that we think at the same level. Had he approached me as a colleague, I would have informed him that the objectives of my involvement are:

One, to develop  and use bio-ethanol as a renewable source of energy. 

Two, to develop bio-gas and organic fertilizer from the by-products of the brewing process, thereby reducing reliance on firewood as an energy source and diversifying the sources of income. 

And, improving distillation to remove impurities such as methanol, which causes blindness. 

In real economic terms, the poverty effect of owning a bicycle with an engine cannot be over emphasised. For instance, there will be an increase in access to markets by farmers. Businessmen and women will be able to increase their sales, and patients should be able to access health services more quickly, while civil servants should be able to cover the distances to and from work. In Lira Municipality, this initiative will officially be launched this Saturday.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this initiative has the potential of not only saving lives of millions of Ugandans, but also fundamentally improving the livelihood of others whose survival depends entirely on a bicycle as a means of transport. I am reaching out to all of you, my colleagues in this House, and other Ugandans, to take forward this initiative. Please, replicate it to save our people. I will be available to support anyone who intends to take forward this initiative with moral and technical advice and experience. The bicycle has been on display to allow Members of Parliament and the public to view it, and those who want more details can contact me directly.

I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, and I hope that you realise that this humble contribution is a manifestation of my love for the people of this country. As a Member of Parliament, I re-affirm my commitment to continue to use my position to look for solutions that can address the real problems of the people of Uganda, a majority of whom are still living below the poverty line, and I know that we can work together across party and other divides to serve the people of Uganda. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you for this statement, and what you have been able to do to increase employment and to promote the Waragi industry, Kasese –(Laughter)- Thank you, very much.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): I would like to thank my brother, Jimmy Akena, for promoting this type of bicycle. Some years back, my friend Henry Makmot brought a similar one, but it was also powered – I think it was in 1982 or 1983. But I just want to clarify that when I made a statement at the funeral service of the late Latigo Olal, it was not to oppose the brewing of Waragi generally. What is really happening –(Interjection)- because the brewing of Waragi in Lango was there even before I was born, and it is going to continue, and I think it is what feeds the factory in Luzira. But the brewing of Waragi in Lira that I am opposed to is from a by-product of molasses brought from the sugar factory, which is extremely smelly and it is being moved everywhere. I do recall that it was even stopped by the Lira Municipal authorities. 

After this by-product of molasses has been used, people pour it carelessly in areas where the brewing has taken place. So, I was looking at it from a health point of view and not from the economic point of view, and honestly, it has made Lira Municipality what it should not be. In some municipalities, it has actually been banned. So, that is the clarification I wanted to give to my brother. Thank you. And since Lira Municipality is being planned, it is growing, it is booming, and part of it is the beauty; and the beauty of it lies in the health and the way we handle the economic and commercial activities. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO REVOKE THE POLICE 
(DECLARATION OF GAZETTED AREAS) NO.53 OF 2007

3.27
MR ELIAS LUKWAGO (Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I move the motion, allow me to register my thanks to the Almighty God for having kept me alive today, to be in position to present this motion. The brutality to which I was subjected left no doubt in the minds of so many that I might not come back the same person, but thank God I am alive. 

I register my thanks to you, Mr Speaker, personally for the courtesy call you paid to me while in detention over the weekend. You witnessed for yourself the squalid conditions in Masaka detention centre and you remember very well that you found me lying on the floor with no bedding or mattress, and in solitary confinement. That is how I spent my weekend. Thank God I am alive today. The place was stinking so much, you remember very well -(Laughter)- but that is life. 

Having said that, with your permission, I wish to proceed and present this motion. It is brought under Rule 44(1) and Rule 46(1). The copies were widely circulated last week with all the necessary annexure. The motion goes as follows, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, can the Clerk’s office produce more copies? I know members had the copies but there are a few of them who did not get. If we can get about 20 copies now. 

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. But if they can pay attention, they will get the gist of the motion, now that they got copies last week. It goes as follows, and I will be very fast in the interest of time. 

WHEREAS the Minister of Internal Affairs, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, issued a statutory instrument to wit; “The Police (Declaration of Gazetted Areas) Instrument No. 53 of 2007 pursuant to the provisions of Section 35 of the Police Act Cap 303; and

WHEREAS the said instrument has made it illegal for any person or persons to convene an assembly or demonstration or procession of more than 25 persons in any area within Kampala City or any city, Municipality, town or urban area in Uganda including any road, lane, avenue, highway, walkway, greenbelt, square, central business area, places of public resort and residential areas, unless a permit has been obtained from the Inspector General of Police; and 

WHEREAS the said Instrument vests overwhelming powers in the person of the Inspector General of Police in his absolute discretion to reject any application for a permit and or prohibit or prevent the holding of any public meeting, assembly, demonstration or procession; and

WHEREAS it is clear from the foregoing that the said Instrument is repugnant to the Bill of Rights duly enshrined in Chapter 4 of our Constitution; and 

WHEREAS the requirement for a Police permit to gather and speak has been condemned and indeed struck down by various Commonwealth jurisdictions on account of being unconstitutional as it constitutes an affront to the enjoyment of fundamental freedoms of speech and assembly; and 

WHEREAS the Instrument has caused scuffles in some parts of the country between the Police force and members of the public, including some Members of Parliament; and

NOW THEREFORE, I move that this Parliament resolves that Government is urged to revoke the said Instrument.  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded by hon. Alaso. Please justify. 

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The justification for this motion is that we are fully cognisant of the fact – all of us that are here do appreciate that Uganda is a constitutional supremacy. We adopted for ourselves and for generations to come a durable Constitution, and the fundamental principle enshrined in the Constitution is good governance and constitutionalism. That is the hallmark of Chapter 4, which talks about the Bill of Rights. 

Mr Speaker, I do agree with everybody, and you will agree with me that fundamental rights are inherent and not granted by the State. This is a cardinal principle. It is expressly stated in Article 20 of our Constitution, and these fundamental freedoms include, among others, in Article 29, the freedom to assemble, the freedom to participate in the governance of your country, freedom of conscience, freedom to hold an opinion, freedom to associate with any person of your choice, and to disseminate the opinion you hold freely without any unnecessary legal fetters. I do accept, Mr Speaker, that it is a given. Under Article 43 of the Constitution, fundamental rights are not absolute, much as there are those which are non-derogable under Article 44. But under Article 43, they are subject to limitations. I do agree and that is a principle in the Constitution. 

But the same Article 43 provides that the limitation imposed on the enjoyment of fundamental rights should not exceed what is demonstrably justifiable and acceptable in a free and democratic society. The question I am posing today is that when you look at this instrument before you that was laid on the Table, does it pass that test? If it does not, then we should go back to Article 2 of the Constitution, which is so clear, that any instrument which is repugnant with the Constitution is null and void to that extent of inconsistency. Our primary obligation as Parliament, under Article 79 is to make legislations, which are in consonance with the Constitution for the good governance of this country. 

I do agree, Mr Speaker, under our parent laws from Parliament, that we do delegate legislative powers to ministers. That is a given, and the minister has powers. It is true under Section 35 of the Police Act to make an instrument to regulate public assembly. That is a fact. The Constitution gave the minister powers -(Interjection)- yes, the minister is enjoined under Section 35 to make an instrument - a subsidiary legislation that regulates assemblies - but there is a constitutional test which is,  an instrument must comply with, the Constitution, and  it should not exceed what is necessary in a free and democratic society. 

Now, what is the answer to this question as I rest my case? Mr Speaker, my reading of this instrument to everybody and Members of this august House, is that this instrument offends both the letter and the spirit of our Constitution. This is what it says, “The following areas are gazetted areas.” This is section 2 of the instrument: “The following areas are gazetted areas in respect of which it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to convene an assembly or hold a demonstration or procession at which it is reasonable to suppose that more than 25 persons will be present, unless a permit has been obtained in accordance with this instrument:
a) the whole of the area within Kampala city including any street, road, lane, avenue, highway, green belts, square, central business area, places of public resort and residential areas.
b) any area within a city, municipality, town or urban area in Uganda including any road, lane, avenue, highway, walkway, green belt, square, central business area, places of public resort and residential areas within that city, municipality, town or urban area.”  

Mr Speaker, I have read section 35 of the Act. The power given to the minister is to gazette specific areas, say Constitutional Square, Parliament or State House. You specifically mention the areas so that those areas cannot be easily accessed for one reason or another without license from a particular authority.  However, the minister -with due respect, honourable minister, overstepped his mandate by gazetting the whole country -(Laughter)- You will agree with me that the whole country has now been gazetted -(Laughter)  

When you look at this instrument, it is broad enough to capture those who will hold a meeting, political or otherwise. Perhaps let me restrict it to political meetings; I will not talk about other things.  In your home area- in my own residence- if it is within a city, a town, a municipality or any urban area- and I have seen villages that have small towns. So, the size of the town is not defined here. Whether it is a small or a big town, they are all gazetted.  The minister did not gazette specific areas as commanded by this House. He instead ended up gazetting the whole country.  That is one aspect. 

The second aspect, and which will be my last point, is that I have carried out a study. I took time off to study the practice and the legal framework in various Commonwealth countries, and I have here with me precedents and decisions of Supreme Courts from across the world and from several countries like Zambia, Ghana, India, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Britain and others. I compiled a volume and I wish to lay it on Table. I cannot go through all the cases but allow me to just get excerpts from these instruments. These are Supreme Court decisions from these countries. 

Mr Speaker, the gist of all these is that they are all condemning the requirement for a police permit for one to gather and speak. It will therefore be unfortunate if Uganda remained a pariah state; if we remained a pocket or an island in a world which is closing up- freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom to associate, it will be unfortunate.  Allow me to get a few excerpts. 

The starting case is the case of Christine Mulundika and seven others vs the Police. It is a Supreme Court appeal decision No.95 of 1995. This case is from Zambia. I will not read the rest in detail, but briefly -(Interruption)- the copies are all there and I highlighted those particular areas.  This is what the Supreme Court of Zambia held on a number of respects. There was much merit in the submissions which are supported by judicial authority from around the world.  The requirement of prior permission to gather and speak is an obvious hindrance to two very important freedoms under the Constitution since the right to organise and participate in a public gathering is inherent in the freedom to express and to receive ideas and information without interference, and to communicate ideas and information without interference. 

The act or possibility that permission to assemble or to speak may be refused so that the Constitutional freedoms are denied altogether on proper or improper or arbitrary grounds or even on unknown grounds, renders the subjection of these rights to a permission objectionable for a variety of reasons. They went ahead to say that this instrument was used in the 50s to oppress Africans who were agitating for their rights and for the freedom to govern themselves. Their Lordships were of the view that it was obvious that in 1953 the authorities did not have in their mind anything like fundamental freedoms and rights to assemble and speak. That is when they made those requirements. 

Mr Speaker, their Lordships went ahead to state that the constitutional arrangements for democracy can hardly survive if the free flow of ideas and information can be torpedoed by a misguided regulating officer, like in our case, the Inspector General of Police, who is given such powers.  Their Lordships did say that the requirement for prior permission to gather and speak, which permission can be denied, sometimes for a good and at other times for a bad cause not contemplated by the constitutional derogation, directly affects the guaranteed freedom of speech and assembly.  

Also, their Lordships did express this observation, that, unfortunately experience teaches, and it is sadly not hypothetical, that in this country the requirement for a permit to gather and speak has been used since 1953 to muzzle critics and opponents as well as alleged trouble makers. It has been used to deny permission on grounds that had nothing to do with securing public order and safety.  .  

Mr Speaker, this is the last one on this judgment of Zambia. That the requirement of prior permit is a leftover from the days of Her Majesty’s Governors and the British themselves do not require permission to assemble and speak. Why should we require them?  

I also have a Tanzanian of Reverend Christopher Mtikila vs the Attorney-General. It is a 1993 decision. Their Lordships again said in that judgment that a law which seeks to make the exercise of the right to assemble and speak, subject to the permission of another person, cannot be consistent with the express provisions of the Constitution for it makes the exercise of such rights illusory. They went ahead to say in that judgment that it is in the absolute discretion of the district commissioner who was enjoined to give permits to determine the circumstances conducive to organisation of an assembly or procession. There are no adequate safeguards against arbitrary exercise of that discretion and there is no mechanism for challenging this decision except going to court. 

Therefore, we have come to the conclusion that the requirement for a permit infringes on the freedom of peaceful assembly and procession and is therefore unconstitutional. It is not irrelevant to add either that in the Tanzanian context the freedom is rendered the more illusory by the stark truth that the power to grant permits is vested in cadres of the ruling party.

Let me read Ghana last and I will leave out USA and the others. In the case of New Patriotic Party Vs the Inspector-General of Police - this is a Ghanaian authority, 1995 - their lordships were of the view that once the state takes for itself the cover to licence associations, assemblies and processions, it resorts to suppress of the status-quo and the only way of changing the prevailing state of affairs is the use of force.

Again, in this same authority of Ghana, their lordships were of the view that those governments do not take cognisance of the fact that every human being was born into the world to enjoy maximum freedom: freedom to associate, freedom to move, and freedom to express one’s views freely without looking over one’s shoulders to see whether there is a big stick in waiting. 

There are many others from USA, India, and many other countries. But the point I wanted to make –(Interjections)- allow me to complete my submission. As I wind up, the requirement for a police permit is condemned. My colleagues on the other side will agree with me that they will not get even a single country which makes a requirement for a police permit to gather and speak; except that there are regulations that can be made for order in society. Those regulations might be like giving notice. 

But in this particular case, it is even made worse that you have to make an application seven days before and you have to state the number of people that are likely to come and participate in that meeting. So, it is quite heinous on the part of the applicant.

So, I am appealing to my colleagues that we are making laws not for purposes of oppressing or repressing anybody; we should make laws, which are good for all of us. We cannot just sit back as Parliament when legislations are being made and the public out there is being confused. It is true the primary obligation to make legislations in this country is vested in this House. Yes, this House can delegate powers to the minister, but this instrument is being confused as a legislation of this House - that is quite unfortunate. We should not pronounce ourselves on this instrument and that is the spirit, Mr Speaker. We have supervisory powers over the legislative powers of the minister – we have to supervise the minister. That is why there is a requirement in all the Acts where powers are delegated to a minister to bring that instrument to Parliament for approval. 

But in this particular case, I agree with the minister; if it does not go beyond one year, then probably it can just take force without approval from Parliament. But the section again says that if it is to last for more than a year, you lay it on the Table for approval.

Ladies and Gentlemen - and I am specifically appealing to the members of NRM; what legacy would you want to leave long after you have gone? The colonialists left for us proclamations and ordinances; Amin’s regime is remembered for decrees - I am putting a challenge to you ladies and gentlemen, what do you what to be remembered for? That you made a law, which was so repressive and oppressive that made the freedoms and rights under the Constitution illusory! I am appealing to your inner feelings, please agree with this motion; let us not pronounce ourselves. The minister can always bring another instrument before us for thorough debate and approval, but I move that this one be revoked.

THE SPEAKER: Yes hon. Alaso; she is the one who seconded the motion.

3.51
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to second this motion that this particular declaration be revoked. And I would like to base my submission on the fact that Article 29 of our Constitution enjoins us to the protection of freedoms, of conscience, expression, movement, assembly, association and religion. And, therefore, in making that submission, I get the feeling that these being inherent rights, they are supposed to be guaranteed by the state but not granted by the state. 

But I am also aware that our Constitution provides for its supremacy and it provides that any law or culture- under Article 2- that contradicts the provisions of this Constitution is null and void to the extent of its inconsistencies.

Having said that, I also want to note that we in this House are under the provisions of the law; the minister has powers to make those statutory declarations. But I would like to say that if you look at Article 2(11), which effectively puts in place the Police, you find that section 2, which I would like to read, says: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, every Police force in Uganda shall be organised and administered in such a manner and shall have functions such as Parliament shall by law prescribe”.

Mr Speaker, I get the impression that whatever the Police have to do is also supposed to be subject to this Constitution. If that is the case, then bringing a declaration, which outrightly infringes upon our freedoms, means that the Police are acting unconstitutionally.  Even the instrument by the Minister itself is inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution.  I would like to inform Government that this is not fair as far as constitutionalism is concerned. That if we are interested in building a society where people are free to at least say what they think, this declaration should be revoked.

Mr Speaker, as Members of this House, whether you sit where, whether you subscribe to what ideology, it is practically impossible to go to your constituency tonight and address your people the next morning on any matter regardless whether it is an emergency or a not because you have to run back to Kampala and get clearance from the Inspector General of Police.  But you cannot do that because this instrument tells you that you should have submitted your request in a week’s time.  This declaration effectively undermines the operations of all political leaders in this country; it curtails the freedoms of people –(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker, I do not know who maintains order in this House, but if the people on the other side could be told to keep quiet.  

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I was saying that it is practically impossible for any Member of Parliament, whether a district woman representative like I, a municipality Member of Parliament and/or any political leader like an L.C.V to address or consult with his or her people without permission from the Inspector General of Police. 

I think this is bad because it infringes on our work, let alone it effectively infringes on the freedoms of ordinary Ugandans who should actually be protected. In any case, previously for us to hold these assemblies, we still notified the Police; we still told the Police that please come and help us with crowd control, and maintain law and order in this place.  I do not think that this practice has been found lacking to the extent that we are being asked to seek permission.  I feel that this is very, very unacceptable.

I also feel that this is a raspy situation for a creation of a Police state where you effectively have Police as state machinery watching over you all the time. But this cannot necessary be since we have many security organisations in this country doing the same thing.  If there is anything people are going to say during the time of assembly, they are able to pick what they want.  

So, to curtail people and ask them to seek permission from the Inspector General of Police, whose political stand you do not know - as people in the Opposition we have no idea whether we will always be granted permission to hold rallies or to freely assemble and demonstrate because we do not know what the Inspector General of Police will think next time.  All we know is that he only unleashes teargas; that is it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.02
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to make a short statement in response to hon. Lukwago’s motion. I will also request for your permission so that my statement can be made available to honourable Members of Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, recently we issued a Statutory Instrument No.53 of 2007 based on Section 35 of the Police Act, which empowers the Minister of Internal Affairs to gazette, by Statutory Instrument, certain areas where it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to convene an assembly at which it is reasonable to suppose that more than 25 persons will be present unless a permit has been obtained from the Inspector General of Police.

Mr Speaker, however contrary to misleading information that has appeared in the media, this excludes assemblies held inside a building or convened and bona- fide for religious observance, or by the Government of Uganda, or by district administrations or for witnessing sports or games. It also excludes social functions.

Mr Speaker, given that the constitutionality of the instrument has been put to question by hon. Lukwago’s motion, it is necessary to remind the House that among the functions of the House –(Interruptions)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  There is a motion on the Floor, which was moved by hon. Lukwago and seconded by hon. Alice Alaso.  We were actually expecting that hon. Abdul Katuntu, whose name appears on the motion, would follow.

Mr Speaker, I have received what was circulated as a statement to Parliament on Statutory Instrument No.53 of 2007, which is not on the Order Paper.  Can the hon. Minister, Mr Speaker, debate the substance of this motion?  I am saying this because we see the hon. Minister making reference to matters contrary to misleading information that appeared in the media.  The motion by hon. Lukwago makes no reference to the media; there is nothing to do with any insinuation.  Would it be procedurally right that a substantive motion gets diverted by a statement that makes reference to wild allegations, hon. Speaker? (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER:  My understanding is that we are not diverting from the motion. I think he has explained that, first of all, he wants to give the background under which the instrument was raised and then we contribute to the debate or withdraw. (Applause) 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your obviously wise guidance. So, as I continue with this short statement that given that the constitutionality of this instrument has been questioned, it is necessary to inform the House that among the functions of the Uganda Police Force as provided for in Article 212 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, is the mandate to protect life and property and to preserve law and order. 

 In fact the Police Act made in accordance with Article 214 of the Constitution, operationalises these key functions. Therefore –(An hon. member rose_)- I have a lot of information; I am clarified, my sister. There is no doubt –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you seek clarification when a Member is holding the Floor, it is up to that Member to yield and then you give the clarification.
 
DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no doubt that Article 29(d) Chapter IV of the Constitution of Uganda. [Mr. Katuntu rose_]

THE SPEAKER:  You see, hon. Member, stick to what you want; you wanted clarification and our Rules are that when a Member is holding the Floor and you seek clarification, it is up to that Member to allow you by yielding the Floor. We must be sure of what we want to do.  You cannot in one minute stand for information or clarification and then you change for rules of order. Please, let us deal with this. I am going to give you an opportunity to say whatever you want to say.  I will definitely give you an opportunity to make your contribution, hon. Katuntu.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Sir. There is no doubt that Article 29 (d) of the Constitution of Uganda provides for and guarantees the rights and freedoms -(Interruption)

MS ALASO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a procedural concern; hon. Lukwago moved a motion, which I seconded. We have a statement. I would like to know what are we going to submit on it? 

THE SPEAKER: I have already explained that you made a contribution and the minister was standing to make a contribution on the motion.  But his style was that he wanted to give the background and then proceed. How are you prejudiced by knowing the background?

 DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Sir. There is no doubt that Article 29 of the Constitution of Uganda provides for and guarantees the rights to freedom of assembly –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER:  You see, hon. Members, as you realised when hon. Lukwago was making a contribution, he brought volumes and read decisions of courts; he was reading decisions of court for you to understand - he was trying to backup. Now, his style is to make you understand the background and then contribute. How are you prejudiced? 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Sir. There is no doubt that Article 29 (d) of the Constitution provides and guarantees the right to freedom to assemble and to demonstrate and even to petition. However, it is critical to note that the exercise of these rights and freedoms are not absolute as Article 29 is qualified by Article 43 of the Constitution.  Indeed   Article 43 (1) entitled “General limitation on fundamental and other human rights on freedoms,” imposes limitations to the enjoyment of the rights enshrined in the Constitution. 

Article 43 of the Constitution states: “In enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.”   Therefore, it is not correct to suggest that the rights and freedoms in the Constitution is relative to the extent that it does not infringe on the rights and freedoms of others or the public.  In fact it is in the effort of reconciling the conflicting rights and the interests relating to public assemblies that we made this very statutory instrument.  Indeed, it is intended to ensure that orderly and peaceful enjoyment of these rights and freedoms and not to suppress them contrary to what the motion suggests. 

This House will remember that in the recent past, the city, Kampala that is, has been rocked by violent demonstrations and riots leading to loss of life as well as colossal loss of property, frequent disruptions of economic activities as well as insecurity and inconvenience to the general public. 

I am sure the devastating effects of the Mabira Forest demonstrations are still fresh in our minds.  Not to mention the violence both real and latent that characterised the campaigns of 2006. 

The business community and indeed the national economy have been the major casualty of such unnecessary disruptions. On a number of occasions the business community particularly Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) as well as market traders have petitioned the Police and other authorities against allowing assemblies.

THE SPEAKER:  You see hon. minister, the gist here was the background but the motion is about unconstitutionality of your instrument. You have given the gist; you defend it. 

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you for your guidance, I will just summarise the contents of this statement focusing on the motion by hon. Lukwago. The statutory instrument therefore aims to ensure that holding assemblies does not compromise security, law and order. And particularly that there is minimal disruption to business as well as the smooth flow of human and vehicular traffic in the Kampala Central business district and other urban centers. 

Without doubt, Mr Speaker, the police have consistently demonstrated their willingness to work with organisers to identify mutually acceptable venues and have proceeded to successful provide security –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, what they have told you is that this kind of instrument is not anywhere in the world. That nowhere else in the world is this practice carried out. This is the position you have to explain to us. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the guidance and as I said, I am highlighting the essential elements that respond to hon. Lukwago’s motion. As I proceed with your permission, the statutory instrument provides for a clear procedure and if followed by all concerned, including hon. Lukwago, will ensure that harmony between Police and the organisers and the public is maintained. The instrument provides, among others –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, with due respect to Ndungu Rugunda, who has been held in high esteem for a very long time, is it in order for the holder of the Floor to disrespect the ruling of the Speaker on matters of procedure that when there is a motion on the Floor, you only give a brief but not read your statement. Is he in order, Mr Speaker? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Rugunda, having given the background, what is your answer to the query that this is the first time in the world that we have this kind of instrument?

DR RUGUNDA: Well, thank you, Mr Speaker for the guidance. I am actually going specifically to the area that highlights this and it is on page 5 of what I am reading and this is the position.  

Contrary to what hon. Lukwago is stating, this instrument is actually in conformity with many other Commonwealth countries -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, I am so happy that the question is asking where and the answer is this. First, the United Kingdom- I have the Public Order Act of 1986 of the United Kingdom, which requires notice of six days for people who want to demonstrate and also –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, the question here is gazetting, you say this area - that is the example they want.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker - and I intend to lay this on the Table because it gives you details – (Interjection)- I will have information from my colleague. (Laughter)

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the information I would like to give is that in the Act the Minister has referred to, the Public Order Act 1986 of the United Kingdom, it requires, first of all, to gazette the area of the assembly - section 14, the number of people who should take part –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you read it?

MR MWESIGE: Section 14 refers to the imposition of conditions on public assemblies and provides that “the Police has the power to impose conditions on assemblies, to prevent serious public disorder, serious criminal damage, serious disruption to lives of the community and imposes conditions specifically on the number of people who may take part in the assembly, the location of the assembly and the maximum duration of the assembly”. So, the UK Act in fact is stronger and all these conditions are stated in the permit. That is the information I thought I should give and the Act is laid on the Table for Members to refer to.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Ndugu Mwesige, for that very timely information. Other countries that I need to quote are: South Africa - if you want to have a demonstration or a rally you must give seven days’ notice in writing to the Police to get permission. The United States of America, you are also required to -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I wish to thank the veteran Minister for Internal Affairs, Ndungu Rugunda, for accepting my search for clarification on an issue that he has raised. I wish the hon. minister could clarify because according to the instrument that he has just read to us from the United Kingdom with his reference to the Republic of South Africa, it is talking about notice. But, this particular statutory instrument he has issued is talking about Police granting permission. Could he clarify the two; are the two the same, notice and permit to give permission? Can you, please, clarify on that because I am getting lost?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the critical element in all this is that somebody should regulate public assemblies; somebody should be able to determine the routes which they take; somebody should ensure that there is order and somebody should be able to handle the numbers that are in place. Consequently, it is important that the Police, who are the regulators, have full information. Then, they may advise that the assembly takes a particular route, or they may advise differently. So the critical point is that there must be a regulator and that regulator is the Police. 

In conclusion, Sir, contrary to what many people have been saying that we intend to suppress rallies of the Opposition, the intention is actually to create greater harmony between the organisers and the Police and ensure that not only are the assemblies secure themselves, but also that the interests of others, as well as public order and security, are not compromised. So I want to appeal to my colleagues to reject hon. Lukwago’s motion because if you follow hon. Lukwago’s motion, you would end up creating conditions of anarchy -(Interjections)- and we cannot allow that type of situation. There must be order! If there is no order, there is no sanity, and there is no development. So, -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened –(Interruptions) 

HON. MEMBERS: We don’t have copies.

THE SPEAKER: I asked the Clerk to produce copies. He should give you copies. I think the copies of the motion were distributed the other day.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I have listened attentively to the submission of the minister and the supportive information given by hon. Adolf Mwesige and it sounds - what he is saying seems to be happening in some other countries. I just want to seek clarification from the honourable minister on whether in future he would consider bringing here a substantive amendment to the Police Act instead of bringing a gazette? That way, all this intent will be captured by this House, with the principles of the law. I just want to seek clarification.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as I have already said, the Act passed by this House gives authority to the Minister of Internal Affairs to give guidelines and regulations, and the minister exercised the powers as given to him by this House. However, it is not a bad idea to give further consideration to this. So, I thank you and I call on the House to reject, in totality, my brother Lukwago’s motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have seen this Police Act, Section 35. I think in your debate it is necessary that actually you refer to the Act of Parliament, which gave the mandate to issue this. Otherwise, if you only concentrate on the notice, leaving – I think you should combine the two. That is my view.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Sir, the Police Act, Cap 303, Section 35, is very clear. It says, “it shall” – I am reading parts of it, “It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to convene an assembly at which it is reasonable to suppose that more than 25 persons will be present unless a permit has been obtained under sub-section (ii), by that person.” This is the substantive Act. It is the one that provides for permission. Now are we trying, indirectly in this debate, to amend this Act of Parliament? (Interruptions)

MR NIWAGABA: The clarification I would like to seek from the honourable minister is based on the fact that the Police Act being referred to was enacted in 1994 and the Constitution, which is the basis of the motion, was promulgated in 1995. (Applause). 

Secondly, Section 35 being referred to talks of an assembly only and yet the word “assembly” is not defined in the Act and the statutory instrument before us is talking of public meetings, demonstrations, processions and assembly. So, does the minister want to imply that actually this Act is within the limitations of the Constitution, particularly Article 43, sub-article 2(c), which gives the principle for an instrument of this nature to be what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society?

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I am not sure that we should resolve by motion of this House the constitutionality of particular provisions of any Act of Parliament because this power does not lie first of all in this institution of state. That is point No. 1. 

Point No. 2, Mr Speaker, as you and other informed people know, when we promulgated the 1995 Constitution, in Article 274, that Constitution saved all the existing laws, including that Act; and the provisions and procedures of challenging the constitutionality of any Act of Parliament are known and it is not by motion of this House. So, I was really saying –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Amama Mbabazi, for giving way. I think to help us - because many of you who have stood are lawyers and you are just arguing the law. Many of us, in fact all of us, who are entitled to participate here are politicians and we argue politics. The provision on declaration of gazetted areas now says that I must get a permit for any person or persons to convene an assembly and the areas included in 2(b) are any area within a city, municipality, town or urban area in Uganda. 

In my constituency I have one town council and a town board and if I understood my brother very well, the law provides that the restrictions must be based on a demonstrable concern. According to this law, if Latigo goes to Agago constituency and calls for a public assembly, it will be illegal. It is said here that, “The following areas are gazetted areas in respect of which it shall be unlawful…” Therefore, if I went to my constituency now and held a public rally, according to this statutory instrument and my understanding, it would be unlawful and you are suggesting that this is a very reasonable statutory instrument? Maybe I have stopped being reasonable. Can you just help me to understand how, as a Member of Parliament, this statutory instrument creates an exception for me - in a place like Agago, which is very peaceful? Just help me; I don’t care about the law. I want to be a Ugandan, I want to be a leader and I want to help my people. Can you help me?

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, hon. Latigo literally paints the picture as if Government is a bunch of people that do not take into account the concerns and freedoms of people. Let me state that the credentials of Government in the struggle for freedom are perhaps unparalleled in this country and, therefore, we will go out of our way to defend the rights of people to enjoy their freedom. While we are respecting hon. Latigo’s freedom to organise his meetings, which he is entitled to, we also take into account the rights of other people who may not be going for hon. Latigo’s meetings. The critical point we are trying to make today is that organisers should have a working and harmonious relationship with the Police in order to ensure that public meetings are orderly and do not cause problems for the public. (Mr Kawanga rose_)

MR MBABAZI: Hon. Kawanga, I gave way to the Leader of the Opposition politely as I always do when he stood on a point of clarification. Yes, you can speak after me. Mr Speaker, I was saying that this is an Act of Parliament - Act 306 - and contrary to what my honourable friend said, there are procedures, which we all know, by which the constitutionality of any provision of an Act of Parliament are challenged. One of them is not by a motion of Parliament. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion of hon. Lukwago is urging Government to consider revoking the statutory instrument, given the fact that this law is oppressive, it is inconsistent with the Constitution and it cannot stand the test of time. The explanation that we are getting, and hon. Lukwago’s submission, point to the fact that it is a primitive law. The procedure I am seeking is whether the Front Bench can be patient enough and listen to our plea to consider - because it is just a motion urging them. They may take our resolution or leave it because they are in the habit of not taking our resolutions seriously so even as regards this one, they may as well not take it seriously. For heaven’s sake, can’t you listen to us and revoke this statutory instrument? Hon. Lukwago, why didn’t you bring an amendment so that we amend this law instead of going into this since it is not restricted to Article 93 of the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said before, the law that enabled the minister to issue the instrument in question is found in the main Act, Section 35. Actually the principal Act’s heading is, “Gazetted areas”. So when you talk about revoking this instrument, suppose he revokes it and the following day issues another one because he is enabled – yes, this is because the essence of Section 35 is to gazette and I think the argument here is that there shouldn’t be any gazetting. Are you saying, “limited”? So you are talking about limited gazetting? Then the question will be: who will decide the limits? This is the problem. I think we have to look at the enabling law, otherwise if we avoid referring to Section 35, we may have a problem after a week of two. I am just making an observation for your consideration. Have you finished so that hon. Kawanga can take over?

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really respect the peoples’ opinion, including those who think this is primitive. They are entitled to their opinion. The point I have made is that Section 35 is very clear. It is the one this House has passed. By the way, that Act was amended in 2006 and this Section was retained by this Parliament in 2006. The Act itself is the one that talks about permission; it is not the statutory instrument. That is point No. 1. 

Point No. 2, when you attack the constitutionality of the Act in this Parliament, of course you can do so but your attack will have no effect because we all know that if you want to attack effectively the constitutionality of any piece of legislation, the Constitution is clear as to where to go.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. What we are saying in the motion is that we are “urging the government”; we are not revoking; our motion is to urge you. I thought this plain English means that after we have moved and if we pass this motion, it comes back to you to revoke the instrument. It is not that Parliament is going to take away the duty of issuing the instrument from you. 

In any case, I want to comment on the parent Act. We are not interested in amending the parent Act. We are interested in the difficulties that your declaration, the statutory instrument, is imposing on us. So we are not saying that we want to withdraw the powers from you, no. We would like the powers to stay with the minister as provided for in the law but all we are asking is that the minister uses the same power that he has to revoke this instrument. That is the spirit of our motion.

MR MBABAZI: Well, I welcome that amendment -(Laughter)- because the resolution reads as follows: “Now, therefore, this Parliament resolves that Government does revoke the said Act”. The point I am making is that from what I understand, with the explanation some people from the Opposition gave off record, their problem is not really with gazetting but with the areas gazetted. Therefore, they should make that point clear and say, “Please, exclude these streets”. The minister was acting in accordance with the command of the law although I can understand when you say that not all areas should be gazetted and you can make proposals on which areas should be gazetted and which should not. That would make some sense but this is clearly a demand and from the speeches made by the presenter himself and the quotations that he made, not only of the Constitution but of judgements from all over, the impression is that this should not be done and that would mean amending the law to enable the minister not to gazette these areas. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us understand each other. Hon. Lukwago, you say you do not want to remove section 35 but you want to revise and reduce gazetted areas? Could it be that you accept gazetting portions rather than the entire city? Is that what you are saying? That would tantamount to reducing gazetted areas. 

MR LUKWAGO: The clarification I want to make on this particular matter is that when you look at the parent Act, Section 35 says, “If the minister is of the opinion that it is desirable in the interest of public tranquillity, he or she by statutory instrument can declare that in a particular area in Uganda....” There are two things here: “If the minister thinks that it is it necessary or not to make …”, this means that it is not mandatory that he has to make this instrument. That is the starting point. It is discretionary and we are trying to -

THE SPEAKER: If it is discretionary then he can say, “In my discretion, I think it is the entire city”. However, I think he is now saying that the entire city should not be gazetted but only some areas.

MR LUKWAGO: There are two aspects, Mr Speaker, and I want to make a clarification on this. One is the point that concerns the minister. We are saying that in exercise of your discretion probably it was not necessary to make that instrument because it is not mandatory under the law. We are trying to give him reasons that state that it is not necessary. 

Secondly, the parent Act talks of any particular area in Uganda. The words, “particular area” should be specific but here in this instrument, he cites municipalities, towns and urban areas. Those are not specific areas. 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think we should say, “Review this for purposes of reducing” so that instead of saying the entire city we say some parts of the city? That is reviewing.

MR KAWANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to urge the minister, when making these instruments, to use the discretion of the Judiciary. The problem with this instrument is that it has virtually gazetted the whole country. Any place where people would publicly assemble, like urban authorities and town councils, is included. 

Furthermore, this has been done without public knowledge. Until recently, honourable members of this House didn’t know and yet this affects virtually everybody carrying out a function anywhere. 

Secondly, the honourable minister should have looked at the parent Act. Section 35 talks about assemblies; it forbids assemblies, but the instrument prevents convening an assembly, holding a demonstration, or a procession. It goes even beyond what the section provides for. I am saying this because I feel very bad! Of late I have a feeling that unless we take care, we may go back to where we came from. If one has to be prevented from holding public meetings in public places all over the country, then we are in trouble. I am saying this because it occurred to me when I was a Member of Parliament here between 1980 and 1985. I could not hold a single meeting in my constituency because the Police could not let me. And I am saying this can happen to any of the honourable members here; you go to a constituency and they flag this instrument -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Kawanga for giving way. The actual problem with this statutory instrument is that not only is it inclusive - if it were restrictive, fine, but it is so inclusive that actually when you look at Section 35, sub-section (7) on the exceptions, one wonders whether even Members of Parliament are part of Government and under exception. 

Two, it goes ahead to even limit public meetings; even if it is a meeting for a wedding or for anything, it is so obnoxious that actually we should have it –(Interruption)

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, the additional problem we have is that the only person who can give the permission is the Inspector-General of Police; only one person in the whole country! 

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the Inspector-General of Police is represented in the entire country by police officers. So when you inform the responsible police officer, he or she will act on behalf of the Inspector-General of Police. So really, it does not mean Inspector-General of Police in person but it means a responsible police officer.  

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, that is the problem we have! The statutory instrument states that it must name the person who has to give the permission, and the instrument names only the Inspector-General of Police. So what the honourable minister is talking about is not what the law says.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, hon. Kawanga for giving way. The information I want to give to the minister is that I totally disagree with what he has said because recently I held a public rally and I went through very difficult situations. I tried - as we fight this bad law - to inform my DPC and then the DPC told me that he had no powers. Then he told me to write to the RPC, Mr Ochom, who is here. Mr Ochom told me, “I have no right to allow you.” He told me to write to Kayihura. I wrote to Kayihura and then I was waiting for a reply from the Inspector-General of Police, Mr Kayihura, who said, “I have no right, write to His Excellency, the President.”  So Minister, it is not true that these DPCs the RPCs can work on behalf of the Inspector-General of Police. It is totally wrong. 

I went through various channels and to my surprise, writing to them was a very disappointing situation because even before the meeting started, the whole place was filled with police officers, the SPCs. I even had no seats for other guests because the police officers had taken up all the seats. The police officers were the first people to attend; they came early and they were many.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you think that what we need is a review and a clarification on exemption? For instance, he was talking about Church marriages, which could also be exempted from the cover of this one. 

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, before you go into that, we are raising this so that the minister also gets to know that it is possible for him to make an instrument, which can cause problems. Section 2 of the instrument says, “In every instrument published under sub-section (1), the Minister shall name a person empowered to issue permits authorising the holding of an assembly of more than 25 persons within the discretion of that person.” So the person must be named and the instrument named only the Inspector-General of Police; causing problems. But we have said enough to justify the minister’s having a second look at this instrument; it is extremely draconian; it looks like people did not look at it. The idea of the section was about gazetting an area. It did not talk about gazetting the whole country and preventing everybody from operating. I hope the minister will go back and look at it again.

I also want to add that we should take care; unless we become vigilant, we may end up with a police state without our knowledge. I am worried about the image of our Police. The kind of violence that gets depicted on our television sets whenever there is a demonstration is ruining the image of the Police. I do not know whether the Police care! Seeing Police pushing and even beating women, clobbering them on WBS on a daily basis and nobody appears to care, surely at the end of the day, people are going to call this country a military police state. 

I am saying this because the late hon. Kafumbe Mukasa was at one time harassed by the Police and he came here to make a statement and we looked across and the hon. late Kirunda was the Minister of Internal Affairs by then. After expressing all his shock, he said, “But after saying this, honourable minister, I pity you, because the fate of Ministers of Internal Affairs is very bad” –(Laughter)– and then he quoted what had happened to former ministers of Internal Affairs. I do not want to go into a situation where we say, “Hon. Rugunda, with your reputation, you do not want to end up in that kind of situation.” We are not threatening you, but we are just pointing out that unless we watch our steps, we may end up in a situation where people hate the Police, fear the Police and decide that the Police cannot continue to do what he is saying. Hon. Rugunda, look at this instrument again. 

4.57
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think this motion is raising issues of good governance, constitutionalism, the rule of law and freedoms as entrenched in our Constitution. This particular statutory instrument comes against the background of what the Police has been doing and saying. For many years, anybody who wished to organise a demonstration or hold a political rally has been asked by the Police to seek permission and they have been claiming all along that under the Police Act, you must seek permission before you organise an assembly, a demonstration or a procession. 

Our argument has been that under the Police Act, you are supposed to notify the Police, and then the Police will make arrangements to make sure that the assembly is peaceful, is orderly and that law and order is kept, because that is the role of the Police. 

When they realised that we are now taking this step, this unconstitutionality or illegal act by the Police asking for permission, they came up with this statutory instrument. They came up with this statutory instrument because they wanted to beat the substantive provision of the Police Act that requires people who are organising either assemblies or demonstrations, to notify them. 

With this statutory instrument as it is, and with the gazetting of almost the entire urban centre, the entire road network or the entire country, you must now seek permission to enjoy your fundamental rights, and this is where the problem is, Mr Speaker. You cannot condition a freedom; an inerrable right entrenched in the Constitution, and put it under the wings of an officer. These are constitutional rights! What the Police are supposed to do is to regularise. 

I am really surprised that the minister – and it is this particular minister who I know very well and whose history the whole country knows – can append his signature to this obnoxious, draconian instrument! It is a betrayal to the people of Uganda, hon. Ndugu Rugunda. You have fought for freedom in this country and everybody knows it; you cannot put us back to a police state. 

Let me go back to the law, Mr Speaker. Look at Section 35(7); it exempts religious observance. It exempts the government of Uganda or the district administration. Where does it leave, for example, those people who are not considered as “Government of Uganda”? So they are the ones it is targeting! It goes for witnessing sports and games and primarily for social purposes. 

When you read the whole of sub-section (7), it leaves one aspect and that is the political gathering. So, what this law – by the way, to me it is not all about this instrument, it is about the constitutionality of even Section 35 itself. You see, with the coming into force of the Constitution in 1995, all laws are supposed to be interpreted and read in consonance with the new Constitution in mind. What the government should be doing is to look at even the Police Act and review it and repeal this particular section –(Applause)- because it is now going –(Interjection)- I do not know, I see the Speaker coming –

THE SPEAKER: No, that is what I said; that you cannot debate this motion without considering the merits of Section 35. 

MR KATUNTU: Absolutely, Mr Speaker. So, we need to look at it and I urge Government – in fact I am surprised that the Attorney-General has all along kept quiet on this particular issue, but I am sure he knows the unconstitutionality of this. (Laughter) I know that many lawyers are coming up on the other side to assist the Attorney-General; he will reply maybe at the end when he has heard all our views. 

But having said that, I urge Government, especially the honourable minister, who is not the Internal Affairs Minister, but who has been very active on the Floor on this subject -(Laughter)– to look into it. Take it to Cabinet and review this particular law such that it is in conformity with the Constitution. 

If you are to look at the Act itself, for example, Section 35 envisaged a temporary situation where within a year there could be a problem somewhere. When you look at this Act, much as the last provision said it will be reviewed after every year, in fact it talks about “reviewing” but it has sort of banned almost permanently and the reasons given are those by Hon. Rugunda, that there could be violence and that there could be criminality. Can I ask hon. Rugunda: is criminality or violence only where there is a political gathering? We have had sports gatherings and what you said has happened. 

So really, we are not talking about laws only but politics too. Mr Speaker, I urge hon. Rugunda to really think twice about this statutory instrument -(Interjection)- and the other honourable ministers who have been very strong about this; whether security ministers or those from the President’s Office. So when you leave the enjoyment of freedoms and rights to police officers, then that means that this particular officer is the one who will determine that right or otherwise. 

Before I conclude I will give you an example –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: I thank you, hon. Katuntu, for giving way. As a lay person who is not well-versed with the law, I want to give examples that affect the common man as information to my colleague and to this House. My constituency, Makindye West, is within the city that has been left with no space whatsoever. My family alone has 43 individuals –(Laughter)– and for every occasion that I have to gather in that very number, I have to get permission –(Laughter) Every time I leave this place, I have stopovers in three markets before I reach home and every market in my constituency has well beyond 25 individuals and so I have to seek permission. Everything I talk about in each market is politics.  

I have been barred from having more than 25 people, including members of my own family, in my compound. Mr Speaker -(Interjection)- but I am giving information to my colleague. The honourable minister -(Laughter)- we know the level of preparedness of our Government and we are not unsympathetic to that situation. We have areas where we gather for political talk. 

I will give specific examples: ekimeeza is indoors. There is akasaawe, and akayembe in Katwe.  If I organised a rally and I informed or sought permission from the Inspector-General to hold a rally at akasaawe and it rained at exactly 3.00, it would be impossible to have a rally at akasaawe and yet akasaawe is right opposite the akayembe. This law prohibits me from shifting to the akayembe because I have already said that the rally is going to be in akasaawe. I think that information could be important to the Members so that we get freedom to assemble in the city and everywhere else. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank hon. Kyanjo for that information. I will give you an example, Mr Speaker. Yesterday I happened to represent a colleague in this House in a court of law. After we had left Old Kampala Police Station, when she was about to be charged, the Buganda Road Chief Magistrate’s Court was surrounded by the Police. When I reached the gate, the police officer who was there said, “I am not going to allow you in”. I said “Please, I am a lawyer to the person who is going to be charged”. He said, “I said I am not going to allow you in.”  So I pleaded with him for almost 30 minutes. By that time the court was about to sit but the police officer could not let me in. Fortunately, I had the telephone number of the Regional Police Commander, who is present in this Chamber, Mr Ochom. I called him and I said to him, “Mr Ochom, they have refused me, a lawyer, to access court”. He said, “Let me talk to the officer concerned”. So I gave my phone to the officer so that he could talk to the RPC. He spoke to him and after he had spoken to him, the police officer said, “I do not take orders from the RPC.” The man was not even a corporal!  

I rang Mr Ochom again and told him what had happened and Mr Ochom had to walk from CPS to the gates of Buganda Road Court to open for me. That was yesterday! This is the sort of experience we go through when we give authority, which is unnecessary, to some of these officers. 

And then I have a second -(Interjection)- just a minute. Let me finish my point. The colleague who had been arrested had asked me to call a few colleagues to stand surety for her. When they arrived at the gate, he chased them away again. He said, “When the Magistrate wants them, I will allow them in.” This is the sort of thing we are talking about, hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Mwesige, hon. Rugunda. This is the sort of police action we are talking about. If you give this sort of fellow such power, it is going to be abused to that extent. In all these towns we have got what we call Boma grounds, which were originally supposed to be for this sort of function, but with this statutory instrument, they are out of bounds and yet even during colonial days the Boma grounds would be accessible for people celebrating either independence, or for any other reason.  

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give to the previous speaker and the Members is that the very act he has described - yesterday we had to drive to Masaka with hon. Kikungwe to stand surety for hon. Lukwago who was in prison in Masaka. When we arrived in Masaka, we found roadblocks in Lukaya and Nyendo, and many other roadblocks. We were driving but we were told that we could not access the road to the courts. These were policemen! We identified ourselves and said, “We are Members of Parliament and we are going to court to stand surety for our friend”. The policemen could not even let us pass, so we had to leave the car and walk all the way - Mr Speaker, you know the place. We went through Kizungu to access the courts and when we arrived there, even at the gate, as he said, it was a hassle to enter the courts. These are the police officers we are talking about.

Two weeks ago, hon. Lukwago and hon. Balikuddembe were arrested and taken to CPS. They rang me. It was a Saturday and I was at home. I drove to CPS and I identified myself to the OC, Mr Ahimbisibwe. Fortunately, I knew him and he knew me because he had worked in Masaka. I told him that I had come to check on my colleagues. He told me that they were making a statement on the third floor, in room 57. He said I could go in and see them. So I went up to third floor. When I got there, there was a certain policeman who asked me “What do you want here?” I told him, “I am hon. Nsubuga. I have come for hon. Lukwago and hon. Balikuddembe. If there is anything I can do, can I do it?” The man ordered the soldiers who were there - I call them soldiers because they are no longer police -(Laughter)- I was held from behind like a thief and he said, “Throw him out.” From the third floor, down the stairs, I was being hit by the batons. I did tell this to my friends here. This is the police we are talking about!  

It is a shame, Mr Speaker, that hon. Amama Mbabazi, hon. Kajura, hon. Rugunda, hon. Kiyonga and hon. Matia Kasaija, the people who we fought the regimes with - hon. Kawanga has just said in front of you that we have to be very careful when we are bringing these kinds of things. I least expected the people I have mentioned to accept this kind of obnoxious law. 

And apparently these days we have changed the police uniform. Yesterday when I was in Masaka there were police officers in blue uniform. I even asked them whether they were Police. You have Police in white uniform; you have Police in Khaki uniform. It is now hard to tell who the policemen are! (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I think our colleagues on the Front Bench on the other side realise the predicament we are in and why we are seeking that this particular statutory instrument be revoked.  

The psyche of the police is such that if you are holding a political meeting, then you are an enemy of the state. That is how they have been either trained or sensitized. As soon as you tell them that, “I am so and so”, and they realise for example that you are a Member of the Opposition, then you are an enemy –(Interjections)- whoever is saying “no” is not a Member of the Opposition but those who are Members of the Opposition know what we have gone through; we go through this everyday. 

And whereas the law envisages the Police to protect our gatherings and provide law and order, once you do that they tell you that, “You are not given permission”. When you ask them under what law that is, they answer it with either tear gas or a baton. In fact they would mobilise more police personnel to disperse a lawful assembly than what would have been required to keep law and order. With three, four policemen, you can keep law and order and an assembly or gathering proceeds smoothly. But to disperse it, they would use almost a hundred policemen, teargas and so on, which is expensive to the taxpayer.

To conclude, hon. Amama Mbabazi has talked about the procedure upon which we can talk about the unconstitutionality of this. Of course we can, hon. Amama Mbabazi, and you know that. We cannot take a decision, which declares an Act of Parliament unconstitutional, but we can pronounce ourselves on it, and then it is incumbent upon your Government to look into it and either agree with us or if you do not agree, then we take it to court for litigation and final decision. I think that is the procedure. So, hon. Amama Mbabazi, you cannot say that we cannot talk about any unconstitutionality because we are not a court of law. We can really talk about it, especially if we are bringing it to your attention. It is possible that you have been too busy and you have not realised that that particular Act is unconstitutional, or you have not addressed your mind to it. 

Mr Speaker, in my humble view, the procedure is correct and I ask my learned friend, the hon. Attorney-General to seriously look into this. Thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: My concluding remakes –

THE SPEAKER: You are concluding? If you are concluding, let us give other people an opportunity to talk first.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I think you should ask yourselves one question: what was the rationale behind my minister’s coming up with these statutory instruments? 

I think for every law there is a disease that we are trying to cure, and in this particular case I want to pray this House that by coming up with this statutory instrument, there was no desire to suppress anybody but to help the Police to maintain law and order.

It is true that we must have and enjoy our human rights, including that of assembly and association. But may I also bring it to your attention that what happened in the recent past and the demonstrations and assemblies that we saw in Kampala, inconvenience many other Ugandans? I do not need to repeat this because my minister has already mentioned some within his statement. Therefore, the question that I want to pose is: must you enjoy your rights at the expense of mine? (Prof. Latigo rose_)- I think, hon. Latigo, you will allow me to finish first because I intend to be very brief. 

I am quoting Section 43, which tells you that the rights are not absolute –(Interjections)– you want me to read it? No, there is no need of reading it. You all have a copy of the Constitution; I do not have to. So I pray that this House should also look on that side of the matter; that while we would like to have and enjoy our rights, we must also enjoy them in cognisance of other people’s rights.

My last point is in answer to hon. Katuntu. I would really wish that hon. Katuntu withdraws the statement that whenever the Police look at the Opposition, they look at them as an enemy of the state. The Police are not looking at anybody as an enemy of the state, as long as you are on the right side of the law. The Police will not be able to touch you, to harass you, if you are on the side of the law. I told you hon. Lukwago – Mr Speaker, I told him when he got problems –(Mr Katuntu rose_)- I think I will end my submission there, Sir. (Laughter)

5.06
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I am not a lawyer, but I am a political scientist. I have listened very carefully to the concerns of this House and I have also consulted my colleague. I would, therefore, like to move that: “Now, therefore, this Parliament resolves that Government does consider reviewing the said instrument.” I so move. (Applause)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When hon. Lukwago moved this motion, he was not in any way challenging the authority of the minister as provided for in the law.  He was raising a genuine matter of concern. We take clear note of the fact that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has recognised the concerns expressed by Members on both sides of the House. In any process, mistakes are made; in any process it is a give and take, and in any process we must address things through dialogue. We believe that the amendment proposed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business provides opportunity for the minister to consider - it is incumbent upon him. If he considers and thinks it is still valid, we will come back and raise our concerns. So, we accept the amendment because we have pronounced ourselves on it very clearly. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the proposed, amended motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion, as amended, adopted.

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, I suggest that you form an inclusive committee to study and make proposals to the minister to consider when he is reviewing it. This will enable you to assist him to do the review. I think this can be done –(Interjections)- but the decision has already been made! I was only talking about modalities of helping the minister to come to a reasonable – 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I want to go on record that I am in total agreement with - and I support - the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s amendment. However, I want to seek a clarification that for example, in between today and when the decision is finally taken to review and so on, I know there should be dialogue between parties or even consult off record such that even if the minister were to come up with another statutory instrument, which is agreeable - what happens between now and then? Can we get some promise or undertaking from the Leader of Government Business to the effect that before that review finally comes up, the legal regime will remain as it is?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much. The instrument is in force but of course he will take into account what has been agreed on here –(Interjections)- yes, he is going to take into account what has been decided here. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to seek a minor clarification from the Leader of Government Business. Currently the Police are behaving uncouthly by mistreating members of the public and attempting to beat up Members of Parliament who go to courts to stand surety for others. They even attempt to beat up individuals who go there for a similar purpose. As Leader of Government Business, what are you putting in place to make the Police become pro-people and stop treating people like animals?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I think it is important for every group to behave in a manner, which is prudent. We have heard what you have said and of course we shall discuss all these issues with the Minister of Internal Affairs. I would not like to rush to give a statement because we have fully grasped the concerns of the body politic, or the body legislative. However, I would also like to appeal to you not to antagonise the Police –(Interjections)– yes, it takes two to tangle.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA TOURISM BILL, 2007

Clause 1

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I want to move an amendment to clause 2 to read as follows: “Tourism means the activity of persons travelling to and staying in places outside their usual environment for not more than one year mainly for leisure, business, and other purposes not related to the exercise of an activity remunerated from within the place visited.” 

The justification is that this is the world tourism organisation definition and it is more embracing than the one we have now.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, any objection? Okay, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, on the head note, the committee proposed to delete the word “tourism” and replace it with the word “tourist”, to read: “Continuation of the Uganda Tourist Board.” 

The justification is that it is the Uganda Tourist Board that is being referred to in its current state.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that we add a new sub-clause (f) to reads as follows: “A representative of the National Planning Authority”, and we re-number (f) to become (g).  

Justification: to give the public sector majority control over the activities of the board since the chief executive officer is an ex-officio who occupies a seat on the board by virtue of his or her position. 

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have no problem with his amendment but I want to suggest an additional amendment. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, what we do: let us deal with that other one and then – is it an immediate addition? 

MR KASIGWA: It is before that one.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So, let us deal with the first one before we come to yours.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seem to get some confusion in the justification given for including the National Planning Authority because the main essence of the Bill was to let the private sector manage the tourism industry. Now you are amending, which I do not mind - for other reasons the National Planning Authority is the repository of national plans and therefore their presence ensures that whatever is being done is consistent with long-term objectives of the country - but to justify it on the basis that “to give public sector control over the board”, I think runs counter to the very purpose of this Bill. I think that justification should be amended by the chair.  
 
THE CHAIRMAN: But if you agreed to the amendment!

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I do not disagree with the opinion of the hon. Leader of the Opposition but I must also say that the initial draft was giving majority seats on the board to the private sector. However, we thought that since it is a regulatory function and where public monies are actually going to be involved and appropriated by this Parliament, the public sector should have majority control.  

Adding the National Planning Authority was really for a different purpose. I can also justify it to say that it is an organ of Government particularly dealing with planning and planning for tourism is very important in this respect. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Experience has shown that big boards are not functioning. We shall give an example: the National Planning Authority, which has 30 members on the board, has not taken off. For this board to be functional, we do not need all these groups of people. The purpose of the National Planning Authority is to plan for the nation. They can be picked and inserted there. I propose that this number of board members should be restricted to the ones we had in the Bill and not go beyond that. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: But do you agree to it because the proposal was for a representative of the National Planning Authority; isn’t that the amendment? Do you oppose it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am opposing it because the National planning Authority is supposed to do plans for us. If they want to plan for the tourism sector, they have a way to handle it and they pass them over for us to go by them. There is no need for them to be on the board.  

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, honourable members, the motion was to include a representative of the National Planning Authority but some Members are opposed to the inclusion of this representation. The best thing to do is to a vote on it. 

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee in its wisdom looked at tourism as a sector that embraces very many other sectors, and the National Planning Authority, leave alone their current, you know, state of weakness. But we are saying that in order to plan effectively for this sector, somebody from the authority should be present to guide in the planning process of this sector. I find it very strange because the presence of the National Planning Authority on this board is more desirable that the absence. So, I do not find merit in hon. Nandala’s argument against the representation. I really do not find merit in it. I wish to propose that hon. Nandala be –(Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We do not object to it if you want it. The National Planning Authority is supposed to plan for all of us; they are supposed to have all categories of people: engineers, tourists, whatever, mention them - social scientists, everyone. If you are going to say that that sector is important, then every sector is very important in this country; it will need somebody on the board from the National Planning Authority. 

Why is the National Planning Authority not on the URA board? Why isn’t the National Planning Authority not on the Water board? It is just simple that the input from tourism will fit in the master plan of the National Planning Authority. So, there is no need for us to have somebody there. You are on the National Planning Authority, sit there; they will be the ones to feed you. In conclusion, Mr Chairman, the National Planning Authority is a body with the duty to plan; it calls on anybody from any sector to help them in the planning; it does not mean that it should sit on that particular sector in order to plan. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think you have exhausted your arguments for and against. I put the question to it.
(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, earlier on I had said that we introduce a new sub-clause (f) and after the justification of the new sub-clause (f), we propose that –

THE CHAIRMAN: No, the honourable member had something connected with the earlier one which we have pronounced ourselves on. Let us have him.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mine is a small amendment - in fact they are two. The first one is that the other day Members expressed their concerns about the manner in which the Ministry of Finance handles the tourism sector in general. Therefore, I want to move an amendment to 4(1)(b).

THE CHAIRMAN: Then you are taking us back to where we have moved from.

MR KASIGWA: No, clause 4(1)(b).

THE CHAIRMAN: No; we voted on 4(1).

MR KASIGWA: But we are still doing 4(1).

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, we are still doing 4(1) but he is adding another one.

MR KASIGWA: Instead of: “A representative of the Ministry of Finance,” it should be: “A senior official responsible for finance.” Considering that in the passed one, it is a senior official. 

THE CHAIRMAN: When you say “a senior official”, you will have to come and define who a senior official is. 

MR KASIGWA: Absolutely, because in (a) they talk of “a senior official of the ministry appointed by the minister”. So, let us go ahead and see to it that also from Finance there should be a senior official and, give “senior official” an interpretation.
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Then who will check on whether the person appointed is a senior official or not? 

MR KASIGWA: It is up to the minister because it is already in the Bill. They talked of “a senior official”, so who is this “senior official”?

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, while I may have no objection to this on face value, I have a problem dictating on the calibre of the person to be represented on this board because the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is the owner of the Bill. They are confident that they need a senior official on the board but when it comes to these other organisations it becomes a little tricky to dictate the category because there may not be very many senior officials. I do not disagree with the amendment but Members can look at it and if they think –

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us try and –

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, the object of this Bill is to enhance the quality of the tourism industry and the board in particular. So if we are talking about quality, I think we should move away from sinecures. We should have serious people, senior people from these ministries that take part -

THE CHAIRMAN: But we have already used the term “senior official” and therefore if you have used the term “senior official”, we might as well continue –(Interjection)- because in 1(a) we see “a senior official”.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, what hon. Harry Kasigwa has brought up actually takes me to what you have just pointed out. Is it likely that under any circumstance the minister would appoint a junior official to represent him on a board? Because the use of that term - and you said that it has then to be defined because “a senior official” must then mean somebody from commissioner level upwards. You must define it so that the actions are legally binding. Otherwise, you would want to remove “senior” and then hon. Kasigwa’s concern disappears. We believe that the board members are going to be appointed on their own merit and relevance to the functions of the board.

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Chairman, we actually would expect the official appointed to the board to be a senior person.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, the object of the Bill is to set standards. In the tourism industry, if you are to set standards, it means a lot. If you move across the world the standards set in countries like Kenya, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Namibia are actually institutionalised. So I was proposing that in the composition of the board, we include members of the Architects’ Association of Uganda because subsequently there is an amendment I shall move. I say this because –(Interjection)- I was trying to compare what we have as a country. 

For example, the tourism sector in Kenya is good but if you look at the one from Uganda, it is very pathetic. Therefore, if we are to create standards within the tourism industry, we should have professionals that will guide the board. So, we need architects. And two, considering that tourism is about themes, architects are best placed to advise the board when it comes to addressing themes. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: But then how many professional bodies are you going to put on this board? Because if the board wants professional advice from any profession they can get it; if you say architects, how about engineers? Where do you end?

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, this one is very specific. You see when we are talking about tourism, we are talking about ideas and if in the board you do not have people who can conceptualise those ideas into realities on the ground, then I think we shall miss the point. We shall end up with a board that will not be any different from what has been there as of now. It is in Kenya, it is in Zimbabwe, it is in Malaysia, it is everywhere.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the idea proposed by hon. Kasigwa is good but as you rightly put it, if we are to put on the board all the relevant professionals that we need, bearing in mind the expenses of the board, the need to have a lean board, then we may never end. I think the best way forward is to look at ways of putting your idea in action when we are recruiting staff, which work for that organisation because in that organisation we have staff and we can actually look at the relevant skills that are needed, like you put it, and they are included. 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, hon. Kasigwa is making a proposal for an amendment based on his study of what applies elsewhere and that means that there is some rationality to what is being done in those countries. If the problem is that we now blow up the size of the board, can we not go back and look at the content of what you have provided and ask ourselves that out of what has been proposed, is there nothing in that category that can be removed so that an architect is brought? Because I quickly picked what he was saying - even the gate to a national park conveys a message. 

A board member who is an architect is probably very quick to notice such a thing and advise the board that, “You know, this is going on like this, maybe we should do something.” So, an official from the Ministry of Finance who will just go there because he has been assigned will have less obligation than an architect who wants to ensure that there is harmony with the structures that are being built and who will take keen, professional interest in what goes on in the tourism sector, and the hotels are about buildings. 

Even if that member you have assigned there sits in that thing, if you make a decision, he will not go and help you in decision making up there because somebody else or the Cabinet will still decide on the funding. So, if the numbers are too big, I would propose that we accept this amendment and then I will introduce an amendment to delete representation of the Ministry of Finance to keep the number.

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Chairman, the input of the architect is taken into account in the grading and clarification of hotels. You know, the criteria for the grading of hotels into classes; we have the same criteria across East Africa because now we are marketing East Africa as one tourism destination. So, the panel of judges is drawn from members from Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya. In that criterion we have the input of architects. Otherwise, I totally agree that the input of the architects is important for hotels but that is captured under the criteria for the grading and classification of hotels. Thank you.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, hon. Harry Kasigwa is emphasising standards. In this country we have an institution, which monitors standards and this is the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. The Uganda National Bureau of Standards falls under the Tourism, Trade and Industry ministry. So, having a senior official from that ministry represented on the board, by implication, means that the Bureau of Standards is represented and besides I look at a member of the board being less an advisory than an employee of the board as proposed by the hon. Attorney-General. 

So in view of having a lean board and in view of what has been advanced as explanations so far, I want to appeal to my brother, hon. Harry Kasigwa, to drop the idea. The ministry is not blind to engaging the expertise of architects in this situation. 

MR KASIGWA: Well, it is your Bill. I am an interested party; I am interested in the tourism sector and in tourism when you talk of “gifted by nature”, what do you mean? When you talk of standards, you are not looking at only buildings, and there are people who are trained to actually actualise those standards and turn them into themes, themes that you are going to market as a ministry. 

Today, as we speak in Uganda, what themes are you marketing in the tourism industry? Zero! There are no themes that you are marketing. That is why I told you that if you could look at what the Kenyans have done, for example, and you look at the themes they have developed, right from Swahili to the Masai themes, name it, you actually see that people are bound to go to Kenya as a destination because there is something peculiar that they are going to see. I would not expect the ministry –(Interjection)- yes, incidentally they are quite many in this country but at the end of the day it is up to you but I believe that the tourism sector in Uganda has not been given the professional touch that it deserves. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. There is an amendment by hon. Kasigwa that we include architects. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I want to remind honourable members about these amendments are just springing from the Floor. The rules say that if you have an amendment, you go to the committee and market it there. If the committee refuses then you can come here. Otherwise – yes, those are our rules. 

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Chairman, I beg your indulgence. We are promoting tourism and one of the most important aspects in the tourism industry is that we are not harnessing local tourism; we are not doing these because we have not brought on board the local authorities that we decentralised. Their participation and encouragement should be part of this tourism industry. And if you realise, in most of the areas where we have some tourism, the local governments are participating in a very minimal manner. 

I humbly beg that if it is possible, if it will be allowed, the Uganda Local Government Association (ULGA) should be included. If it is not taken then among these we could have a member of the board because he would be able to bring the local governments on board; and these are very important partners in as far as the tourism industry in concerned. I beg, Mr Chairman.

MR AHABWE: I appreciate the hon. John Kigyagi’s proposal. It is as important, as any other interested party and as earlier proposed by hon. Harry Kasigwa, but for purposes of having a lean board, I think the categories we have put here can also cater for those local environments. For example, the association of accommodation owners, hotel owners, these associations go as deep as upcountry environments. I think let us not over burden the board. I appreciate it but agree with me that for purposes of having a lean board, allow me to withdraw your amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we have abandoned the other one? Okay.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I too would like to make a proposal that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be part of the board. Yes, I will give you the reason why I am saying it. Foreign Affairs is the mother of tourism. It would give reasons why tourism is not picking up; it would borrow from abroad how tourism should be done and when people come here, it is Foreign Affairs, which is actually responsible for the foreigners who come here. So if you leave it out, it will have to depend on hearsay about what is hindering tourism from picking up. I would like to propose that. 

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I want to beg the indulgence of this House that for reasons I have already advanced, really many organisations are relevant to this board. However, I think that for purposes of having a lean board, you know the financial implications; please, agree with me that we take the committee proposals as we have submitted them. I beg that you agree with me on this one. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the smaller the board the better. I think the earlier we finish this clause 4 the better. I would suggest that you put the –

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are withdrawing the proposal of (f)?

MR AHABWE: I want to make a small amendment. Thank you, hon. Mafabi and thank you members for really being considerate. 

I want to propose that we merge sub-clause 4(f)(ii), with (iv) to make a new sub-clause 4(f)(ii) redrafted as follows: “One person shall be appointed from a list of three names submitted by accommodation owners, hoteliers and providers of catering services to be a representative of their interests.” The justification is that those categories actually are similar and, therefore, one representative is sufficient.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to move an amendment to clause 5(1) as follows: that we add at the end of the sentence “…for one more term.” The justification – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Does this means you want them to serve just two terms?

MR AHABWE: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, after (e) I would like to propose another ground, for the removal of a member from office, and that is by introducing an (f) to say: “If he or she is in breach of the Leadership Code.” The justification for this is that we should –(Interjections)- I am introducing an (f) - 

THE CHAIRMAN: (f) where?

MR KASIGWA: Clause 5, sub-clause (2), after (e) we should introduce an (f).

THE CHAIRMAN: We have not reached that. We are only on 5(1).

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, in clause 5(2)(e), I wish to propose to substitute the word “minister” in line three, with the word “chairman”. The justification is to reduce the load of the minister.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, all these members of the board are being appointed by specific organisations. There are those coming from the Ministry of Finance and those from the private sector. Anybody can resign from the board by telling the organisation he is coming from. I do not think it is necessary to tell the minister only. The person should resign to the authority that appointed him not the minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that after they have been appointed, the sector minister becomes responsible for them instead of having different authorities controlling them.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, we have already moved an amendment that actually instead of submitting a resignation to the minister, the resignation is submitted to the chairman of the board.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear really. I put the question to it.

(Question and agreed to.)

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, I would like to introduce a new ground and that is: “If he or she is in breach of the Leadership Code.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, the reason you do not have to do that is that the Leadership Code is a law of general application, and it is up to the person administering it to decide the punishment. So, you do not have to - because it is a law of general application. Whenever circumstances arise under it, then certain consequences follow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think all members who are on Government boards are supposed to submit declaration forms.

THE CHAIRMAN: They are leaders.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They are leaders, so I think that does not apply. If he does not submit he will be dealt with.

MR CHAIRMAN: Okay; next amendment? Clause 5(4)

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, we propose that clause 5(4) be deleted because it is redundant. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AHABWE: The committee also proposes the deletion of clause 5(5) for the same reason.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to introduce an amendment that would be somewhere between 7(c) and (d) such that we shall re-number them, as one of the functions. What I want to introduce is: “To locate potential tourism sites that merit development, and gazette them.”

THE CHAIRMAN: As a function?

MR KASIGWA: As a function. The justification for it is that the board shall undertake to commission appropriate research in the field of tourism. If you are going to undertake research then you should be able to gazette that, and potential investors will come in and develop those particular sectors that you would have done research on.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. There is an added function of the board.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I certainly would not have a problem with it. My concern and I need to be guided on this – is that the function is already vested under the ministry itself. If we give a similar function to the tourism board, will it not be duplication or will it not create unnecessary conflict and competition of functions? I need to be guided here but it is a good amendment. Sub-clause (k) reads that one of the functions is “to inspect, register, license and classify tourist facilities and services.”  Hon. Kasigwa, I do not know whether it is covered under that, but I would also not want certain functions to be competed for between the board, which will be under the sector, and the sector itself.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Basically we are trying to streamline the sector. Not so? And the other day hon. Alice Alaso asked a question: Uganda is gifted by nature, but what is there? What is there? What do you talk about? So if you are going to attract investment, as you said, then you should go out and say, “These are the potential areas that you can invest in if you come to Uganda.” That should be, specifically, the function of the board.

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Chairman, hon. Kasigwa is talking about a very important point of potential sites. We have for example, the rocks in Tororo. However, presenting a budget as well as gazetting is the work of the ministry. What we are saying is very important but it is not this board to do this.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to clause 7.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OCULA: Mr Chairman, I want to make an amendment to clause 7(2). We have just finished with (1) but there is (2), on page 10.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we have finished the entire 7 because there was no recorded, proposed amendment.

MR OCULA: Okay, I will recommit.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee wants to propose an amendment to clause 8(1) to insert the following words: “from among themselves” between “committees” and “for”. The justification is to restrict the appointment of committee members to members of the board.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are talking of committees and if you look at the number, with the amendments, we have nine members. Therefore, it seems that at any one time there will be one committee because they are saying here that, “the committee appointed shall have a maximum of five members”. If you go with the maximum five members, at a particular moment we shall only have one committee. I propose that the maximum be reduced from five to four.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is reducing the number to four.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I didn’t get hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment very well.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, suppose we have an important committee that we have formed and it has five members and we need another committee? There will be only four members left and in most cases, chairpersons may not be part of those committees. So I am suggesting that if we remove the chairperson and they remain eight, at any particular moment if a big committee has a maximum of four members, we can have two committees. That is my rationale on that but with five members, if another job comes up, we shall only have one committee.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, if we can use Parliament as an example, I am a chairman of a committee but at times when a select committee or an ad hoc committee of Parliament is formed, I can be part of it. What I am trying to say is that a person can be a member of more than one committee. The only thing that we are trying to say is that there should be sufficient numbers on the committee to do a good job.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think his point is that you may need committees to work simultaneously and if you say five members, you may not be able constitute a second committee. I think this is the idea.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. With nine people, and with a maximum of five, we still have four people and when we say a maximum of five, then that means we can have a committee of three. Therefore, with five we are still okay.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then use the term “minimum” rather than “maximum”, and state the minimum.

MR MUGAMBE: The minimum would be two and that does not guide the people constituting the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, with that guidance I think we should put the word “minimum” and not “maximum”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there any magic in a maximum of four or five?

MR KIGYAGI: The tourist board is not like a Parliament, which works all the time. These committees will come as ad hoc; when need arises and the number five is to make sure that there is a substantial number. These are not permanent committees; they will be constituted for a certain purpose, which will be executed and it will end. So I still believe that they should be five even if the total number is nine.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I agree totally with hon. Kigyagi’s submission but I must also say that when we talk of a quorum and you have a minimum of three, if only two are going to make a quorum then you may have a problem of acceptability of a decision that has been taken. So as hon. Mugambe says, let us go for the maximum of five but a quorum of three can still make some recommendations. I think that is not very controversial.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think the best way should be the minimum. If we are going to state this let us say a minimum of three and a maximum of five. That will be ideal. But if we just say maximum then what is the number? So, let us have the minimum and the maximum. 

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, if the drafters of the law do not disagree I have no problem with that amendment. We can have the minimum and the maximum. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So we should use both maximum and minimum?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, we want to substitute the word “may” at the beginning of the sentence with the word “shall”. We should also delete: “in consultation with the minister responsible for finance”, appearing in the second and third lines, and replace it with: “on the recommendation of the board”. The justification is to make it mandatory for board members to be paid allowances, and to involve them.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the use of the word “shall” instead of “may” creates a paradigm shift in the drafting style hitherto known. Normally the assumption is that the payment will be there although to generally bind the paying authority is good. But the normal style is always, “may”. I do not know why but if you look at most of the laws, this is the expression normally used. But I do not have much problem with the word “shall”. 

On the recommendation of the board, I would agree but the only problem –(Interjection)– yes, there has to be a recommendation anyway because they are in the kitchen. They cook and then they send to somebody for approval, or they consult but the monies from the board will be appropriated by Parliament and really to involve the Ministry of Finance is very important. It creates some kind of interface and legitimacy so that there is no anachronism dependent on these allowances whereby at a later stage there may be complaints and audit queries.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not differ with the Attorney-General. In fact the reason for “may” is that if the board were the one to determine this, they can say, “Pay us this much.” And they just bring it. That would not be different from determining their emoluments. So the word “may” is in the right place and in consultation with the Minister of Finance because he has to come to Parliament and present the budget. As it stands, the amendment of the committee wants to put us in danger.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, we conceived it that way because – we can concede the word “may” because in terms of drafting, we are not experts. But when it comes to the Ministry of Finance, money is already been appropriated by Parliament. The minister gives his budget and his mandate stops there. Once the money goes to the board, why would this board be subjected again to the Ministry of Finance? 

History has it that actually the Ministry of Finance has always constrained operations of some of these organisations by their stringent nature – I hope I am using the right words. In my opinion, let us give the board autonomy to manage their affairs. After all, the Ministry of Finance is represented already by a senior official on the board. I do not see why we should bring in the minister again to dictate on the operations of the board, which falls under a different sector. I think it is not right especially when the Ministry of Finance is already represented on the same board. That is consultation enough. 

I want to concede the use of the word “may” but I seek the indulgence of the House to leave out the Minister responsible for Finance from being consulted on how the board should manage its financial affairs. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, he is saying that he agrees with the word “may” and that we should keep it. 

There was another amendment to clause 10, that we delete “in consultation with the Minister responsible for finance”, appearing on the second and third lines, and replace it with “on the recommendation of the Board.” I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRMAN: This is the convenient time to resume because the Bill was drafted in parts. We have finished that part and we will resume tomorrow.

6.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Chairman and honourable members, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Committee of the whole House has considered the Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007 from clause 1 to clause 10, and passed those clauses with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Mr Serapio Rukundo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we adopt the report from the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: With this we have come to the end of today’s business. We shall continue with the committee tomorrow. The House is adjourned until then.

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)


