Tuesday, 19 February 2008 

Parliament met at 2.46 P.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I want to welcome you and thank you for what you have been able to do in your constituencies by way of development. I see a number of visitors but I do not have the particulars. I would have wanted to introduce them. When I get the particulars, I will introduce them to you.

2.48
MR HUSSEIN GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter national importance; it concerns the health of former Vice President of this country, Gen. Idris, who is one of my constituents. The fact is that Gen. Idris got an attack of high blood pressure and diabetes two weeks ago and he was admitted to Arua Hospital. As you know, the hospital is not well equipped to have managed his problem. So, correspondences were exchanged between Kampala and Arua and finally the Minister of Defence promised to send a chopper to pick him.  It took around two or three days for the chopper to arrive. When the chopper arrived, he was brought to Kampala and has been admitted to Mulago Hospital. 

But the problem is that we do not see any signs of improvement. What we are asking is whether Government can use the Presidential Emoluments and Benefits Act Cap. 263. Under that Act, a former vice president is entitled to the same benefits like the sitting vice president as long as he does not have any problem with this country and he is ordinary resident here, which he is. Government has been helping him by accommodating him and giving him transport.  

So, I would like to know whether Government has plans to transport him to a hospital, which is outside this country to have a thorough body check up and review for his health. We fear that if he is discharged today and the same thing happens and he gets another cute attack, what is going to happen? We want to know whether that assistance can be granted. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the Minister of Public Service is the one in charge.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE/SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did read something about the state of the former vice president who happens to be a friend of mine since I worked in Arua. I passed by to inquire about his state of health and I was told to hold on for a little while whilst they do their best. They said he was responding and this was about three days ago. Perhaps I should go back and find out his current state. I shall do so as soon as I leave the House and then you would be advised on what to do next. This is what the authority thought two days ago. Thank you.

2.52
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise up with a very heavy heart requesting your indulgence that you consider giving a closed session to this particular Parliament because I have serious issues to raise that entail money which has been given to some Members of Parliament to a tune of Shs 170 million to influence legislation in this House. 

Mr Speaker, I will seek your guidance so that in that closed session, I would lay before this Parliament all the necessary information without necessarily destroying the integrity of this House. Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: This prayer is made under what Rule of our Rules of Procedure?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I will seek your indulgence if I would consult the Rules because as an upcoming lawyer, I do not want to error in the face of the law. But the principle of the prayer will still remain intact because if I do not raise it in this plenary- I am also receiving a lot of threats on my life. I really pray for a closed session as urgently as possible so that I can lay before this House the necessary information to redeem our image.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think you have made the prayer and you said I give you more time. We may need more time to decide on this because it is not usual but it may be merited. Here is the camera -(Laughter)- Is this the sign of approval?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give me sometime. You have made the point; I will do some consultation in the Rules and I will decide on it. You have given me the subject matter.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.  Otherwise, it is Rule 22. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had promised that when I get the details, I would introduce the visitors. In the gallery, we have student leaders from Makerere University Business School, Nakawa.  You are most welcome. (Applause)

2.54
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance relating to the functions of this august House. On Friday, 15 February 2008, a catastrophe befell my constituency where one of the major markets, –Mpanga market, caught fire and a lot of property and merchandise worth almost half a billion was destroyed. 

The fire broke out at around 8 o’clock. Members of the community tried to put off the fire but they could not manage. They invited the Police, who tried their best. They also could not manage. Luckily, there was a tap near by which was used to put off the fire and thank God, Mpanga shell, a nearby petrol station which is about three to four metres away did not catch fire. 

Therefore, the Mpanga market vendors are really in a very sorry state. Their property and goods have been completely destroyed. Article 26 (1) of our Constitution guarantees the right to property, to the effect that every person has a right to own property either individually or in association with others.

Mr Speaker, I do very much appreciate the role of our Police force in executing their obligation of protecting life and property as it is well stipulated in Article 2 (12) (a) of our national Constitution. But as we are all aware the Police force is ill-equipped to handle such dangerous fire catastrophes. 

I am also aware of section 30 of the Local Government Act, which provides for the functions, powers and services of local Government council. And specifically for Fort Portal municipality, section 30 (3) of the Local Government Act gives urban councils the responsibility of providing fire brigade services. It is very clearly specified under part 3 of the second schedule of the Local Government Act. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, part 3 of the second schedule of the Local Government Act specifies fire brigade services as a function of urban local governments. But as you are all aware, our local governments are very ill-funded and this was as a result of the abolition of the Graduated Tax. 

Mr Speaker, the Graduated Tax compensation of Shs 80 billion, which was requested by the local councils only Shs 45 billion was put in the national budget and out of which only Shs 33 billion was released, and even then that Shs 33 billion which was released, it went on raising the staffing levels from 43 per cent to 63 per cent. The Local Service Act that would have come in to rescue the situation is still in the bureaucracies of legislation.

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to urge Government to put viable mitigation strategies to fight the rampant fires more so in urban areas. I would like to call for some inter-ministerial collaboration because – it is true the local governments have got the responsibility of providing fire brigade services; Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Police force is empowered to protect life and property; and the Ministry of Finance, more especially the Ministry for Investment –

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, I thought you were just standing to report an incident, which took place in Fort Portal, rather than explaining the general policy of Government running Local Government -(Laughter)- I think you put your point; there is an emergency in that the market was burnt. I think it is clear.

MR KALIBA: Thank you very much for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Finally, I would like to urge Government through the ministry for relief and disaster preparedness to extend a helping hand to the vendors of Mpanga market. I would also like to request the Minister of Local Government also to give a hand to renovate or to reconstruct the badly damaged Mpanga market. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.02
MS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I just would like to give some supplementary on the issue of Mpanga market. I think, at this point in time, what we need for this market is Government intervention to put back this infrastructure for people to get back to work. Though they do need aid from say the ministry for disaster preparedness but we surely need a new structure now for people to begin working. We can also get them some funds from “bona bagagawale” since it is our programme as NRM and we get them kick-started. 

Mr Speaker, like I had already informed you, I had also got a matter of public importance which I want to raise on this now. It is about the mushrooming telecommunication companies in this country. It is about the many masts and antennas that are being erected in places where an environment impact assessment report has not been done.  You will recall that many people have been complaining that we cannot allow investments with impunity. Somehow we need to talk to local people. 

I have talked to the Director of National Communication Commission and that of National Environment Management Authority. WARID, the new telecommunication company is putting so many antennas in Kampala and they are not doing the impact assessment from NEMA and by the time they get it - you know with the corruption in Uganda - they may even put it there before they get the -(Interjections)- I need your protection, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I am raising this because when I went to NEMA yesterday –(Mr Godi rose on a point of information_) let me finish hon. Godi. I was told that WARID has about 25 antennas already in Kampala city alone, most of these are in residential areas. Their statute I think has got a clause which says, you need to talk to the local people who are living nearby where you are putting up an antenna. So, even if one person has sold to you a piece of land onto which you are to construct the mast, you have to sit with the whole community to discuss it and agree.  
Mr Speaker, there is a mast being constructed in Mbuya on Ismail Road, Plot 98.  It is being built under a high voltage power line, yet I have not seen electricity being shifted. Maybe the Minister of State (Energy) can ask his staff to go and look at it; it is coming up under a higher voltage power line, which supplies the whole of Mbuya and continues to Luzira.  We do not know what is going on. If an impact assessment report was got, the power line would have been shifted. 

Mr Speaker, there is also a problem of health concerns of people who live in this neighbourhood -

THE SPEAKER:  I think the point has been made. Has it not?  Your complaint has been heard and it is now the minister concerned – 

MS NAJJEMBA:  I am the Vice Chairperson of the ICT Committee of Parliament. The information I would like to give is that last week we called the Minister of ICT to explain to us what he had to say about WARID and other telephone companies coming up with masts.  I would like to inform the House that the minister promised that he was going to take up the matter. This morning, my committee met members from the Uganda Communications Commission and the members raised the same issue. I am hopeful that they will take up the matter.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.   

THE SPEAKER:  So, the problem is being addressed. Okay?

MS MUHANGA:  Mr Speaker, our concern is about the masts that are being constructed near schools, hospitals and residential areas.  If you look at MTN masts, you will realise that they are up at Kololo summit view and Naguru hills, but these ones that are being constructed in residential areas like Bugolobi and Nsambya, worry us a lot. I think we need to caution the investments.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.07
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The issue that the hon. Member raised is important. It is also important that immediate clarification be given because what she is suggesting is that the telephone companies are doing something illegal. Otherwise, no telephone company would establish a mast without an environment impact assessment and approval by NEMA. So, if what she is alleging is true, then there is a big problem; locating it in urban centres, if the environment management authority has given approval, there would be no problem.  The problem I have seen is what the hon. Member said, Mr Speaker, that they are building masts without environment impact assessment and without the authority of NEMA.  

I happen to have done an impact assessment for a mast that was put on top of a rock in my place. I will tell you that the process of getting approval is so comprehensive that I would be very disappointed if, under some new circumstances, the established procedure, which protects the environment and people, is being flouted.  So, it would be important for clarification to be given by Government, without re-course to the vice chair of the committee, but this is not happening.

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, we have agreed on the matter and I know that our committee is taking steps. Maybe the minister responsible can say something. Okay, the problem has been brought to our attention and at least our committee -

MS NAJJEMBA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  We are going to take up the matter as a committee. Let me say that we have already started on it. Like I have just said, this morning we had a meeting with officials from UCC and the same issues were raised; we will take up the matter with the minister.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE (WATER) (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu):  Mr Speaker, as a ministry in charge of NEMA, I am happy that this has come up. I will consult NEMA and find out if it is true that the environmental impact assessment is not being done.  But under normal circumstances, with any investment in Uganda, we have NEMA working closely with Uganda Investment Authority.  So, I would be surprised if it is not being done.

PRESENTATION OF PETITION

3.10
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  This is a petition moved under Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.  

The humble petition is of the sitting tenants of Buganda Road Flats to Parliament on the discrimination over the purchase of flats. The National Housing and Construction Company Limited manage Buganda road flats. The flats are part of the former civil service pool houses to which the humble petitioners are beneficiaries under the government Pool Housing Divestiture Policy.  

The National Housing and Constructing Company Limited, herein referred as NHCCL, is a limited liability company registered under the Laws of Uganda.  

Pursuant to the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Statute of 1993, now the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act, Cap. 98, the said NHCCL took over the interests of the National Housing and Construction Corporation, which has been established under the National Housing Construction Corporation Decree No.19 of 1977, to develop, build and manage housing estates, and to sell houses upon such terms of payment as the board may prescribe or to let houses at economic rates.  It was mandated to undertake the contracts of building and civil engineering works on behalf of the government and any other person.  

The said humble petitioners are sitting tenants in the various units of the flats in the common estate being managed by National Housing and Construction Company Limited located on Buganda road, Kampala and are beneficiaries of the government Pull Housing Divestiture Policy, which through the Condominium law, empowers your humble petitioners to purchase, upfront, the flats they occupy.  

On 15 February 2006, in a meeting held at Buganda Road estate between the Chief Executive Officer of NHCCL, herein referred to as CEO and your humble petitioners, the CEO confirmed the said sale policy in the presence of then Minister of State for Housing, hon. Capt. Francis Edward Babu, for which the written record is hereto appended under miscellaneous.  

Previously, between the years 2002 and 2003, several undertakings had already been made by NHCCL, which included the mapping, gazetting and approval of the condominium’s preparation of the Title Deeds and actual valuation of the various units in which your humble petitioners are residents. These are attached and labelled annexure (A).  

The said preparatory work by NHCCL was no doubt meant not only to commit the company to the sales programme, but to guide your humble petitioners on the procedure of finally acquiring the various units, including access to the available mortgage facilities on the market recommended by NCHCCL.  

Additionally, management sent circulars to your humble petitioners informing them that the sales were underway.  These are attached and labelled annexure (B).  

The technical and administrative measures undertaken by NHCCL as described above, were underscored by the ministerial policy statement to this august House on the 30 June 2006, by the Minister of Lands Housing and Urban Development covering financial years 2006 to 2008, where upon the Minister announced the sales programme for the divested Government full houses, including Buganda Road NHCCL Flats, where your humble petitioners are sitting tenants. A copy of the said ministerial policy statement is attached and marked annexure C. 

However, in a meeting held on 27 May 2006 at the Grand Imperial Hotel Kampala between the CEO and your humble petitioners, the CEO, totally to the surprise of your humble petitioners, retracted the earlier undertaking by the NHCCL management to sell the various units at Buganda Road Flats to your humble petitioners. 

In the said meeting of 27 May 2006, the CEO informed your humble petitioners of a decision to remove them from their various residential units at Buganda Road Flats and to relocate them to new places which were yet to be constructed, to allow NHCCL redevelop the Buganda Road Flat area for reasons unilaterally known to the CEO and conceived by him without any consultations nor consensus with your humble petitioners. 

Your humble petitioners protested this decision in their brief to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, dated 25 July 2006 sighting discrimination, illegality, breach of human rights and outright move by the CEO of NHCCL to frustrate the government Full Housing Divestiture Policy. 

They impressed it to the minister to intervene and halt the decision of the CEO of NHCCL to cancel the offer of the sale of the units, and any other discrimination of your humble petitioners’ rights to purchase the plots and property they occupy. This, they prayed, should have been done by the issuance of the purchase offers to your humble petitioners by July 2006, as the CEO had committed himself to do on the 15 Feb 2006 of the aforesaid meeting. A copy of the said brief is attached and labelled annexure D. 

In his letter dated, 16 August 2006, to the CEO of NHCCL, the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development as the line Government authority on the matter reiterated on the basis of the afore-mentioned laws and polices that the CEO’s intended plan to cancel the sales offers to your humble petitioners was a double standard, discriminatory and therefore illegal. The letter is hereto appended and labelled annexure D2. 

In his defence dated, 25 August 2006, the CEO sighted the supposed decision by the company’s new board after Libya’s acquisition of 49 percent of the company’s shares- 

THE SPEAKER: Apparently, this petition is a long one. How many pages are you remaining with? 

MRS SEMPALA: No, it is almost over; this is the second last paragraph. After Libya acquired 49 percent shares, NHCCL decided to shift the tenants, redevelop the property and give priority to the tenants to acquire units after redevelopment, a process that would entail the demolition of the existing structures. 

The tenants, therefore, through their commentary, dated 15 September 2007, rejected this bid seeing it as a ploy to hide the CEO’s ulterior motives and from a factual basis discounted all his aspects, including the CEO’S false claims of the tenants’ support. As an authoritative position, Kampala City Council’s letter of July 2006 had also stated that Buganda Road structures had never been condemned and the condominium plans for the flats were approved in 2002.  

While the tenants validly consider the CEO’s bid to be utterly untenable, they are themselves set within the laws and policies in place to redevelop the property, given the expertise in their midst, including engineers, architects, construction consultants, quantity surveyors, financiers, lawyers and administrators, who can steer the project to textbook success and vindicate the entire policy programme. The various documents are hereto appended in annexure D (ii). 

By the CEO’s continued refusal to issue the sales offers to Buganda Road Sitting tenants, your humble petitioners feel betrayed and discriminated against in light of the said housing divestiture and condominium policy programme, since beneficiaries residing in other estates such as those in Kololo, Bugolobi, Nakasero, Wandegeya, Wampewo Avenue, Bukoto and even Buganda Road Public Service Flats, most of which are managed by NHCCL have been offered the first priority to purchase their own units under the same policy scheme. 

Your humble petitioners further appeal that in their health and aesthetic rights, and in the urgent Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting that took place, the CEO’s position above has been frustrating and given the face-lifting of their estate that has been undertaken, they know that this exercise should further reinstate their claim to purchase these units. 

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners have petitioned a number of other authorities including the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Inspector General of Government and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In all the above cases, your humble petitioners have not received any response to a conclusive effect. Copies of the said letters are attached and labelled annexure E and F respectively. 

Therefore by this petition, Mr Speaker, your humble petitioners seek your indulgence and that of the whole august House in the matter above and pray that the decision by the CEO and NHCCL to cancel the sales to your humble petitioners be halted forthwith. 

A directive to be given by this august House to the CEO of NHCCL, its management and board as a matter of law and policy, to offer to your humble petitioners priority to purchase and acquire their residential units at Buganda Road flats without any encumbrances and/or acts of discrimination as has occurred to their counterparts in other estates under the same policy scheme. (Power Interruption)

I continue; any further payments of rentals by your humble petitioners to NHCCL be halted in favour of purchase deposits for the flats with which should indeed date back to the time of the enactment of the condominium law but certainly be executed after this has been passed. 

And your humble petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. 

MRS SEMPALA: Mr Speaker, given the urgent nature of their situation, we pray that the committee handles this matter with utmost urgency. Thank you. I lay this on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, there are two ministers involved in this; there is the minister of housing and the minister of finance. Who is the principal offender in that petition?

MRS SEMPALA: Mr Speaker, it is the Ministry of Housing – (Interjections)- because they are the ones who are handling it.  The honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is here, I think he can answer.  I lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, the issue of National Housing is under the Ministry of Finance (Privatisation) because now the company has its board members - just two members from the Ministry of Finance.  So, I think it is imperative that the Ministry of Finance handles this issue.  

Mr Speaker, this case has been on for so long that the people of Buganda Road have suffered instead of benefiting from the Condominium Law.  I thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, the National Housing and Construction Corporation as a corporation falls under the Ministry of Finance.  In fact, the chairman of the board is the Secretary to the Treasury.  But, the sector of housing policy falls under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development - and all their queries - and as a matter of fact on pool houses; it also falls under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.  My advice would be that you send it to the committees handling the two matters - it is a cross-cutting issue and I would gladly appear before the committee because I have handled a number of their correspondences –

THE SPEAKER: You mean the Committee on Finance and the Committee on Infrastructure – the two committees?

MR ATUBO: Yes, the two committees, but the lead committee would be the Ministry of Finance because the directive on whether to leave the flats would eventually come from the decision of the Board of Directors of National Housing and Construction Corporation.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Any contrary view from Members?

MR NDEEZI:  Thank you. What I am seeking is guidance from you, Mr Speaker. I am worried when it comes to assessment of the helpfulness of Parliament’s intervention in a matter of this nature by way of a petition.  We in Parliament have already set a bad precedent; this is not the first time petitions are presented to this Parliament or laid on Table.  

We know from experience that for Parliament to dispose of a petition, it takes more than a year.  Now, if it is a year, it means that by the time we pronounce ourselves on this matter it will no longer be relevant or meaningful at all.  Therefore, Mr Speaker, unless you set a time frame for this committee, I do not think that our intervention will be meaningful at all.  Thank you.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Sir.  I was saying that hon. Atubo says there should be a lead committee but I do not see the relevancy of having two committees handling this matter.  What we need is the committee, which will come out with relevant information and then we can make resolutions, which will help the tenants.  I think the only committee, which can do that is that which is already handling issues connected to this matter and that is the Committee on Finance. I do not see where the Committee on Infrastructure comes in.

THE SPEAKER: okay, in view of the observations made, the Committee of Finance should handle this matter.  I also agree with hon. Ndeezi that this report should come out within two weeks because the complainants are here and their documents are available. I think within three weeks the Committee on Finance should be able to submit its report to us.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA TOURISM BILL, 2007

Clause 11

 MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposed that clause 11 (2) be deleted.  The justification is that having a deputy CEO would put unnecessary public resources underway.

Mr RUKUNDO:  I concur.

MR SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
               
(Clause 11(2), deleted)

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, on clause 11(4) the Committee recommends that we substitute the word “board” with the statement “Minister on recommendation of the board.”  The justification is that the Minister should have the power to appoint and disappoint on recommendation of the board.  Maybe, Mr Chairman, I read the entire amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let us go one by one because one may want one and may not want the other.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that in clause 11(5) we delete the words: “or Deputy Chief Executive Officer” and “to” and substitute the word “decision” with “recommendation.”

 MR RUKUNDO:  I concur.

MR RUHINDI Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment. I have consulted the Minister and the chairman of the committee because my view is that the whole of that clause should be deleted. Having agreed with the first amendment to clause 4, it is not logical to subject a recommendation from the board to a petition. This is because normally a petition arises after a final decision is made.  

So, the justification is that the minister may or may not accept the recommendation of the board. Whatever the minister does, it is the minister’s decision that should be appealed against and not the recommendation of the board. There will also be other consequential, small amendments that I have proposed in respect of this particular clause in view of the chairman’s amendment to clause 4. I had requested the secretariat to circulate these amendments because I could not circulate them before the chairman’s amendment to clause 4 was adopted. However, I could pass one to the Speaker. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, chairman and the minister. Otherwise, the minister is suggesting complete deletion.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I consulted with the hon. Attorney-General and we were of the view - given the explanation he has given and being the legal advisor to most of us - that once a decision of the board has been made, for example of firing a member of the board, you can only appeal in court contesting the decision of the minister, and not the recommendation by the board. 

I also thought that was something that possibly the committee kind of overlooked! Therefore, I concede that clause 11(5) be deleted entirely and be substituted as - ok. The justification is that the minister may or may not accept the recommendation of the board. Whatever the minister does, it is the minister’s decision and should be appealed against and not the recommendation from the board. So, we should delete clause 11(5) –

THE CHAIRMAN: And substitute it with -

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the substitutions will come in subsequent sub-sections of clause 11. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I just want to seek some guidance. Are we going clause by clause, or can we talk about any clause? I can see sub-clause 5 had an issue with clause 3.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are going clause by clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Why am I bringing up clause 3? It is because I do not think there is any contract, which you serve for such periods. A contract is always defined. So we are saying that you forgot to make contracts for the chief executives. The period should be determined here and it should be in the law.	

THE CHAIRMAN: Now your submission is in respect of which clause?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is clause 11 sub-clause (3). I know we are on clause 11 but I had an issue with sub-clause (3) when the -

THE CHAIRMAN: But we have already moved away from there. If you insist then I think we will do a recommittal. Otherwise, we are now on 11(6).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are still on the same clause. Why am I bringing this? The issue I am bringing is quite vital, in my opinion. I plead that you listen to it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You insist but we have procedure, hon. Mafabi, and we are following the procedure. Next is 11(6).

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, on clause 11(6) we propose that we delete clause 11(6) and insert the following clause: “The minister shall, within two months after receiving a recommendation under sub-section (4), communicate his or her decision on the recommendation to the Chief Executive Officer and the board.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, clause 11(7); we propose that it be deleted and be substituted with the following clause, which reads: “If the minister takes a decision to remove the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Executive Officer may, within 30 days after the decision is communicated to him or her, apply to the High Court for judicial review of the decision.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, judicial review is just to review the decision but for somebody to have a fair hearing, we propose that the High Court should stay and we should in fact add another quote and say, “somebody can appeal even to the Court of Appeal”, because you cannot go only to one court. Why am I saying that? If you go to one court and it says no, you are finished. But you can try another one so that you are contented.

THE CHAIRMAN: Appeals are determined by the rights given by the law. You do not appeal everything and go to the Supreme Court simply because that court exists. We can even insert the Court of Appeal but the right to appeal is actually given by the law.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I want to supplement your submission because the right of judicial review is a creature of a statute under the Judicature Act. It is section 38 of the Judicature Act. And in fact this amendment, which the chairman has read, cures what was enshrined in the Bill because the Bill was providing that the appeal should be to the High Court and the decision of the High Court should be final. We thought that that actually hampers public policy, limiting jurisdiction of the court and stifling a party’s right to appeal. So, judicial review is a creature of statute; you go to the High Court for judicial review and you can even appeal to the Supreme Court.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not understand very well. Judicial review is, I think, on issues of law. But in this case, the minister is not acting maybe on law. He could act on anything. So, to go for judicial review there must have been a court, which has done review and you have to review what it has decided. That is my layman’s understanding. I think the person should have the right to appeal and not for judicial review because with judicial review you are saying, “What have they decided? Can you review it and see if it was in line?”

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I appreciate the problem of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, because judicial review is a process of appeal against administrative decisions or quasi-judicial decisions, for instance, from some administrative tribunals. The term we use is “judicial review,” but substantively it is actually the same as the appeal you are talking about. It is just a term referring to the process of hearing your evidence and everything related to the application is certainly governed by principles of fair hearing under the Constitution. So there is no problem.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if there is no problem then I would be more comfortable saying, appeal”. You are saying that it is the same so why do you want to bring in that term, “judicial review” and not leave “appeal”?  

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the problem with “judicial review,” is that it must be taken within stipulated time and to be specific, 90 days, and yet I do not see the time being given here for providing for the decision of the minister so that the person can take a proper step in time. For that matter I would wish to support hon. Nandala’s opinion that we maintain the word “appeal” so that the party decides whether to actually appeal or go for judicial review.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Where they used “review”, you prefer “appeal”, is that the case? Honourable member, you certainly know the legal difference between the two terms. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, we propose that clause 11(8) be deleted and we insert a new sub-clause (8) which reads as follows: “Where a minister fails to take a decision within the time prescribed by sub-section 6, a recommendation of the board shall abort.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you say that it is a recommendation of the board that means that when a minister keeps quiet then he has agreed with the board’s decision. But if that person has appealed - the moment I appeal and the minister does not respond then he has agreed with that person who appealed. In this case, it should not be the board but the person who petitioned the minister.  

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I have not followed properly what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said. I request that you repeat what you said so that I get you properly.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the board will make a recommendation and there are two ways through which the chief executive or the deputy would appeal - whatever the case. So, if the petitioner has appealed to the minister against the board’s decision and the minister has not responded in the prescribed time, then he would have agreed with the petitioner. That is the argument I am putting across.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what he is saying is that a decision was made and there is a petition to a minister, who does not answer; then you said the decision against which their position was made aborts - it is the petition which was not been answered that aborts.  

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, my understanding of this amendment is that the board has made a recommendation and that recommendation is to the minister. The minister has not yet taken action so there is nothing to appeal against; once the minister has taken action, then the affected party appeals against the decision of the minister; this is the spirit of this amendment. Now what is going to abort is the recommendation of the board in case the minister does not take action in the time stipulated.  

THE CHAIRMAN: So non-action on the part of the minister aborts the recommendation? Must he not react? That is encouraging laziness!

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think that is the essence. The chairman should agree with us that the moment the minister fails to act, then the petitioner has got it.  

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I thought that was exactly what I was saying, that once the board makes a recommendation to the minister and the minister does not take action in certain period of time, then that recommendation does not proceed –(Interruption)  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What about the petitioner? Mr Chairman, if they have recommended that they sack the chief executive and the chief executive has not been given a hearing - I think that is not fair. We are saying that the moment the petition of the chief executive is in place and the minister does not act, then he cannot be sacked.  

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, these amendments are flowing from amendments made before. So for purposes of consistence, I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s point is fundamental. What we could prudently say is that once the recommendation is made by the board to the minister and he does not take action within the stipulated time, the recommendation of the board should be presumed to be the decision of the minister so that any appeal there from is taken on that recommendation, which now becomes a decision of the minister.  

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, given the fact that this amendment was on the advice of the Attorney-General and he has abandoned or revised it, then who am I not to concede?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, for us we cannot say that this amendment was from the Attorney-General; they are all amendments; you are the one who has been spearheading it. So you have abandoned it?

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, I want to amend this recommendation that where the minister fails to take decision within the time prescribed by sub-section (6), the recommendation of the board shall be taken to have been approved.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any further amendments to clause 11?

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, you know the other was a new insertion; but we propose that clause 11(10) be deleted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to propose another sub-clause – I cannot tell the number because there are so many, which have been deleted, but let it follow the one that we have deleted, that the period which the chief executive and the deputy will serve will be three years, renewable on satisfactory performance. 

The reason is that the moment we leave it open-ended, they can decide to make a contract of twenty years and that is not right; most contracts we know are three to five years.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, while hon. Nandala has a point, that item was dealt with under clause 11(3), which we amended and said that the board should hold office for only two terms.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am not talking about the board. I am talking about the chief executive and the deputy executive officers. We are done with those on the board; we are now on the management.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, by implication since the chief executive is a member of the board – but I have no object, if you want to amend that.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, Clause 12(2) says, “The staff of the board …” what does it mean? I thought the board consists of those members; we have staff of the organisation not of the board? So I feel that there was a problem in drafting –

THE CHAIRMAN: So they become staff of what?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The staff of Uganda Tourism – of the organisation. But when you call them the staff of the board - which board? The board is appointed for the organisation. No staff on that board can be appointed by the organisation. 

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, if you go to the interpretation clause, on page 3 of the Bill, the board is defined. So I agree with hon. Nandala but I also want to make reference to page 3, which says that the board means the Uganda Tourism Board – that is what it is.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is very right, Uganda Tourism Board. The board of the Uganda Investment Authority –

THE CHAIRMAN: You do not have to repeat “Uganda Tourism Board”, it is clear. Well, there is an amendment proposed by hon. Nandala to delete. I put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 15 talks about application for a licence and how they can grant it, but it does not indicate what I do when the board refuses to give me a licence. I think we should put in sub-clause (5) that if the board refuses, the applicant can appeal to the High Court.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, although hon. Nandala has a point, he is bringing it much earlier than the appeal’s clause, which is on page 14 of the Bill. So I pray that he waits till then.

THE CHAIRMAN: Oh, it is handled under clause 17. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR ACHIA: There are four specifications there on how a licence can be cancelled. What if a citizen of Uganda brings a complaint against a company or an organisation that it is not doing its work, under what clause can we cancel this licence?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not clear. Could you please repeat?

MR ACHIA: Mr Chairman, under this cancellation clause, there are specifications that a board may cancel a licence granted by this Act, if the holder of the licence is convicted, if the holder of the licence becomes bankrupt, if the licence holder fails to comply or if it is proven or suspected that the licence it was got by fraudulent means. But what if I bring a complaint against say a tour company that it was involved in maybe corruption or it is not doing its right work, shouldn’t there be a clause that provides for the cancellation of a licence for such a company that is not doing the right thing?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if the honourable member read (a), it provides for fraud and dishonesty – I think it is covered there, so you shouldn’t get worried.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is an umbrella provision. I put the question that clause 16 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that in 17(2) we substitute the word “fourteen” with the word “thirty” so that the minister is given sufficient time to consider the petition. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek clarification from the chairman. Do you mean 30 working days or 30 calendar days?

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, days are days and from my experience with this kind of drafting, I have never seen where it is specified that it should be 30 calendar days or 30 working days. I propose that we maintain the formulation but they are just 30 days.

MR RUHINDI: I will still welcome the help but let me also give mine. Mr Chairman, I did not come with the Interpretation Act but the Interpretation Act adequately covers circumstances of that nature and when we talk in terms of days, we really mean working days and that is covered under the Interpretation Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think in some situations there are exceptions in the sense that if for instance you are supposed to file a document within 30 days and the last days, 29th and 30th are public holidays and not working days, what happens? Is there no guidance on this?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, if I understood you well, if you are given 30 days -

THE CHAIRMAN: You understood me very well. If the last two days are, say Saturday and Sunday, what happens?

MR RUHINDI: Then you actually file on the succeeding working days.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR RUHINDI: On the immediately succeeding working days (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is now clear, hon. Nandala.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. Mr Chairman, if that is it, we have got it. If you are now saying that 30 days means working days then that is okay. If that is the case, then these 14 days are the same as in sub-clause (1) because I had wanted to move it as sub-clause (1). The 30 days should also apply to sub-clause (1) not only sub-clause (2).

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, since we have not considered that sub-clause, if you want it to be consistent that way, I have no problem.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Then that is okay. 

MR AHABWE: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying that if the board does not take a decision within 14 days then what happens? He thinks it could be a short time. Just as we have given the minister 30 days, he thinks that we can also give the board 30 days; and they find it not controversial. So I accept that in 17(1) we substitute “fourteen” with “thirty” and do the same in sub-clause (2).

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes that is fine but, Mr Chairman, are we first dealing with amendments so that we put them altogether or we deal with this first? 

THE CHAIRMAN: No. We had said that we should consider each amendment separately because one may support one amendment and does not support the other. But I think with 17(7), they agree with you that they be consistent; they say 30 days instead of the days put there and I am putting the question to that.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, for the same reasons, clause 17(5), we also want to increase it from 14 to 30 days.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so your amendments are on days.

MR AHABWE: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put the question that –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to again seek your guidance. With the clauses, we are comfortable. Do we put another sub-clause because you are about to read the whole clause? What I am putting across is that I wanted to introduce 17 -

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is that our rules say that if you have an amendment to make, you go to the committee and present the amendment to the committee so that the committee can consider the amendment. If they do not accept the amendment you have proposed, then you are free to come here in the Plenary and present it. We are considering this without other amendments being expected and that is why, I think, he was saying that the only amendment we have is about changing. That is why we were going to pronounce ourselves on this because we have agreed that we should be uniform. But if you have another amendment then we shall - but in future, any Member who has an amendment should go to the committee dealing with the Bill so that the committee is given opportunity to consider and report the same to the Plenary but for this time we shall allow you. However, let us complete the amendments of the committee to the effect that “fourteen” is changed into “thirty”. Can I put the question to that? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I do not disagree with your ruling but sometimes you can sleep over it and discover that there is something you are about to make a mistake over and you come here and –

THE CHAIRMAN: How will you disagree with my ruling when I am basing it on rules?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this one has made the petitioner to go in the normal way up to the minister but supposing the minister refuses? Somebody should go seek it elsewhere. So, what we are saying here is that we should put clause 7. If the petitioner does not agree with the minister, then he will appeal to the High Court. The reason is simple: supposing the minister has also erred? You need a second opinion on your case. That is my suggestion.

THE CHAIRMAN: What should be clear in Members’ minds is that sometimes processes are closed and you have no opportunity to appeal to the court. Not all administrative decisions are “appealable” and as I have told you, appeals in court structures must be provided for by the law. That is, the right to appeal must be provided for. It is not that anytime you get offended you say you are going to appeal, no. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, there is a general act of application in the Constitution; Article 42, and this is in respect to the right to just and fair treatment in administrative decisions. It is short and it reads: “Any person appearing before any administrative official or body has a right to be treated justly and fairly and shall have a right to appeal to a court of law in respect of any administrative decisions taken against him or her.” Therefore under that provision, even if you don’t state it categorically, the right is embedded in the Constitution.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but the grounds must be that he or she has not been treated justly. That is, the grounds must be that the administrative tribunal did not treat him justly. 

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, the right of review of administrative action is inalienable whether it is provided for or not. Once there are grounds then a dissatisfied person can appeal to court for the review of an administrative decision.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is the view but that is a different term. Anyway, why don’t we dispose of this? Is there any other amendment that you want to bring, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, is the Attorney-General saying that anybody aggrieved concerning this can go to the High Court or to the Court of Appeal? Hakuna tabu.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there any other amendment that you want to make before we proceed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, under (1) they say, “Monies appropriated by Parliament for the purpose of the board” and in (b) they are saying, “Grants from government”. As we know, all monies that government gives to any institution must be appropriated by Parliament. I don’t see any reason why these grants should appear here because it is redundant. I propose that 19(1)(b) be deleted.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, unless I am not aware, monies appropriated by Parliament are either in the budget or are loans but my thinking on this is that government can actually donate, in its own right, to this organisation [Hon. Members: “From where?”] No, I can be helped by my colleagues on the Front Bench but my understanding on this is that government – I can give an example. Maybe I should leave it but the other day we approved a motion that some debts of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation that were incurred as a result of government lending be written off. I am not aware of a situation where government actually came here and said, “This is money and we want to give it to National Water”. So there is a precedent.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying is that (b) is not necessary. I put the question on the deletion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The clarification that I want to seek from the minister is: which sectors of the tourism industry does he envisage as liable to paying the development levy? 

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Chairman, it is clear that after consultation with the minister responsible for finance, we shall get clarification on those areas that will be charged the levy, including accommodation.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Chairman, I am raising this concern because the hoteliers in my constituency are already complaining that they will be subjected to this levy yet they are already overtaxed and are going to be subjected to the local service tax. That is why I specifically asked which areas would be liable to this tourism development levy. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What should be understood in this provision is that it is permissible for the minister to levy this but it may or may not be. All circumstances will have to be considered before a decision is made to implement this particular provision and that is why after consultation with the minister, the minister responsible may say, “Well, we have imposed enough taxes on these people and, therefore, it is not necessary”. It is just a permissive provision.

MR KASIGWA: Then can’t we go ahead and cushion the hoteliers against this levy in particular? I seek your guidance.

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Chairman, in the process of coming up with this Bill, the Uganda Hotel Owners’ Association were our biggest stakeholders and they were consulted. They are also represented on the board and if the levy is imposed and collected, it will actually be for their own good; the promotion of Uganda and training among others. Therefore, I do not think that the hoteliers under Uganda Hotel Owners Association will complain because they will be consulted.


Clause 21

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, all accounts of Uganda are authorised by the Accountant-General not the minister. So here it cannot be the Minister under sub-clause (ii). We have to change this and say that they are creating a bank account approved by the Accountant-General under the Public Finance and Accountability Act. He will be the one to authorise the board to open an account in the prescribed bank.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is your amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The amendment is where they say in the bank approved by the minister, I am saying that the bank will be approved by the Accountant-General not the minister.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the sector minister for the administration of this Act, once passed- is the Minister responsible for Tourism. Therefore, the Accountant-General is under Ministry of Finance and if there was to be any improvement on this provision, I would have expected hon. Nandala-Mafabi to say the responsible minister in consultation with the Minister of Finance. But ministers are the supervisory persons for most of these bodies and it would be incongruous to bring the approval powers to another body which is under the supervisory authority of a person in the name of the minister. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is this a sort of a parastatal or it is a traditional department of government? You have to consider that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the Secretary to the Treasury appoints accounting officers wherever the money appropriated by Parliament goes. In fact, heads of those institutions like the chief executives are the ones who become the accounting officers because the money is leaving the Secretary to the Treasury; the person who monitors that money on behalf of the Secretary to the Treasury is the Accountant-General. That is why all the accounts we have made – 

THE CHAIRMAN: What about National Water and Sewerage Corporation?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The law must be saying by the Secretary to the Treasury. At that time it was Secretary to the Treasury but now it should be the Accountant-General.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, if what is proposed was a tax, then hon. Nandala-Mafabi would have a point. But what the section proposes is establishment of a fund, which is not necessarily a tax and definitely it is proper for the Parliament to legislate on how that fund should be administered. We have not said it is a tax; it is a tourism development fund.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, I do not want to agree with the Minister because, how would you differentiate the monies which will go on the fund? Some of the monies, which will go on the fund will be appropriated by Parliament. We should just improve on hon. Nandala’s amendment. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the funds, which will be levied will be by a statutory instrument in consultation with the Minister of Finance. That is already a fund coming in. Those monies have to go to specific accounts. That is why all the monies from Parliament and the ones they will collect have to be monitored and that is why the Accountant- General is the one responsible for all the accounts where public resources are going. Even if we are going to collect it without going to the consolidated fund, it is a tax. That is why the one who authorises the opening of the account is the Accountant-General.

MR ARUMADRI: Mr Chairman, you will recall that during the debate on this matter, I raised the issue of a game reserve in my constituency which is not benefiting from collection of fees. I would like the Minister to include me in this law so that when this fund becomes operational, I am taken care of. 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Chairman, there is a difference between a levy and a fund. Where it was a levy - in other words, we are seeking to impose some kind of tax on the public. But the fund which is being proposed can be derived from Article 19 (c), “Any money accruing to the board from the Tourism Development Levy or (b) Grants from government -(Interjection)– sorry, monies appropriated by Parliament-” it is permitted; it allows the minister to set a fund which could be a levy, a grant from government or a fundraising in which case that fund need not comply with the accounting regulations of the Ministry of Finance.

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Chairman, we are looking at the funds which are going to be managed by the board and the account is actually operated by the board. The approval of the bank by the minister; he is supposed to choose a bank which in the opinion of the minister is strong. In Uganda we have had banks, which after some time they collapse. That is where the minister comes in. Otherwise, the management of the funds is by the board but the Minister is to ensure that the bank within which they deposit this money is a strong bank. I do not see how the Accountant-General comes into the management of this fund.

THE CHAIRMAN: You will decide yourselves because we are wasting a lot of time on this small matter. I put the question that clause 21 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 22 agreed to.)

(Clause 23 agreed to.)

Clause 24

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, they have said the Auditor- General will audit but they have not specified in which the report it will be presented. The law is clear. They are saying the board will submit the accounts with in two months for the audit. We are saying that the audit report - of course the law is clear - after every close of financial year, after four months, the report must be ready. So, we are saying that the report of the Auditor-General shall be ready with in four months after the closure of the financial year. Reason is that if you leave it open, the Auditor-General can take time or the management can delay to give the Auditor-General records and render the work redundant.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, clause 24 (2) talks about financial statements every year but when you go ahead and look at clause 31 (1) the committee has proposed an amendment which is going to cater for hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concerns. So, I pray that hon. Nandala becomes patient until we reach clause 31 (1).

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, I would like to suggest an amendment on clause 25 (2) at the end that “the audited report will be submitted within four months after the closure of the business.” You cannot go to clause 31.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are imposing it on the Auditor- General to submit the report within that period? Can you constitutionally do so?- (Interjections)- No, no, you have to look - because you are talking about audit and somebody is imposing the timeframe within which a report is submitted. Can you constitutionally do so?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Mr Chairman, statutory reports have a period, because audited accounts are supposed to be submitted to the shareholders at a specific period.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then, if they are statutory reports, don’t you think that the general law on statutory reports should cover this? If there is a law for statutory reports, we leave it to control the situation. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, on the head note, the committee proposes that we substitute the word “etcetera.” with the words “and others” just for clarity.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I would like to be assisted. When you look at clause 26 (1) it provides for vicarious liability of the employer; and then when you go to clause 2, it provides for joint liabilities. Can I have your assistance?

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we dispose of these first amendments instead of “etc” he says we put “and others.” Is there a dispute on this? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, if you look at clause 26 (1), it is providing for vicarious liability which is anyway provided for under other legal provisions and other laws. An employee committing any act in the course of his employment ordinarily the employer is responsible. So, really it is just a repetition. But then when you look at clause 2, it again provides for joint liability, I see it as a contradiction. If the Bill sought to create that joint liability, I think clause 26 (2) would be more relevant than Clause 26 (1). Maybe the Attorney-General can assist us.

MR MWESIGE: My understanding of sub clause (1) is that this is – it is vicarious liability, but my understanding is that this is civil liability. And in sub clause (2), the clause talks of offences and offences cannot be vicariously committed and that is why the penalties or the agents are liable for their own offences committed by themselves. So, I think the distinction is justified. I do not see any contradiction here.

MR KATUNTU: Well, my own interpretation of clause 26 (2) is different. It does not have to be offences; any penalties, that means any infringement on the law and that could also cater for civil infringement. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the outstanding term, which brings this to the umbrella of criminal liability is the use of offence. Offence is not used in civil liability. Offence is used in criminal liabilities. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman that is the second part of the clause. The first part is “does any act or makes an omission, which is an offence.” That is the second part which talks of offences. The first one is any act.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR MWESIGE: Really sub clause (2) is talking of offences against the provisions of this Act and those offences can only be criminal. I do not think this Bill introduces civil offences.  I know offences can be civil, but a law introduces criminal offences.  The omissions and acts as referred to in subsection (1) are civil acts, committed by agents of an operator or owner of a tourist facility. So, for these, definitely the owner is liable because that is vicarious liability.  The offences in sub clause (2), against the provisions of the Bill once passed into an Act, are criminal offences.  So, this distinction must be made; there is no duplicity here.

MR KATUNTU: When the clause he is talking about says, “Jointly and severally liable.” Does that mean a criminal act?

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us address it this way. What harm is caused by these two provisions being there?   What is the lose that is sustained by having these two clauses there?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, first of all, clause 1 is a repetition.  Clause 1 is already provided under the general principles of law.  An employer is always vicariously liable for any act of his employee, done during the course of employment.  It is already provided for under our principles of the law.  So, whereas we can specifically repeat it here, I do not know whether we are not just trying to create provisions for -

THE CHAIRMAN: It is just helpful that when you put it there, the body dealing with tourism will look at this law and understand it.

MR KATUNTU: I concede.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 27 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes we re-draft clause 31(1) to read as follows: “The minister shall, after receiving both the statement of accounts required to in Section 24 of this Act, and the Auditor-General’s report on the same, lay them before Parliament within a period not exceeding 60 days.”  The justification is that we should really provide a time frame.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 31(2)

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee process that clause 31(2) is re-drafted to read as follows: “That the minister shall, after receiving the Annual Report referred to in Section 30 of this Act lay it before Parliament within the period not exceeding 60 days.”  The justification is the same, Mr Speaker.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 31, as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended agreed.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, after having considered this clause together with some our colleagues and after we had written a report, we thought that we would make an amendment by deleting the words: “and with approval of Cabinet.”  The justification being that the minister can make regulations.  When we involve Cabinet, we make it inflexible for these regulations not to be - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, what you are saying is that the minister’s consultation with the Cabinet is an affair, which we need not to know? Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, agreed to

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 34 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, in clause 36(2), the committee proposes that we delete the words: “or shall submit against” just for clarity, and that the sub-clause should be moved to clause 3 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the committee also proposes that we substitute the word “may” for the word “shall.”  The justification is in clause 36(8), which reads: “To subject the continuity of the employment to needs of the board and to give an opportunity to former employees of Uganda Tourist Board who wish to exit.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AHABWE: The committee also proposes, Mr Speaker, that clause 36(9) be deleted because this provision is unrealistic and can be subjected to abuse.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36 (9), deleted.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Chairman, having amended clause 34, you will realise that clause 35 should have been a consequential amendment though we passed it.  I am saying this because after deleting the phrase, “Cabinet approval,” you cannot again maintain it in clause 35. It should have been consequential so that the formulation is the same.  

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, clause 35 is seeking the approval of Cabinet to amend the first schedule of this Bill, which has to do with currency points. Therefore, it cannot be the minister in charge of Tourism to amend the currency points without seeking the approval of Cabinet.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 36 as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.
               
The first schedule.

MR KATUNTU: We have a problem there because the minister is already defined as the minister responsible for tourism and the minister that the Chairman is talking about to amend the schedule is another minister. Not so?

MR AHABWE: It is the same minister but we are saying that he should first seek the approval of Cabinet since the subject matter is not specific to that sector, but it involves a major decision to amend the currency points. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The value of money? 

MR WOPUWA: I was just wondering, if the minister is the one who made the statutory instrument after having an internal consultation with Cabinet, why should he or she need Cabinet when making changes? Why does it not become part of the internal consultation from the beginning? 

MR AHABWE: Mr Chairman, the issue of amending the first schedule - that is the value of money - cannot be done by a sector minister. It is a major policy position; it is a constitutional matter and cannot be done by the minister without consulting Cabinet. This is very specific.

MR WOPUWA: If it is a major policy issue, which is also a constitutional issue, then why is it not brought to Parliament instead of Cabinet?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what are we doing? We have finished the clauses and we are on the schedule and I am putting the question. 

The first schedule, agreed to.

The second schedule, agreed to.
                 
The Title, agreed to.

MR NYEKO: Is it not the right time now to bring in recommital before the title is read? 

THE CHAIRMAN: This is when there is a report made and then there is another motion before that. If you seriously want a recommital, you can say so and tell us the reasons and then we proceed. 

MR NYEKO: Mr Chairman, I have two recomittals to make. The reasons were - (Interjection) -just because your speed was a bit higher than me standing up. No. 1 is on Section 7 (ii)-

THE CHAIRMAN: No, as I have said, we have to move from the committee. A report will be made and after it has been made and adopted, there is a move to have the Bill read for the third time. If you seriously want a recommittal, you can ask and then we shall come for a recommittal on that specific provision. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM) (MR Serapio Rukundo): Mr Chairman and honourable members, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the House report there too. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007 and passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR RUKUNDO: Mr Speaker and hon. members, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.53
MR MICHAEL NYEKO (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): I beg that I be allowed to recommit two sections. That is section 7 (ii) and section 13; and in section 7 (ii) which talks about authority being given to the board to inspect the tourist facilities. I would like to add at the end of it, that “after giving due notice to the management.” In the current astute, the board did not need to give any notice at all, whether for one minute or two minutes or so. So, I want to add that one on to section 7 (ii).

THE SPEAKER: And the other one?

MR NYEKO: Another one to be recommitted, I have a lot of problems with section 13 (i) and (ii).  Section 13 (i) bars people from operating tourist facilities. I think the spirit is not bad because it bars those who are not  licensed from operating as tourist facilities, but it goes ahead to make it an offence for those who accommodate tourists in their facilities to be charged in court and have a jail term of two years. Mr Chairman, I find a problem with that.

The reason being that assuming a tourist goes to a hotel which is not gazetted, the hotel owner cannot actually say that, “please go away”. Now, if you accommodate that person in that hotel, it becomes an offence. So, I thought really that section 13(iii) would take care of all that by making the minister regulate and designate tourist facilities. After the minister has done that, it is up to the tourist to find where exactly to fall without causing offence here and there, of people who are operating hotels. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean a tourist who has come into the country may turn into a visitor in your House? -(Laughter) – Okay, hon. members, you have heard. The prayer by hon. member is that we consider this section. In one way or the other, you may accept his argument or you may not but once it has to recommit these provisions–

MR RUKUNDO: I oppose it; accommodation for payment and you do not want it to be regulated? I oppose it. 

MR NYEKO: Mr Speaker, yes the hon. minister may oppose it, but I want him to look at the practicality of implementing this provision. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, why don’t we recommit and reconsider and then decide? 

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This morning I had a discussion with the Chairman of the committee and in principal he did agreed that we recommit clause 7(1) and we refocus on the functions of the board.

THE SPEAKER: So, there is a prayer for a recommital -(Interruption)

MR AHABWE:  Before that, Mr Speaker, it is true I met the hon. Kasigwa in my office this morning and he gave me an impression that he would want to recommit this clause.  While I agreed in principle, I advised him where the functions of the ministry are likely to be tampered with by his amendment to transfer the functions of the ministry to the board.  I said he must first consult because also this is really – it would be a policy change.  It is in my opinion that Parliament cannot simply legislate on the transfer of functions from the ministry to the board. 

I want to seek a clarification from him whether he has actually consulted the minister so that the minister is in agreement that the functions of the ministry be transferred to the board in this regard.

MR KASIGWA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the chairman.  Mr Speaker I went ahead and looked at the functions of the ministry and none of them falls in this category. And I think the minister is here to watch for himself.  Thank you.

MR AHABWE:  May be I can furnish - since you did not consult the minister I can furnish him with the intentions of your proposed amendment.  Mr Speaker, the hon. Harry Kasigwa intends to amend one of the functions of the ministry in regard to gazetting tourism sites.  In the previous debate, I said this is the function of the ministry, if the ministry concedes that that function can be moved from the ministry to the board, I have no objection; and the minister is here he can either accept or reject.  But I insisted that the ministry must be consulted on this matter.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want to draw your attention to Rule 112(1), if any Member desired to delete or amend any provision contained in the Bill as reported from the committee of the whole House, he or she may at any time before the Member moves a third reading for the Bill, move that the Bill be recommitted either wholly or in respect only of some particular amendment or amendments.  No notice of motion for recommital is required and if the motion is agreed to, the Bill shall stand so recommitted and shall proceed in accordance with Rule 1 of Rule 105 of our Rules of Procedure to resolve itself into a committee of supply.  

So, now the case has been made by the two Members, it is now for us to decide whether we recommit or not. You have been given the reasons for the recommittal; clear? So, now I put the question on recommital.

(Question put and negatived.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA TOURISM BILL, 2007

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE (TOURISM) (Mr Serapio Rukundo):  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Tourism Bill, 2007” be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA TOURISM ACT, 2007”

THE SPEAKER:  The Bill is passed. Congratulations (Applause). 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC SERVICE BILL, 2007

THE SPEAKER:  Well, did you want to change Local Government to Public Service, or we handle Public Service.

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi):  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Service Bill, 2007 be read a second time.

THE SPEAKER:  Supported - yes.  Okay justify.

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the object of this Bill is to replace the Public Service Act Cap.288 with a new Act that conforms and gives effect to the provisions of the Constitution relating to the Public Service and the government Public Service reform programme and to provide the related incidental matters.  

Mr Speaker, this Bill has parts and part one of the Bill deals with the commencement, proposals and interpretation and specifies certain categories of persons whom this Bill will apply.  

This Bill seeks to establish a mechanism where any changes that occur in a ministry or department on terms and conditions of service, abolition of ministries, the establishment of another ministry in lieu of an additional ministry or change in the name of a ministry is reflected in relation to the concerned ministry by way of an automatic amendment to the first schedule.  

Mr Speaker, this Bill particularly contains the provisions relating to the objectives, the composition and the management of the Public Service.  The Bill does provide the objective of the Public Service as enabling Government to formulate and implement policies and programmes for the development of Uganda.

In addition, this Bill deals with, among other things, the appointment of the Head of Public Service and re-instates the mandate of the President under Article 173(2) of the Constitution to appoint the Head of Public Service on advice of the Public Service Commission.  It spells out the constitutional functions of the Head of Public Service. 

This Bill provides and spells out the functions of the Public Service as a whole and its mandate; and the appointment of permanent secretaries in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission. 

The Bill does provide for the protection of public officers from victimization, discrimination or arbitrary dismissal or removal from office; and it outlines the obligations of public officers.

This Bill provides for and acknowledges the right of public officers to participate in trade union activities in accordance with the relevant law.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this Bill deals with miscellaneous matters such as the power of the minister to amend the schedule to the proposed Act and make regulations for giving full effect to the provisions of this Act.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Yes, chairperson.

5.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr George Wopuwa):  Mr Speaker, the committee received this Bill - it is a small Bill - on 04 December 2007. 

According to rules 90, 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the Committee of Public Service and Local Government received and considered the Bill. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to thank the Ministry of Public Service and the Public Service Commission for the input they gave the committee. 

In considering the Bill, the committee was told that the Public Service has been operating under the Public Service Act of 1969, which was then being covered under the 1967 Constitution. The new Constitution of 1995 and the amendments have brought in new issues, which require a new law. 

The Public Service has evolved to include developments in the new system of Public Service reform and hence the need for an enabling legal structure. 

With the enactment of this Act, the Ministry of Public Service would be empowered with the legal framework to make the necessary changes in the Public Service. 

The Bill provides for a clear framework that will enable a public officer to be accountable for implementation of government programmes. 

Mr Speaker, the Public Service Bill, 2007 covers both the central government and local, public service officers. The Bill seeks to bring on board the head of the Public Service in accordance with the Constitution, Article 173(a). 

The Bill also seeks to create an appeal mechanism for the Public Service staff at the centre, as it is for local governments. When local government staff are aggrieved by the decision of the District Service Commission, they are provided with an opportunity to appeal to the Public Service Commission. Staff at the center did not have that opportunity. 

With the introduction of the Public Service Commission Bill, the Public Service Act of 1968 is repealed. 

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank those who assisted the committee with valuable information. And subject to the proposed amendments, the committee recommends that the Bill be enacted into law. I beg to report, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I thank the committee and the chairperson for the report. The debate is now open.

5.09
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister and the committee for the brief and precise report. I rise to support the motion. 

I am happy that this Bill is in place and soon we are going to enact it into law. I say so because the Public Service is the most important organ in the development of our country. You see that all the programmes developed and all the funds passed here in Parliament are in the hands of the Public Service. 

I am happy that we will have the head of the Public Service with a deputy who would be able to ensure that the permanent secretaries and the public servants do their work. What I have realized with public servants is the issue of keeping time; they do not keep time; they come late to do their work. Usually time lost is money lost, so I would like this Bill to help the public servants to be committed to their work and be able to use our funds correctly. Because quite often money is lost through the public servant; documents are lost - you go to an office and documents are not there! They all come late to work! Please, this is the Bill to ensure that each person does their work very well. 

I would like to thank the Minister and the committee for the work. Please civil servants, we know that you need also support in form of a good salary. If you do your work, we shall also think about improving your salary but first show that you can do your work and then we can think of increasing your salaries. Thank you very much. 

5.12
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have very little to say about this Bill. First of all, in the interpretation sector, the word “cadre” is new in the civil service. The word “cadre”, I feel that it should be replaced by a better word because you know we have been talking about cadres going to Kyankwanzi and you -(Interjection)- really this kind of thing - I think we should use formal words for our Public Service so that these terms, which are not generally acceptable should not be in our law. That is No.1.

Two, the civil service in Uganda is finished and gone. We have to do something afresh to revamp; to re-activate it so that we have the system we used to have. These days a civil servant can stay away from office for a whole week and nobody will ask; nobody will even bother to find out what is happening to that civil servant. The system has fallen to zero. I think this law should address the reactivation of the Public Service in Uganda. As we speak now, the system is just running itself as if there is nobody in charge. This is true, Mr Speaker, I deal with the civil service.

The ministry has introduced examinations: whether you want to be promoted from assistant secretary to senior assistant secretary or to principal secretary, you do written and oral examinations. But apparently when somebody is being appointed as permanent secretary to head the civil service, those examinations are omitted. Why don’t we use the system all through so that we get the best out of the best? Restricting examinations to a particular group of civil servants and then the cream is exempted, I think is not fair. We should extend the system to cover everybody so that we get what the examination has given us to eliminate any opportunity of favouritism.

Mr Speaker, concerning motivation, we can make very good laws about the civil service but as long as there is no motivation, we are wasting time. The salaries of civil servants must be improved. For someone to earn Shs 150,000 at the end of the month - I do not know how many bunches of matooke those are - and he or she has a child admitted to senior one in a school asking for Shs 600,000 for school fees, I wonder how he or she is able to get that child into that school with that kind of money. So, really we should pay these people a living wage.  

There is money in this country, more than enough to pay a living wage, but our priorities are upside down. Without a functioning civil service, there is no government. It is the civil service that runs any government. The ministers are there for policy matters, but the running of the civil service is the work of the civil servants and they should really get value for the service they are rendering. In fact in Uganda the civil servants are slaves because they are working for free. The salaries they are paid cannot last one week. Now, what do you want them to do? They must live; they must be alive. So they cheat on government time to go and make the difference elsewhere. A law like this should address these matters squarely so that we bring back the civil service that we shall be proud of.

And for the pensioners, Madam Minister, there is no system of regularly increasing salaries and pensions. You get the same figure year in, year out and yet the inflation is eating it away. Really we should think about the civil servants and the pensioners so that we go back to the system we used to be very proud of. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.18
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My honourable colleagues will note that I am a member of this committee and while in the committee, I raised objections to the use of the word “cadre”. I did say that this is a relic of communist vocabulary and indeed we agreed in the committee to have it dropped. I am now surprised that it has been smuggled in here. I hope that when we come to the Committee Stage, my chairman will concede and this matter will be laid to rest. Thank you.

5.19
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am a member of this committee and I would not like to be seen in another light; I want to make two clarifications, which emanate from what hon. Okello-Okello said. He talked of cadreship as something strange in the vocabulary of the civil service in this country. This to me is very absurd. “Cadre” is an English word. Cadreship is something equivalent to commitments. We are talking about committed cadres; workers.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, in the late 1980s, the Uganda Government retrenched very many civil servants and the word used was “retrenchment”. Later on, some two civil servants who were retrenched went to court. The court ruled that the word “retrenchment” was not part of our public service. That is why I am saying that we should be formal. Let us leave this excitement with whatever we are doing. (Laughter)

MR BYARUGABA: I am not talking about excitement. Perhaps he himself is excited but I am not at all.  I am very normal and I am talking from the point of knowledge that a cadre is a committed worker. That is all it is about. If court rules otherwise, so be it. We are legislators and we will abide. But as it is today, it certainly does no harm.

I also wanted to clarify on promotions. Hon. Okello-Okello alleges that today’s civil service has almost gone to the dogs due to the fact that promotions are done almost on table, verbally and they say, “Hon. Byarugaba, you are promoted to permanent secretary.” That is certainly wrong. That is not the case. I was a civil servant for the last 24 years. For all this time, I rose through the ranks and every time I sought promotion, I had to go through both written and oral examinations. Even to the level of permanent secretary, I can bear you –(Interruptions)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, when I was a student at the university I used to work as an apprentice during all my holidays but I could not get my salary without an appointment letter from the Public Service. I would come from Nairobi and within a week I would get my appointment letter. But in 1996 we wanted to promote one of our valuers and it was discovered that that person had been earning salary for 15 years without an appointment letter. These days you can earn money all your life without any appointment letter from the Public Service. It is happening. So, let us not pretend. There is something wrong with the system. Let us address it.

THE SPEAKER: But since you are a member of this committee, hon. Byarugaba, and you have given the information, some may accept it but others may not accept it. I think we can end it there. 

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much for your wise ruling. I want to inform this august House that today the civil service, as much as possible, to the best of my knowledge and the knowledge of the committee, has tried to improve greatly. During the days of hon. Okello-Okello, I think they were doing that but that is not the case today. Thank you very much.

5.24
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the hon. Minister of Public Service for the Bill, and also the chairman of the committee for the report. However, I would like to point out a few issues regarding the Ministry of Public Service, or the Public Service at large. 

Discipline is not being enforced in the Public Service and that is why somebody can get away for a whole week without anybody asking where he is; and the late coming can just go on without anybody’s notice. There used to be letters of warning. You would be given a first and second warning, and on the third warning, your dismissal would be recommended. That system is not being enforced; we what such disciplinary action taken against officers! 

Another issue is about motivation. In May of every year, we have a worker’s day. This is the time when workers would look forward to an increment of their salaries. This is no longer the case. We do not even know why this day is being honoured here when we cannot give the people what is due to them.

Another thing that really disturbs me is about employment sealing. We are churning out new graduates every year, where do we expect to put these people if there is no employment for them? We need to expand the employment base in order to absorb these people who are coming out of the tertiary institutions. That is what is causing brain drain to this country. We cry that people are running out of this country for greener pastures, but we are not addressing the cause. So, could we have the cause addressed? Thank you.

5.27
MS HUDA OLERU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister of Public Service and the committee. To me this Bill has come at the right time and I support the motion. I hope that Parliament will pass it immediately without wasting time, but there are things that I see must be included in the Bill to improve our performance.

First, this Bill must consider the transfer of civil servants. It is now a problem especially for nurses and teachers. These people can be transferred at any time. A teacher can be transferred from one place to another where he has to ride a bicycle for more than 30 kilometres from where he is residing to the school where he teaches. This causes such teachers to go to school only once or not to go at all in a whole week. This leads to poor performance. 

This is also relevant to the nurses. They are transferred from one health centre or hospital to another; but there is no accommodation, no staff quarters. This problem hinders such civil servants from performing well. So I hope the Bill is going to consider that.

Another thing is that the civil servants are now more interested in politics. I want this Bill to come clean on the role of the civil servants and politicians. This is the time when the civil servants are supposed to help the people, but they are on the ground preparing for the next elections so that they can leave the civil service and join politics. I hope the Bill is going to address this problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.29
MR IBRAHIM MUWULIZE (Independent, Buikwe County West, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for coming up with this Bill. However, I think this is the time for this Parliament to consider where the majority of our workers are – the trend is shifting and the majority of the people are entering into the private sector. 

We are here trying to legislate for the workers in the Public Service, which is necessary, but you find that the rules in the private sector are not being enforced and the people in that sector are crying. For example, when it comes to paying pensioners - when the pension is due, they receive a package and use it in full. However, when our private workers, especially those in companies, graduate for gratuity, they receive it with tax charges yet they had paid Pay-as-You-Earn all along. They are crying because they consider this as double taxation. 

This is to mention a few, but even the terms of service – government needs to get closer - much as we are inviting and enticing investors to come in, we need to look more closely at their terms of service and the way they handle our workers. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.31
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion. One of the major challenges I see, having worked as a civil servant in this country for a long time, is the issue of motivation. If this Bill is seeking to improve and to streamline the work of our people, and in light of the recent decisions we made in trying to explore the possibility of removing the many cars being carried to the districts, I think we need to reconsider, critically, the terms of service of our civil servants. 

A person married with say four kids that go primary school – not all of them go to UPE schools, faces a big challenge of fending for them. And considering the government structure today, many positions at the district level have no room for promotion. You can be assistant CAO for five to ten years. If you are lucky, you get interviewed to become deputy CAO in the tenth year.

I started in 1995 as a planner, until I was tired of being a planner and left at planning level; there was no room to go up, they were fixed. Moreover, it was the same salary. How do you expect a person, who has got more papers, from degree to masters, to second masters, to postgraduate diploma to still remain a planner earning the same salary for years?

I think it is important that if we are trying to streamline the terms and conditions - even if there is an increment of Shs 3,000 or even Shs 2,000 on the salary of a civil servant every year, it is important to look at the scalability of the motivation we provide to our civil servants if we want to maintain and retain them. We are saying that we are going to take away the little motivation that they have, the cars. Do you know that some of these cars that we have given civil servants have been the one and only motivating factor that has been keeping them in those positions; helping them to go out? It is motivating to at least drive in that government car and go and serve some rural people. That is a big challenge for us; I think in terms of seeing the structures as they now stand at district level, particularly at the frontline of service delivery, there is a big challenge. 

How are we going to motivate people where someone works in one position for ten years and sometimes some of these people are not transferable? You work in one district for as many years as God has given you – you are a planner in Kotido until you leave. So, I think we need to see the potential; for us to look at how we manage the civil service in this country. The issue of motivation is very important.

Another problem, which I have experienced as a civil servant is that when people get frustrated, they start fighting offices; nobody keeps the rules, everybody flouts the laws; the CAO is not there, the RDC is there; people are fighting; many people go for study leave; you just walk away and register in a nearby university. Nobody even asks for you. Some people even get study leave at the end of their studies. They could have been studying quietly for one or two years, then they ask for study leave at the end. When you go to a primary school, some of the teachers are not there; where are they? They are doing their diploma at NTC, Kaliro. 

The level of discipline and motivation in our civil service is quite low. From personal experience, I think this is more to do with motivation because you will love your job if you are very conscious that it is rewarding you and you are benefiting a lot from it. Some people, although they are civil servants, are benefiting not because of the positions they hold but by being contractors. You are the district engineer as well as the contractor working on some bridge; or doing some labour based technology on another road; or having a contract to build another classroom. 

This is daily corruption going on in some of the districts. I think we need to revise our public service standing orders. How we are going to manage the civil service in the country? Because the way I see it, most young people are entering public service, they want to acquire skills but we have a challenge on how to provide motivation to our civil servants.  

I want this Bill to help us address the issue of discipline, motivation, promotion, streamlining how we move from level a, to b; even with a little salary, at least you see room for movement. I think that will be a very important thing. 

Although we support decentralisation, I think there is also a motivating factor in these transfers around the country. I have seen many CAOs who were fighting with many people but when they were transferred, they have become very happy people. You find a CAO who was in Hoima is now somewhere – even at the same salary scale just being able to serve in Kabale or in Adjumani and the move to another part of the country is motivation in itself. 

So, administrative offices have been brought to the centre but the salaries have remained the same. We need to also think about planners, economists, statisticians, and personnel officers. There is nothing strange about this, it will still be decentralisation; power will still remain with the people. Persons in these offices also need to be moved around without affecting the principles of decentralisation. We can still make these people transferable around the country. 

Some people will retire from the Public Service without even being to all the corners of this country. They will have been born in Adjumani, gone to school in Adjumani, gone to Makerere, from Makerere back to Adjumani, finished the 25 years there and retired. This is not very healthy for our country. I think we need to find a way, even though we are not thinking about salaries, of making these people transferable around the country. Some people will even die before knowing where Bundibugyo is yet they are Ugandans. I think we need to make civil servants transferable as part of motivation and also as a part of education, so that when you retire, you can at least tell your kids that, “I have been to this part of Uganda”. Thank you very much.

5.38
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the Minister of Public Service and the chairperson of the committee for this Bill. I think the Bill is long overdue but it is good that you have brought it on board and I pray that Members do support it.

I pray that the Bill helps this nation to create a minimum wage for the workers of this country. If we are to fight corruption in this country, we must look at the remuneration package of our workers in this country. I do believe that corruption is on the increase in offices because of the pay that our officers receive. Like other honourable members have already noted, a civil servant cannot receive Shs 150,000 or even receive less than that, Shs 60,000, Shs 90,000; and this is a man or woman who has a family and children to look after and you think the person will be happy! That is why most of them are even not dedicated to the work that they are doing. Most of them report to work when they are actually thinking of chasing other business deals and it has become a tendency in the civil service that most of the civil servants wake up from home knowing – or first ask themselves, “What am I going to do in office today? Am I going to get anything from there today?” If he thinks there is nothing he is going to get then he would opt not to go to office because he has a pressing problem - a family is there looking at him. 

If we are to curb corruption in this country, then the Public Service must come up with a minimum wage for our civil servants. It is still a motivating factor.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way and accepting this information that I want to share with the entire House. While I agree with you to some extent that the rampant corruption in the civil service is as a result of poor remuneration, I also wish to tell you that there are a few of us in this House who when we joined the civil service, had our first salary at the rate of Shs 1,650. That was the salary for a graduate and that time corruption was unheard of. I have people here like hon. Alex Byaruhanga, my contemporary and hon. Nathan Byanyima; that was the salary scale from 1981 to 1983, as a graduate you would get that but there was no corruption. 

I imagine that what we actually need to do is to strengthen implementation and adherence to Uganda Government Standing Orders. There is a lot of laxity to the extent that when officers come, the first thing that the person asks is: “Is there a project for me to manage? What can I have in that office?” So, there is an attitude problem with the Uganda society of today; there is laxity in as far as enforcing the Uganda Government Standing Orders is concerned. That is the information I want to share with you.

MS KIIZA: Thank you so much. That is very healthy information for Ugandans but I would also add that during those days, my brother, life was still easy as books were provided in schools, school fees was still very low and the cost of living was also very low. But given the standards and the cost of living these days, sincerely people –(Interjections)- yes, when you talk of appetites I understand. There are so many people here who have high appetites for money or higher infinity for money and that is part of it. When we institute laws to condemn impunity and corruption, that is the reason. 

Mr Speaker, I also pray that the Bill strengthens the workings of the civil service. The civil service provides that when someone attains higher qualifications than those with which he or she joined the service, his salary increases automatically but this is not being practiced. I am talking from experience. In the civil service it is also provided that when someone serves for two years then he is confirmed in the service but this is not being done. Many officers serving in the districts complete the mandatory two years and they are never confirmed and when they are laid off, they don’t get their benefits from the service. I pray that this Bill also resolves this. 

It is very good that our civil servants get transferred to acquaint themselves with the cultures and workings of this country. However, some officers have used transfers as a way of punishing civil servants. You will find for example the DEO transferring teachers who come from mountainous areas. If you are not a friend of the DEO or of the inspector of schools, you will find yourself being transferred to an area, which is inaccessible. They take you close to Congo, Rwenzori National Park or to Matheniko in Karamoja because you are not co-operative to the boss in the respective civil service department. 

I beg that as we talk about transfers, we are cautious of not using the transfers to punish civil servants. Rather, it should be done uniformly and an officer should not be transferred every year. In fact, some officers are complaining that they are a mobile force; that every year they are the same people being transferred. At the same time, you find that there is an officer who has served at a station for more than 20 years. Officers who are always transferred do not like this and are not motivated. They feel they are being witch hunted. 

Therefore, I pray that as we consider this Bill, we try to see how we can strengthen the existing laws: how to motivate our workers and think of ways of creating new jobs for our children and for the Ugandans who are leaving schools in big numbers. This is because every year all the universities in the country are pouring out new people who are looking for civil service jobs but the jobs are not there. Where do we put them? Most of them are going to the streets. Even as we encourage the growth of industries, these investors come with their own people and they employ them here so that our children don’t get jobs. Even when they are employed, there is no law on minimum wage so these investors pay them what they think they should. 

Therefore, I believe that as we support industrialisation we should first think of putting in place a minimum wage, which those investors will follow in giving our children jobs. I beg to submit.

5.47
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Mr Speaker, I will start by telling you a story. When I was growing up in Busoga, almost all the primary schools in my region had teachers, headmasters and other support staff from different tribes. Today in Busoga, like I am sure is the case in many other areas, all the staff are people from the same area. What does this show? What this country is yearning for is unity. You hear people talking about ethnicity, looking inward and saying, “These are Basoga, Baganda, Acholi, Balaalo”, because we have lost out on one thing: unity as a country. When you look at what the district service commissions are doing for example, they all recruit “children of the soil”. 

When you go to Iganga, they will recruit Basoga for all the service jobs. The same will happen in Ankole and Acholi. How do you create a country when people are inward looking? I think the Public Service and the ministry should have it as a guiding policy –(Interruption)

MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Amuru): Thank you, honourable member for giving way. I want to give information regarding recruitment of civil servants in Amuru District, where I come from. It is only Amuru District, which is fairly balanced and they are a bit focused. They don’t only look at people from Amuru and as I speak, we have two people, one from Iganga who is the Director of Health Services - I am only mentioning the key positions like heads of departments. We also have the Inspector of Schools who is somebody from Rukungiri. That is the information that I want to give to my colleagues, although this is exceptional.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, it is possible that there was no one qualified from Amuru to become - but the point that I want to make is that the district service commission needs to have some guidelines because this is becoming a tribal affair. Years back you would find a person from any region working anywhere and learning the culture of that particular region as well as the language. 

That is why you would find people like the late Adonia Tiberondwa somewhere in Teso. He was a Munyankole but he could speak Ateso. That was when this country was still a country but today, small tribes are being created and people are just looking at their tribes, accusing each other and saying, “You see, that tribe is doing this and the other”. All this is because we are no longer interacting. The Public Service is one of the avenues of interaction. As long as you let it remain tribal, then we are finished as a country. 

Secondly, at a risk of being over repetitive about this issue of motivation, some years back Public Service went through a restructuring programme, why, because you needed a motivated small professional work force, well paid, which would be efficient. Today, they are talking about the issue of remuneration and motivation. It looks like even after restructuring the Public Service at a very high cost - because if you can tell us the figures the country will wonder, about the money we spent in restructuring that public force. We are still having the same problem; a workforce, which is not motivated if they do not steal money, they will steal other things to survive. Whereas the top cadres could be more comfortable, the lower cadres are poorly remunerated. You will not compete fairly. 

The industry I am used to, the legal industry, is having a problem. All the good lawyers are not comfortable with Public Service for one reason, pay. You cannot compete with the private sector in payment. Therefore, the best even those you have been training, in-service training, those who have got scholarships as a result of Public Service, have ended up going to the private sector and the trend will continue because you are not paying them. If you really wanted a small efficient workforce, you must find monies to pay and then these issues you are raising about corruption and so forth. 

Thirdly, I will talk about pension. For years and years, we are having as a country the problem of pension. When people retire, they are tired, they are aged; some are sick. This is a social security - but if you do not pay pension in time - today you have pension arrears, how do you think these people will survive? They can no longer work; they have no savings and you are talking about pension arrears. 

We sometimes do not get our priorities correct as a country. I appeal to you, hon. Minister and your ministry to look into these issues of national unity as against ethnicity and policy of public recruitment, issues of a well-motivated paid civil service and pensions. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.54
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Mr Speaker, this Bill, I am optimistic will go a long way in strengthening the quality of Public Service if it is not put on the sides just like many laws and policies we have made in this country. They are actually packed in cells and not implemented. 

The Civil Service in Uganda is indeed the thorn in the flesh of the people of this country. It is indeed ticks in the cow because if you look at the cost benefit analysis, it is characterised by non-functionality and non-performance. No results you can get from government in terms of Civil Service. We must do away with this unacceptable situation because the human resource is the most important resource that can mobilise the rest of the resources and bring real quality meaning in terms of development. 

What is abnormal has become normal in the Civil Service of Uganda and I pity the Minister as well as the Prime Minister on how they can move on a proactive way to revert this situation. We cannot talk about this in disregard of the ethical and integrity issues because this is the greatest disease that has affected the Civil Service in Uganda. 

If I am to suggest, it looks like we need to provide for an induction framework whereby before you join the Civil Service, you must be inducted in ethical and integrity issues because the reality is that these issues are not in our educational curriculum and there is every reason to suggest that it is so much lacking in our civil servants. They are not aware of the standing orders, which guides them in the process of executing their responsibilities on behalf of citizens because these are delegated responsibilities. So, we need to enforce a very strict code of conduct for the Civil Service in this country to be aligned in the direction that would enhance performance and effective service delivery.

The size of the Civil Service is totally uncalled for. In Apac District, at a time Action Aid Uganda was operationalising an annual budget with 10 technical staff, the district local government was operating the same budget with over 300 staff. What sense does it make if we are making business decisions in public institutions where we have a huge pile of human beings in the Civil Service but in terms of output, they are equivalent to the civil society organisations which have got very few staff. We need to redirect our efforts in that- 

The in-fight in local government: This has paralysed services in most local governments in this country. In fact, if I was the Minister of Local Government in Uganda, I would be considering resigning now because I am doing nothing in my own perspective. With decentralisation, service delivery is going to be more effective through local government –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am just seeking clarification from hon. Ebong from Maruzi on the issue of resignation. With all the good work hon. Hope Mwesigye is doing, how do you compromise your statement of resignation vis-à-vis all the good work she is doing in that particular ministry? (Laughter)
 
MR EBONG: I thank you very much for that question but I wish the Minister was a substantive full minister in her capacity, I would have held her to account very strongly but –(Interjections)- until it is officially into perspective. But we can only measure results -(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Ebong for giving way. The clarification I would like to seek is for the hon. Member to declare his interest in the post. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR EBONG: Thank you very much. I am not about to declare my interest in the post because I still want to get more experience, and then by the time I come there, it will be real progressive work. But we can only measure success in terms of output. If we had seen a strong revolutionary perspective in changing the face of Local Government, I think we would appreciate the hard work being done; probably it has been done but more is still needed. 

The issue of roles and responsibilities in public services is indeed very poor in terms of – because if I do not understand my roles and responsibilities, how do I perform? So, there is need to strengthen this in the civil service of Uganda and put a mechanism that will be in place to ensure that disputes are resolved in Local Government, because it should be expected.

MR EKANYA: Thank you hon. Ebong for accepting this information. The in-fighting is very deep, Mr Speaker, in the structure and in local governments, to the extent that if members bother to read the Auditor-General’s report for Kampala District for 2006/2007, it has even led people to form groups that collect money from government facilities and take to their homes and this has been confirmed in the Auditor-General’s report for Kampala district where politicians recruit people, collect money and take it.  

So, in-fighting has gone so deep that it is affecting service delivery; the same thing is happening in Mbale municipality where even the town clerk has asked the ministry that he wants to resign because the government structure there can not even help him because of the in-fighting between the politicians - the civil servants are children of some of the politicians; so tribal and deep rooted to the extent that some civil servants no longer want to work in local government. 

Another case is Bundibugyo, where the CAO said he even wanted – is not supported - he wants to leave and 20 per cent of the whole budget for two years was abused and the politicians cannot help him. Some people are threatening his life, so this thing is so deep that when members are talking about it, it is very serious. 

On that note, Mr Speaker, I want to request that you give us time to present our report because it has been standing on the Order Papers since last session, so that these things come out and the public gets to know. Thank you.

MR EBONG: Lastly, Mr Speaker, the issue of minimum wage should not be over emphasised. It is high time Uganda adopted a minimum wage policy that will protect our brothers and sisters who are left more vulnerable and doing work in the private sector. I have been carrying out some survey in hotels, security institutions and in tea estates where I found we still have slavery in this country. This must be checked. Because in the situation where you pay somebody shs 25,000 per month. You know, simply it is to restrict you not to leave that work because you can only eat the money, but cannot afford transport to go and visit people from where you come. Circumstantially, most of these young boys and men have been chased by economic poverty in Northern Uganda; so they have been rendered very vulnerable and the issue of a minimum wage cannot be over emphasised. I know that – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, hon. Ebong for giving way. I am seeking clarification on how the hon. Member reconciles the notion of a minimum wage in a situation of rampant unemployment where a person is willing to work for whatever he can to earn a living.

MR EBONG: Mr Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Ebong, please, conclude.

MR EBONG: Mr Speaker, we cannot leave our people vulnerable to slavery in disguise of rampant unemployment. This is unacceptable. But what I would rather think should be done is to put in place this policy- and also looking at the other side when we put a minimum wage, what is going to be the implication in the entire private sector? I understand this is something very difficult to bring to Parliament, the minimum wage policy, why, because most of the private sectors in Uganda have got key government officials behind them. So, in other words, these people who are being enslaved – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you see you are not the first person to talk about the subject of minimum wage. I think what hon. Rukutana was informing you is that this matter has been coming on many times but then there was a fear that when you set a reasonable minimum wage, you may cause some many people to be declared redundant and unemployed. I think there is that fear. We must find a solution - If you say minimum wage is, Shs 100,000, how many people – supposing you have been employing 100 people, will you continue? This was the fear - I think this is what the hon. minister was trying to get from you.

MR EBONG: Mr Speaker, I agree with that sentiment but let it be brought on the floor of the House and we sort it here, not on the corridors or the streets of the country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No. The reason it does not come is because already there is enabling law to declare this minimum wage but that expression was given.

6.08
MR JOHN OGWANG (UPC, Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not going to bore you with all this. They will be very few words. I am going to be brief -(Laughter)- you see the problem we have here in Uganda is - there are four problems: One, we have got no discipline  (Laughter)- do not laugh because it is a very important thing. Two is respect, and three is that there are very few people who have got vision; people who see things ahead of us. 

The fourth one is unity. We need this because the country is divided into north, east, south and whatever. Uganda cannot go on like that because we are a very small country and a very powerful one at the moment in the entire world. We are far off from those who call themselves developed countries. Despite that, people are poorly paid. If I may ask on the Floor here, how much money do people get? It is Shs 150 or 250. There is nothing like a 20 percent increment; no. So please, think of these poor people. They would be very happy if little money is added onto what they put in their pockets.

Hon. Minister of Public Service, if I can ask –(Laughter)- this is where we go wrong. We go wrong mainly because of this sense of disrespect; you are very arrogant. Development does not consider that. If you are arrogant, you are not clever. I think this is what we always get from here. You are too busy thinking about me and the like. No, think about the others; the little ones.

What I want to know from you, hon. Minister –(Interjections)– oh! I do not believe in this because in Apac we do not use it. Hon. Minister, is your ministry broke? Have you got enough money? If your ministry is not broke –(Interjections)– then why do people get poor pay? That means you have no money? Do you have the money? [Mrs Sezi: “Yes.”] Then pay our people in a decent way –(Laughter). If you can do it, my good friend, the Prime Minister is seated there –(Interjections)– how many people are working in the Public Service; any idea? –(Laughter)- just a little –(Interruption)

Mrs Sezi: Mr Speaker, I want to provide the information about the size of the Public Service because I think that is what he is talking about. 

The Public Service is made up of the central government ministries, local governments and universities. As of January, the Public Service of Uganda had 234,866 employees. That is the total number. Out of that –(Interjections)– there are no ghosts, Sir. Out of that, 150,000 are teachers in different categories of primary, secondary and institutions. Of the 150,000, primary teachers make the largest number of 128,000; that is the bulk.

As for the local governments, they are close to 50,000 people. The breakdown for line ministries is only 42,000. I thought I would provide that information.

MR OGWANG: Thank you – what is it, the microphone? Hah! This thing is too low –(Laughter) When I look into your eyes I can tell whether a person is honest or not, but this one is okay. I want you, from today when you go back home to make sure you get enough money to increase these people’s pay; make it a little better, whether 10 percent or whatever it will be. 

I am saying this because the people are very important and we cannot run the country without them. The country is run by the little people and not the big ones. If the little person is happy, you get some strength out of him but if he is not well fed, then you cannot get any service out of him. So, give these people some increment on their pay. As you increase pay for civil servants, I would also like to see you include the Police. By doing that you will discourage corruption; you will bring unity in the country. 

The other thing I want to tell you is that Uganda is a very rich country. Do not let anybody tell you that we are poor. You see –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you see we are about to end –

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, can this young lady assure me? 

THE SPEAKER: I am going ask her to make a response. Hon. Minister, would you like to say something on this general debate? Okay, let us have the Prime Minister to say something then the minister will wind up.

6.09
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ogwang has made a very important issue about discipline and I would like to emphasize the importance of discipline. Where you have for example, political leaders who are effective time managers, they become role models for the public servants in terms of keeping time. I do not want to give examples here because you know those who are good time keepers for public servants to copy. If they do not, they are thrown into Lake Victoria. (Laughter) That is number one.

No. 2 is the issue of recognition. When I was teaching at Makerere University, we were not really getting a living wage. But the moment I was promoted to the level of a professor, I was recognised; I was satisfied. I got a sense of being satisfied. So, the issue of ensuring that promotional outlets exist is extremely important so that people reach the top of their career. 

Let me also say that the public servants do not have the clout to demand for higher salaries. If you take for example some universities, they strike, which is not a good thing. But sometimes we respond when they strike, which is wrong. We should respond before they strike. There was a time when Parliament wanted to have salaries of MPs increased and government refused. They also refused to perform -(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: No, you see when you talk about salaries of Parliament; I must say that for ten years we have never increased the salary of Members of Parliament. (Applause) I think these facts should be known because I saw something like that in the newspapers this morning. The salary, which Members of Parliament get, was determined in the Sixth Parliament. I was on the committee that negotiated with hon. Mayanja Nkangi while he was the Minister of Finance. From Mayanja Nkangi, we had hon. Ssendaula. From the time hon. Ssendaula left the Ministry of Finance we have never increased the salary of an MP; it is still Shs 1.4 million as was determined in the Sixth Parliament and we have been contented with it. (Applause)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I agree, Mr Speaker, but the point I was making was that we have the clout as opposed -(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has made a very important statement that civil servants do not know how to bargain. I wonder whether from tomorrow the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business will now allow civil servants to form unions for purposes of bargaining their terms? I am saying this because they can only bargain properly if they are allowed to belong to unions.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: They are allowed. I am informed by the minister of state that the law was passed; she has informed us. You can check the relevant literature. So I think they need to get more organised and put pressure because the resources are scarce and what is required is pressure. The pressure is essential because the resources are scarce. Let me finally say -

THE SPEAKER: There is no information really. Let him finish. I am about to close because I want to invite the minister to wind up.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Let me say that when Parliament put pressure on us to handle the issue of pensions, it was addressed and let me also say that it was our weakness as government not to address that matter. I am saying this because if there are mistakes we must accept. We thank you for putting pressure on us and I want to inform you of someone who came to see me. That person was sick of AIDS and he said that he had not received his pension. I put pressure on my colleague until this person was paid the pension before he died a week later. But at least I was happy that he got it. So, there have been weaknesses from government; weaknesses from Parliament; weaknesses from the public servants themselves. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister. No, we are winding up and I advise those who still want to contribute to wait and make their contributions during the Committee Stage.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This has been a lively debate and many of the views that were expressed have been expressed before, but when you are looking for virtue and quality, you never stop to listen to ideas and suggestions that are made. 

However, let me briefly – because she moved a motion and I will address just a few salient points. Salaries are a question of the budget. When the budget is being formulated, we are given a certain amount of say Shs 20 billion to be distributed among all the workers and we do our best. Of course the more people you have, the less they get because it is cut out that way. But we have made some significant improvements. For example, if you take the teachers, when we came into government they were getting Shs 35,000. Later on it went to Shs 70,000, then Shs 100,000; then 130,000 and now it is Shs 200,000.

When you increase the salary of a teacher, you have got to multiply it by the number of teachers; this takes you into billions although the total sum that is allocated for the purpose remains the same. So, if the House feels that it is in a position to allocate more resources for emoluments, this will be appreciated but there are sectors, which of course are as important and at times quite urgent. So I would like you to look at it from that angle.

Two is the question of decentralisation. Complaints have been made about the inefficiency and tardiness in the local governments. The concept of local governments was to revolve power to the districts, but to also allow them to recruit their staff. The idea, which we had during the British times of secondment was abandoned because it was said that it was not adequate and that these people were never loyal to the local authorities; they remained committed to the centre, which originally employed them. So the idea was to let the local governments recruit their staff, but with some supervision from the centre. That is why you get situations, which hon. Katuntu referred to of people recruiting their own, locally. 

Recently, I visited one local government. They were recruiting drivers and they took everybody from their own area. They said, “Well, this is the opportunity for our sons and daughters. Why should we look elsewhere?” And with the amount of unemployment that we have, I will not want to say it is unthinkable, but it is natural that in the local areas, they should want to give opportunity to their people rather than recruit significantly from other areas. However, I know that at senior level some people are being recruited from other districts other than the recruiting one. 

So, are we now going to decentralise recruitment?  (Interjection)- I want to conclude because it is out of the generosity of the chairman that he allowed me to make a few remarks. Consequently, there are some of these matters, which are policy matters with regard to decentralisation. We know we have a situation where somebody can be educated in his district, be recruited in his district, work in his district and retire in his district. These are all matters that we have got to look at as we go on looking at our system and how best to make everything work.

I think the other issues are clear. We take every suggestion in good spirit because I know that that is what you mean. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled the Public Service Bill, 2007 be read for the second time.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now we have reached the Committee Stage for this Bill, but take into account what happened today when we were considering the Tourism Bill. I realised that some Members had not submitted their amendments to the committee. They want their amendments to be considered here. This is of course contrary to the Rules of Procedure which say that you must have gone to the committee before you raise the amendments here. But we have given licence today for that and I think this is an important Bill. 

I will request you to go and read the Bill tonight and the proposed amendments by the committee. Should you have any amendment you think is very important to making a good law, you will draft it so that we have it in writing before we come tomorrow to the Committee Stage. Copies should be given to the Members as that will make our work easy and faster. 

I think this is an appropriate time to adjourn the House until tomorrow at 2 p.m. The House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 6.32 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)






