                Thursday, 11th February, 1999. 

(Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS
        
(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the chair).

The House was called to order.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE BUDGET FOR THE FISCAL YEAR, 1998/99 

THE CHAIRPERSON,SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Lt. Col. Mudoola): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Let me take this opportunity to thank all the Members that have supported the report, for the comments made.  Most of the questions have been replied to by the Minister. So, I have a few points to comment on. 

One; about the helicopter price inflation, Mr. Speaker, as we indicated in our report, that we are concerned about the inflation in the price of the helicopters though we were informed that this did not happen, from the new developments, I think the Committee will have to revisit this matter and report to the House.  

Talking about the tanks, you will notice that this matter was not discussed in our report, because at the time when we wrote the report, the tanks had not yet arrived in the country.  So, we did not report anything on them, but personally, I talked to the Minister of State for Defence who assured me that the thanks were okay and that they have no fault at all.  Nevertheless, again, we shall have to call the officials and discuss this matter concerning the tanks.  Whether it means going there, we shall have to go there and confirm.  We shall report to the House again after that.  

Our concern as a Committee has actually been classified information or classified equipment. I think Parliament should find a way of really categorising what is classified information and equipment; because you find that some of these so-called classified information or equipment are not availed to the Members of Parliament, yet it is availed to some civilians or some people are not really - who do not have Uganda at heart but just want to get money.  So, we should find a way of finding out what classified information and equipment is.  Some officials are using this as a loophole;  when they feel that they cannot account for the money received or given to them by the Government, then it is switched on to classified information or classified equipment.

I will also tackle the Uganda Air Cargo company. It is said that its price went up because the aircraft was not being serviced according to the maintenance schedule.  I want to tell the House that this is not true.  This aircraft has been serviced in approved facilities, approved by FAA, approved by CAA and approved by the manufacturer.  So, really, to come up and say that the price has gone up because of that, I would not buy that reason.  This aircraft has been maintained in U.S.A, in the U.K. in Portugal and in Israel, of late.  We still insist that a probe be instituted to look into the repair of this aircraft.

I will now handle the question raised by hon. Okulo Epak, saying that the Committee seems not be to be concerned about the suffering of the people in insurgency areas.  I want to make it clear here that the Committee is very much concerned and when you read our report, we indicated that we are worried that this war has taken too long.  And when we were writing this report, at that time, there was a general calmness in the country.  We commended this and we urged the Government to really sustain and maintain this situation.  So, the Committee is really committed, and we want to see to it that the whole country is stable and everybody enjoys peace. 

He talked of some people who were awarded contracts in Defence.  As the Minister of State for Defence indicated, I think this should be taken up by the Committee on Transport, Works and Communication because, that is exactly where the contracts were awarded from.  I do not see how we can go in as a Committee of Defence and tackle this problem.  We shall pass on this matter to the committee concerned.  

He also indicated that parastatals in the Ministry should be sold off.  We had that view, but here we are, the Government has spent a lot of money on this pharmaceutical, the factory is ready to operate.  We thought that it would not be feasible to just sell it off.  Where the service is wanted, we think we should not just sell off the parastatals.  This factory is not making a loss and at the same time, the medicine is needed by our forces.  So, we felt that since the UPDF cannot manage these factories, we should privatise management only, and leave the parastatals and the factories belonging to the Ministry.  

I will also talk of one point raised by hon. Lukyamuzi, about movement of troops. I think it would really be very unfair for us to restrict the movement of troops in the country.  Because he has seen troops going to Entebbe, or going to protect a place and then Parliament comes in and says, 'we should restrict movement.'  I do not think we are being realistic.  

He also he talked of Government talking to rebels.  Yes, when you read the report, it is there. We are assured that Government will continue as before, in pursuing political and military intervention in the war.  We are not saying that we shall just go and fight only without negotiation, no.  And let me tell the Members here that we sat with the President, as a Committee and we told him of the view that we should pursue both ways.  We should pursue the military way and also the political side of the matter.  We should not fear to negotiate; but we should not negotiate out of fear.

There was also an issue raised asking whether the Committee knows whether the Minister of Defence has passed or has used up its money,  and whether they have used the supplement.  On this, I will answer that you know very well that for a Ministry to get a supplement, it does not have to come to the Committee.  So I could not say whether they have gone for a supplement or not;  and at the same time, even if we pass these figures, we do not even know how the money is spent.   You know very well that according to the regulations, they are supposed to report to PAC and not to the Sessional Committee.  Maybe in our rules, I would suggest that since the Sessional Committees approve these funds, when accounting comes, instead of PAC, these Ministries should go to the relevant Committees to look into what they have used.  
With those few remarks, I wish to thank again the Members for their contribution and urge them that they approve our report as it is.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT, BY RESOLUTION, DO SET UP A SELECT COMMITTEE TO PROBE ALLEGATIONS AND REPORTED CASES OF ABUSE AND MISUSE OF POWER AND CORRUPTION IN THE MILITARY PROCUREMENT, SPECIFICALLY THE PURCHASE OF HELICOPTERS, TANKS, RADARS, MISSILES AND OTHER SOPHISTICATED WEAPONRY BY THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE, AND REPORT BACK WITHIN 45 DAYS.  

MR. AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia):  Mr. Speaker, arising from the debate and the comments made in the committee's report, I beg to move a Motion.  

Pursuant to observations, debate, recommendations and acute concerns raised in the report of the Sessional Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs; noting with concern the President's speech on the 6th February 1999, at Bombo Army Headquarters expressing dismay with the contingent corruption in the Army; and cognizant of the role of Parliament as a watch dog of the Government;  we, the Members of Parliament, do hereby, by resolution, set up a Select Committee to probe allegations and reported cases of abuse and misuse of power and corruption in the military procurement; specifically the purchase of helicopters, tanks and other sophisticated weaponry by the Ministry of Defence,  and report back within 45 days.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  The Motion has been moved and seconded.  Can you speak to the Motion -(Interjections)-  Hon. Members, you know very well he has the right to speak to his Motion.  That is his right to be able to convince you before you vote.  Otherwise, the whole thing will become so mechanical.

MR. AWORI:  Mr. Speaker, thank you for your intervention and opportunity of allowing me to move this Motion.  This matter has been debated at great length and all I am trying to ask is for this House either to endorse the views expressed in the Committee report,  or the views expressed by individual Members of this House; and also to call upon the authorities to observe our concerns.

This matter of corruption is not unique.  If it had not been serious concern expressed about corruption and misuse of public resources, endorsed, debated and cleared by this House, I would not be standing up to move this Motion.  I do not think this House,  as a watch on the Government, should feel exasperated, should feel tired of setting up another Select Committee.  

The matter of purchase of sophisticated weaponry in the Ministry of Defence has caused concern to all of us,  especially those of us who are mandated to make sure that public resources are not misused.  Mr. Speaker, no less person than the Commander-in-chief of UPDF has expressed concern on many occasions that there has been corruption.  
At one time, a special adviser to His Excellency the President and Commander-in-chief confessed to him that indeed, he had received a commission on the purchase of equipment related to the military procurement.  This matter was never debated.  We were told in the press it was going to be investigated.  Nothing has happened to date.  Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Awori, I do not want to interrupt you, but let us get the statement right. Was the confession as to receipt or to promise of a commission?

MR. AWORI:  Relative to your question, Mr. Speaker,  that is why I am moving the Motion that we investigate the matter and confirm conclusively.  Was he promised or did he receive?  And if so, how much?  These are the issues that forced me to stand up in this House and ask for a special Committee to look into this allegation.  We are told it was a confession, we do not know whether it was a confession or misdeed,  or intention to commit a crime.  It has never been confirmed and generally, Mr. Speaker, even in  your private capacity as a lawyer, a confession implies having committed something wrong.  You do not confess to a deed that is good for society.  You are literally saying, 'I am sorry, I did something wrong.'  That is what we call a confession.

These are not simple matters.  We have been told that this aircraft cost US $6 million.  Yesterday, we were told by the hon. Minister of State for Defence that the figure varied from US $1.3 to US $ 1.6 billion.  We are not talking about Shs 1.3, we are talking about billions of shillings. People in districts, in my constituent specifically,  go to great lengths to give out money to support the security of this country.  When we do not know even how much we have spent on such matters or such equipment, it definitely causes concern.  
According to press reports, one of our Colleagues who is charged with the responsibility of military intelligence at one time gave a report; whether it was given in writing or verbally to this same Committee whose report we are debating, I do not know, but indeed there was concern about the purchase of this aircraft.  We never got a conclusive report.  

Not only that, Mr. Speaker, you were in the chair when that Member and that Minister contradicted each other on the matter of this aircraft.  One said, they could fly, the other said they could not fly.

MAJ. MAYOMBO:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Awori for giving way.  Let me clarify this point to you, and the whole country, that I did not contradict the Minister of State for Defence, when I was talking about the flying or otherwise of the aircrafts purchased by the Ministry of Defence.  

The Ministry of Defence set up a team to inspect the aircrafts before they are accepted. This was a necessary pre-condition to ensure that Government does not receive equipment which is not in conformity with what was provided for in the contract. That team was required to study the documentation on that aircraft, to talk to a number of people who had got involved in the procurement of those aircrafts,  and to look at the equipment itself - including test flying them - in order to give a report that is technical, that is scientific, that is reliable.  So, the flying I was talking about in this assembly, I was trying to dispel the argument which was on the Floor then, that what was imported was junk.  I was saying what was imported was not junk.  Even if this assembly would like to go to Entebbe to verify, those aircrafts can take off and go in the air and come back.  

But they were not overhauled in accordance with the contract.  So, there is no contradiction whatsoever. Government of Uganda did not take them because they were not in conformity with the contract, but they can fly. They did not take them because, Uganda's Civil Aviation rules established certain standards and they did not meet with those standards. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that the people of Samia Bugwe have understood the clear, articulate message on this point.  Thank you, Sir. 

MR. AWORI:  I would like to thank the hon. Member for his clarification and indeed, as he says, people of Samia Bugwe will be informed.  Indeed, I have got a meeting with people of Samia Bugwe on Saturday at 9 a.m. in Busia Social Hall, where I am supposed to clarify, among other things, this particular issue of misuse of public funds.  

You can see for yourself the kind of situation we are involved in, but I am calling upon this House to set up a Select Committee.  Mr. Speaker, if we had the time, I would have said, 'can we play back the tape on the Hansard to know who is telling the truth, who is inaccurate, or who is deviating from what he stated before.'  But I do not think I stood up here with your permission to start a ping pong debate on the Floor.  All I am saying is that indeed we have received contradictory information, incomplete information, and constant calls of dismay and expression of concern by the Commander-in-Chief on a matter pertaining to military procurement.  I am saying that indeed, we have had these calls many a time.  But I am also asking that we as a supreme legislative organ of the State, given the mandate to authorise public expenditure, we are indeed entitled to an accurate report on how that money has been spent.  But as I said, arising from the debate, the reports and recommendations of the report by the Committee on Defence,  a lot of gaps are still not yet covered. That is why I am saying we definitely need a Select Committee.  

Many people say we have had too many Committees, but are we going to say that from now on we cannot investigate what we think is not correct?  It is not because of my so called ideological or political inclination that I stand up to mention these things. Mr. Speaker, a concern is a concern;  even if we try to cover up now, one day the crack will show and it will be a shame on us.  I am speaking almost out of desperation.  There is a concern that really we are not so sure of what is happening to the Vote we have allocated to the Ministry of Defence.  I do not want to involve myself in a debate with the Minister of State for Defence on a matter of tanks.  It is common knowledge, it was reported and he never refuted the report in The New Vision that between Masaka and some point - Mr. Speaker, I would like to hold back in view of your ruling yesterday that we should not go into a matter of national security in great depth.  So I hold back my comments.  

But if these Select Committees were in place, and I hope there will be one, it should hold its hearing in camera so that some of the information can come out without fear or favour.  I have detailed information on the tanks and I am not new in military weaponry.  I am not new.  Mr. Speaker, we have information which we can only release in camera and to a serious Select Committee of this House.  Yesterday, Mr. Speaker -(Interruption).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  From the hon. Member's contribution, is he implying that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is not serious?  Is he in order to imply that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs is not serious, when I have indicated here that we did not receive this report of the prices, but now that we have received it, we are going to sit and investigate and report to this House?

THE SPEAKER:  I think my understanding of the hon. Member's contribution is that the Select Committee must be composed of serious people.  It in no way implies that the Sessional Committee was not serious in the way it handled its business.

MR. AWORI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker for your ruling and observation.  Either in the event, my hon. Colleague the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs missed out some words, or I was not quite clear.  I never implied in my statement that his Committee is not serious.  Never did I imply that, nor do I intend to imply so in future.  So I would like to assure my hon. Colleague that he is indeed a very serious person that is why I thanked him in my introductory remarks for his important report.  And that is why, arising from his report, I am moving a Motion among other things to thank him, and call upon this House to set up another Committee to follow up serious issues he raised in his Committee report.  Hon. Member you are a serious Chairperson and we would like to take up this matter from your serious report in greater depth, by selecting a Committee also of serious people to do the job.

In winding up my remarks, I would simply like to call upon this House to note that indeed the Commander-in-Chief himself has expressed concern about this matter of military procurement.  I do not want to go into great depth lest again I fall in that pit of discussing matters of national security in the open as it is.  All I am saying is that this House is entitled to know how public funds have been spent, this House is entitled to know how our national security is maintained, this House is entitled to know that indeed equipment we deploy for our national security is of good quality.  Mr. Speaker, time permitting, maybe one day we should ask that indeed all Government procurement, especially pertaining to national security, should be first hand and from manufacturers, not from scrap yard dealers or some third party.  
When this Select Committee is composed, I am prepared to give a number of companies, personalities, individuals who are involved in this deal.  We have their names and if we are to do the due diligence on these particular companies that were involved, this House will be surprised at the kind of people who are helping us maintain national security.  Mr. Speaker, as we rightly put it yesterday, this kind of detail can only come out in camera.  And I do not think it will be opportune for us to clear the gallery and the press in order to go into such detail, especially at a time when I am requesting that there should be a Select Committee to go into greater depth on this matter,  Mr. Speaker; on a matter of expressing national concern for our national security and the use of public funds, I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr.Steven Kavuma):  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to oppose the Motion.  A  Select Committee to deal with this matter is not called for at all.  We have just been assured by the Committee which normally looks at the affairs of Defence and Internal Affairs, and the Chairman has said he intends to hold meetings with the people concerned in this matter.  And I think it is only fair and fitting that we adhere to our normal rules of procedure and discuss matters in the forum where they belong.  

But there is even a more fundamental reason.  This Motion is heavily pregnant with dire possibilities of driving this country into a catastrophe. -(Interjections)-  Yes, Mr. Speaker, why do I say so?  When you look at the Motion, it talks about the Select Committee looking into purchases of helicopters, tanks, radars, missiles and other sophisticated weaponry.  

MR. AWORI:  I was very careful in reading my Motion. I never read the words 'radar' and 'missiles'.  Mr. Speaker, this paper came out yesterday the 10th of February, you can look at it. After considering a number of issues, I stood up here, I could not withdraw it. But in my submission which has gone into the Hansard, I left out those two.  The Hansard goes by what I say here, not what I write from outside; you know it, Mr. Speaker. So, I carefully read it out and said "helicopters, tanks and other sophisticated weaponry".  In other words I am reading out the Motion.  

I also deliberately left out the word 'therefore'.  I assume, Mr. Speaker, that what one says is what goes into the Hansard.  If I am wrong, I could be corrected.  Having said that, is the hon. Minister in order to misquote me?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Awori,  before I rule on your point of order, I would like you to make me comfortable by confirming or denying whether you distributed a copy of your Motion.

MR. AWORI:  I would like to confirm that indeed I distributed this Motion yesterday to every Member, including your Office.  But I am saying, having listened to the debate, maybe I made a mistake of saying 'an amended Motion'.  But having listened to the debate yesterday -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Awori, you have not only confirmed the distribution of the Motion but also clarified the circumstances regarding its text;  my ruling is that the hon. Minister is not out of order.  

MR. KAVUMA:  I was saying that when you look at the list, it leaves nobody in doubt that we are invading the area we call 'classified stores.' The world over, there is information about the national defence system and security of the country, that cannot be just given to anybody.  This is especially in areas of classified stores, in areas of classified information, because of the obvious danger that can arise out of possible mishandling of information in those areas.  This is why I say, Sir, that this motion is dangerous.  It can at one moment or another drive this country into a situation that would be undesirable for its security.  

I know that this is not the first time that attempts have been made through various ways for many people including some of our leaders, to try and gain access to information in these vital areas through various means.  I know the press has been urged either to provoke those who are responsible or to trick them into divulging vital information regarding our security. We have resisted that and as I said yesterday, we are not about to be intimidated by any amount of persuasion or trickery into putting the security of this country in danger.  

Hon. Aggrey Awori has repeated many of those things we hoped we had cleared yesterday.  About inflated prices which we explained, these were not prices for the unit of the helicopter, but it included expenses to cover other areas including, but not restricted to, training, purchase of ground equipment, spares, ammunition, armaments and so forth.  But he continues to pursue the line that actually this was the price for one unit of a  helicopter.  I feel this is a betrayal by a leader of the calibre of my hon. Friend, to continue pursuing untruthful information when actually he knows the truth.  

This country has gone through a period of untold suffering and when we look back in our history, some of these circumstances were triggered off by what one could call mishandling of vital areas of public management of our society.  Mr. Speaker, it is possible for many of us as leaders to trigger off trouble and find safe exit into havens of peace.  But the damage will continue to go down to our population.  And this is why as Members of this House we must always bear in mind that as we seek for the votes from the  population, we should always be guided by what will be the best course to take in order to ensure that we avoid trouble for those majority who may not be as loud as we are.  The silent majority in this country do not have the opportunity to run away, they will not have the opportunity to fly away;  many of them do not even have work permits elsewhere in other jurisdictions of this world.  It is our cardinal duty as leaders to ensure that we handle public business in a manner that is not going to endanger the security of our people. The twenty or so million Ugandans.

I want to appeal to this House to reject this Motion.  There are avenues where matters of concern in this country, in this area, can be discussed without causing any security risk.  Mr. Speaker, I want to remind hon. Members that when the President talked about some concern he raised - where hon. Aggrey Awori my Friend did not attend - he also said he was gathering information about some reports he had received.  It is therefore inappropriate for anybody to come and try to intimidate this House into thinking that actually the President has come out to say there is rampant corruption in the army.  And in any case he is taking steps to gather information in those areas where he thought there was some concern raised.  

I do not even know whether you can talk about continued corruption in the army. I do not know whether my great Friend the Mover is not living in memory of the armies he used to purchase arms for, before the NRA came to power. I want to assure him that there has been a tremendous change in the field of our army for over 13 years. He should forget the bad past and move with Ugandans into the promising present and the future. I beg Members to reject this Motion, Sir.

MR. ELLY KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all I would like us as Parliament to seriously try and specialise in the fields that we have volunteers to serve in.  There are some Members in this House who have volunteered to serve on various Standing Committees and Sessional Committees out of their special knowledge and interest in those fields.  

The Members who serve us on the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for purposes of refreshing the memory of the Members of the House are: Lt. Col. Mudoola, Hon. Kabasharira Naome, Hon. Kule Muranga Joseph, Hon. Baku, Hon. Maj. Kazoora, Hon. Maj.Gen. Elly Tumwiine, Hon. Lokawua Wilson, Hon. Omony Ogaba, Hon. Taire Idhwege, Hon. Maj Sewakambo, Hon. Lt. Kinobe James, Hon. Lt.Mulindwa Birimumaaso, Hon. Mao Nobert (Private member) -(Laughter)- hon. Onzima Alex, hon. Kibanzanga, hon. Kimera Vincent, hon. Omeda Omax, hon. Olum Zachary, hon. Wasswa, hon. Lorika Rose, hon. Maj. Noble Mayombo, hon. Sam Njuba - veteran fighter.  These are not Members whom you can doubt that they are not capable of handling any matter relating to the security of the nation at any time. We cannot question their integrity at all, and it is a mixed grill. The only person probably missing here is the Mover of the Motion, and it is by his choice, although he knew that he was very used to sophisticated weaponry.  And he too felt that these Members would represent him very well and he is always in that meeting - every time I visit that Committee, the hon. Member is always there.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, let me read to you the Provisions of the Constitution.  Article 90 of our Constitution -(Interruption).

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Karuhanga for allowing me to ask for this clarification. I am not necessarily supporting the Motion, but I want from his expression, to be clarified in my mind whether where now we have the Committee consisting of very hon. Members, we shall never again in future have a Select Committee,  because if we do, there will be some kind of passion against those who are Members of that Committee?  Is that really the impression that the Member wants to create?  

We have currently a Select Committee probing into privatisation and yet we have very hon. Members who are heading the Committee on the Economy and they are all very knowledgeable in the matter - but we have a Select Committee.  Is this expression of his to the effect that we did not trust this other Committee in order to select another Committee to probe into areas where they are concerned?  I would like this clarified to me.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA: I am very grateful to my veteran Friend for asking this question because we have been sitting together here since 1989 - hon. Ongom and I - and he has now asked a very interesting question.  Because when we were selecting some of those Select Committees at that time, I tried to read the provisions of the Constitution which I am just about to read, and the mood of the House of that time was not very ready to receive this type of information from the Constitution because it was like it was urgent.  But after the Select Committee was made, I started reading reports in the press, doubting the selection and the membership of the Select Committee, to the effect that some people went and mobilised themselves and formed Committees and it was a biased Committee.  

It is very important that this House always maintains the integrity of the House.  The people who at the beginning of the year declare that they are interested in this matter, let us give them time to specialise.  We can always have a Select of very few for urgent work that requires may be two, three, four, five days.  I am not opposed to us using another method to establish Select Committees.  But if it becomes the form, I tell you, the House is always going to be finding itself in Select Committees - Select Committee on water, Select Committee on this and that; and we can end up having too many Select Committees and we can end up undermining the committees.  

So, I feel grateful that you have raised the question, but I would like the Members to reflect on it more so that when they are thinking about going into these Select Committees, they are mindful of even what our constitutional 'fore-mothers' and fathers did when they decided in Article 90 (1) of the Constitution as follows;  Mr. Speaker, if you will, permit me to refresh the memory of my Colleagues:  "Parliament shall appoint standing committees and other committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions."  (2) "The following shall apply with respect to composition of the committees-  (a)"the members of standing committees shall be elected from among Members of Parliament during the first session of Parliament."
(b)"the rules of procedure of Parliament shall prescribe the manner in which the members and chairpersons of the committees are to be elected."  This has been done.  (3)"The functions of the standing committees shall include the following-  (a)"to discuss and make recommendations on all Bills laid before Parliament; (b)"to initiate any bill within their respective areas of competence.  (c)"to assess and evaluate activities of Government and other bodies."  That is the relevant provision - to assess and evaluate activities of Government other bodies.  (d)"to carry out relevant research in their respective fields." That is very operative.  Those Members should have been elected during the first session of Parliament. (e)"to report to Parliament on their functions."   

So my view on this matter is that I believe hon. Awori is moving his Motion in good faith because he is caught up in this decision to hurry,  and then the Speaker will have to have some Members who are may be not on that Committee to get on to it.  But I would rather that -(Interruptions).

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank hon. Karuhanga for listening to the clarification I am seeking.  The hon. Member representing Nyabushozi, the Committee we are talking about is a Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, if I get it correct. What he has read to us is relevant to Standing Committees. I do not know the relationship and relevance of the same.

The other thing I thought is necessary to clarify is that if he really wanted to tell us that we do not need a Select Committee, it would have been for him to read also for us the provision of the Constitution regarding the appointment of Select Committees, then we can know whether it is relevant.  But as far as this one appears to be, I think the hon. Member, if I am not mistaken, is actually misleading us.  Thank you.
MR. KARUHANGA:  I am grateful that hon. Okulo Epak has raised that point because I think it had escaped the attention of some other Members.

MR. PINTO:  May I give information regarding our rules of procedure, rule 144 concerning the Select Committees?  "The House may, at any time, upon a motion made after notice given, appoint a Select Committee to be nominated by the Speaker, for the consideration of such matters as the House may refer to the Committee and to report on any such matter to the House."  In other words, this House would refer specifically to the Select Committee, to look into certain aspects which may have been covered by the other Committees but not so exhaustively,  as in the case of Privatisation or Agriculture.  But the important thing is that it is the House to determine that there is enough cause to appoint that Select Committee.

MR. KARUHANGA: Let me first satisfy the worries of my Friend, Dr. Okulo Epak. He did not think that Article 90 which I read out, also affected Sessional Committees.  The name 'sessional committee' does not appear, but it is covered in Article 90. It reads: "Parliament shall appoint Standing Committees and other Committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions."  It is in that that the Sessional Committees are taken care of.

Secondly, the Constitution has already spelt out what the Standing Committees will do.  Maybe Members do not know, or have forgotten a number of the Standing Committees we have in the House which handle this.  If they are not satisfied with the Sessional Committee which has taken care of that, there are Standing Committees.  These Standing Committees have got - there is one chaired by hon. Kazoora - the Committee on Government Assurances.  These have been taken care of and the Constitution has specified the jobs they will do.  You read (d) and (c) - (d) says: "to carry out relevant research in their respective fields"; (c) says: "to assess and evaluate the activities of Government," and that is Sessional Committee or Standing Committee, which can handle that. 

Then we went ahead - and I was a Member of the Rules Committee  - I was lucky to be elected by the House to draw the rules.  We went ahead and said, 'there could be some specific issues' - and that was the thinking of the Rules Committee when we were drafting - 'which may not fall directly in these areas.  They may come up and we may need to handle them.'  Immediately we put up a Select Committee to handle these.  But it is under unexceptional circumstances, rather than the general rule that Select Committees are supposed - in law at least, to be.  And it is not the Select Committees which come first before the Standing Committee or the Sessional Committee.  They are in that order; nor are the rules more important than the Constitution.  It is the Constitution first, then the rules.  So, in my view I suspect that if you are not satisfied - and the House is free not to be satisfied with the hon. Members that I have read out - go ahead to another Committee, namely a Select Committee.  

In my own position as a Member of Parliament, I would like to encourage Members to specialise. Hon. Mudoola's Committee, if I may call it so, has had a lot of interaction with people in various security agencies. These include the one that is led by hon. the Minister, also Chairman of the National Security Committee, the one who has got the Judge's presentation.  I really would like to urge my hon. Friend, hon. Awori, that if he has the information - because he presents himself as a witness, not as a Member of this future Select Committee he is urging for, and I am sure that he will find a lot of support among these Members whom I have read out.  
In any case, I think the seconder of the motion was an active Member of this Committee;  as a former Minister of Defence.  Let us give all our support to hon. Mudoola's Committee to carry out this work.  Otherwise, we will lose specialisation in our Committee and I think we should try and make our Members specialised.  I thank you so much, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this motion.  Thank you.

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to oppose the motion.  

There are bare minimum pillars for the nation to survive so that one can sit in that Chair as the Speaker of Parliament and we can sit here as Members of Parliament, and also be able to travel to our constituencies and consult.  If these pillars are exposed to our enemies, then we may not even be able to come here and talk.  Matters of security cannot be treated as UCB matters or Railway matters, or whatever!  We cannot just say, 'let us expose our security'; although they are saying, we can have it in camera.  We have seen, Mr. Speaker, many matters that are supposed to be handled in camera and in secret, the following day they hit headlines.  We cannot accept this kind of situation.  

One pillar that is so sensitive is our security.  We cannot go and start saying, 'we purchase these weapons or this equipment from here or from there, this type, this calibre.'  It would certainly be very dangerous - giving free information to our hostile enemies.  Mr. Speaker, what is the work of the security agencies?  Mandated by the Constitution, we approve money every year to these security agencies, you can talk of ISO, you can talk of ESO and others.  What do they do?  What should be their limits in these matters?  

The Mover said that there was a confession of a bribe having been taken.  This revelation was made by none other than His Excellency the President.  That shows that the President is the Commander-in-Chief, he is following what is happening in matters of security in the Army.  
Also, as hon. Karuhanga has said, we in the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs shall consider these matters. The Chairman has expressed himself clearly well that we shall continue looking into all these allegations as a Committee.  Surely, Mr. Speaker, at that level there could be some damage control on what to be and not to be released.  

I would like to end by once again re-emphasizing and appealing to hon. Members to seriously think about exposing matters of security rather irresponsibly, I must add;  and also to think of throwing us into anarchy once - considering the consequences.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.(Applause).

DR. KINYATA GEORGE (Kinkizi East, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I stand also here to oppose this motion. This motion has got a hidden agenda -(Laughter)- and the hidden agenda is to expose Uganda's military strength, -(Interruption).

DR. OKULO EPAK:  We have heard some of this very spurious statements made in the House in contributions to debates of important national issues by hon. Members of Parliament, who were elected to represent their people.  Also, it is a constitutional mandate of Parliament to monitor and evaluate the manner in which public funds are spent.  Is the hon. Member in order to impute improper motive in a motion we shall take and we should take for granted, moved by an hon. Member of this House?  This is contrary to our rules, Mr. Speaker,  I would have wished to quote the specific rule which is being violated by this hon. Member, Dr. Kinyata.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I was waiting for the Member who was contributing to complete his sentence, then probably you would have raised your point of order at that point. I would be in a position to make a ruling then.  He started by saying that this motion has a hidden agenda, and I took a deep breath because he was going to make a statement.  He did not complete this statement, so I am really in a fix.

DR. KINYATA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling.  The motion has the aim of exposing Uganda's military strength by uncovering what type of military material we have, where we buy the equipment from, and what type it is, to the enemies.  It has nothing to do with corruption.  
I do not know when the Member who has brought the motion withdrew those papers which hon. Minister of Defence has just read to us, and went to amend it.  In fact, the motion is incompetently presented to this House because what we have is not amended.  What was given to us yesterday, Mr. Speaker, is not what hon. Aggrey Awori is claiming to have amended.  So, it is incompetently brought here.  It should have been rejected without debate, but since you accepted that the debate continues, I still stand on my own two feet and say that its main aim is not to curb the corruption which we has been haunting us, but only to know inside operations of our defence forces; so that they are exposed to the outside enemies.  That is the aim.  

I stand here to oppose it and I call upon all Members to oppose it because of the motive behind this motion.    I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE MINISTER FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Dr. Martin Aliker): Mr. Speaker, I set myself an exam on the basis of the motion brought.  Try as I have been, I cannot pass it to be able to support this motion.  

This Parliament has the right to know what Government does; indeed this is accepted by Government.  Mr. speaker, this Parliament is equally entitled to know that the funds allocated to all branches of Government are properly accounted for.  

Our security forces are a separate group of citizens, the very nature of their job makes them different.  Mr. Speaker, not all of us in this House can do what they do.  I doubt how many of us can do five push-ups if asked to do so on this Floor.  Our soldiers, our armed forces defend our country.  This means that there is somebody inside or outside it who intends to do harm to the country, that is why they defend it. We as Members of Parliament, have the  responsibility to the people who elected us, for those who were elected,  and it is their welfare that we come to defend.  

Let me take the outside of this country.  Have you ever heard the Parliament of India, the Parliament of Iran, the Congress of United States, the Parliament of United Kingdom, discuss their nuclear capabilities in the Houses of Parliament?  

DR. MALLINGA:  I would like to inform this House that I think we are beginning to misunderstand what is security and what is not security.  The purchase of arms,  and what arms we have in the country,  especially in a third world country like this one, is not a matter of security.  Those who want to know what arms we have in this country will know from the source or from the route before they get here.  The only people we are keeping away from knowing what weapons we have in this country are the Ugandans.  Security is how you deploy those arms and what you decide to do with those arms, that is security.  We do not manufacture those arms in this country, so our neighbours who want to know, have many avenues of knowing what weapons we have in this country.  

Secondly I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I would like to remind you again about my ruling on the question you are just posing.  I did say that while the purchase of defective military equipment may raise the question of insecurity, to discuss that fact publicly and in all manner of places is in itself insecurity.  Even though people can go to the source and find out what exactly was purchased and so on, for you who are conscious of your security to go out there and start talking about what arms you have, defective or not,  we said yesterday that that in itself could bring insecurity.  But you can proceed.

DR. MALLINGA: Secondly, with due respect to the hon. Member holding the Floor, he raised the question, 'do nuclear weapons get discussed in the Parliaments of the United States or of United Kingdom?'  Yes, and he has read it many times over.  Thank you very much.

MR. MWANDHA:  I as a disabled person and speaking on behalf of all the people who are disabled in this country,  would not wish to undermine the security of this country.  Because in the situation of insecurity I will not be able to run -(Laughter)- and take cover.  The blind people will not be able to run and take cover;  when guns are being shot those who are deaf will not know that there are guns being shot around, they will not know what is happening.  

My personal concern is that if Government gave US $100 to a person X,  with a view to purchasing equipment to protect this country and for some reason that person X pocketed US $60 and spent US $40 and actually bought equipment which is defective, that person will be undermining the security of this country.  And I for one as a disabled person, I would feel extremely sad that the security of Uganda is being undermined by some person who is so selfish. I want to be guided by hon. John Kazoora, by hon. Kinyata, by other hon. Members,  as to how we can identify the person who has pocketed US $60 and spent US $40 to buy defective equipment, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WASSWA LULE:  I have noted the trend of some of the arguments and the emphasis -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wasswa Lule you did not catch my eye.  I was inquiring from the Member who was on the floor whether he accepted the information of hon. Awori. 

DR. ALIKER: Mr. Speaker, do we have two Speakers in the House or one?

THE SPEAKER: You accept the clarification?

MR. PINTO:  I wish to seek clarification from the Minister for Presidential Affairs and from the Minister in charge of Defence.  Having given the assurance that Government is indeed interested in good governance and accountability, and that Parliament is entitled to know about the expenditure,  could we now focus on the issue of accountability and not the hidden agendas that are seen in the motion? I would like to get assurance from the hon. Minister in charge of Defence,  and from the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs that indeed accounts of expenditures that may go into procurement of equipment and other supplies will be subjected to the Auditor General's scrutiny and that there shall be established a facility that can guard the secrecy pertaining to these purchases.  

I would be comforted to hear if that assurance can be given because really as I read through this motion, the element that we should be focusing on is how to get the true value for the money that we spend on the equipment.  Is there accountability for the expenditure that goes for these equipment?  Because out of the so called guarded expenditure on machinery, we have received reports that the country has acquired defective equipments which have been bought at inflated prices, and that there has been unnecessary and unaccounted for expenditures.  If I could have this assurance that Government is going to put in place a system that the Auditor General and a specific vetted group of people will be put in place to look into those confidential purchases such that we know these expenditures are audited, that there is accountability;  I would like to seek this clarification, Mr. Speaker.

DR. ALIKER:  I am very conscious of the fact that other Members want to contribute, therefore, I will wind up.  I was moved by the hon. James Mwandha that if there is any problem, he as a disabled person cannot run,  so like many other thousands of Ugandans.  When things go wrong in this country, the very same foreign Governments which urge our Members to want to ask questions and bring motions like these,  are the first ones to tell their citizens to get out before the natives kill themselves.  Let us not pretend, Mr. Speaker, I lived in a foreign country, and it is not my intention to go back into exile; this time I will die here -(Laughter).

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Is the hon. Minister Dr. Aliker Martin in order to mislead this House that he was in exile during the war, when actually he was not in exile, especially between 1996 up to now when he returned to be a Minister?  He was never in exile between 1986 and now. He was living a very luxurious life, he could fly to Uganda, do his business and charter another plane to fly and go for holiday in America; and then back to Uganda.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Order please. Hon. Members, I do not know the circumstances under which hon. Aliker went out there, apart from what he has stated in the House here. But even if he lived out there comfortably, there are people who have gone into exile and have lived comfortably, in fact, perhaps even more comfortably than the host citizens.  That may not necessarily mean that someone is not in exile or that hon. Aliker is misleading the House.  But as I said, I do not know the circumstances under which he lived.  So, I cannot rule whether he is misleading the House and therefore, out of order.

DR. ALIKER:  Finally, let me state very simply, we have the mechanisms for finding out how our money or our taxes are used or misused. Let us use those organs because out there we have enemies who will be so happy to know where our radars are stationed, if we have missiles, how many tanks, how many troops we have Gulu, or in Wolingha where I come from.  Therefore, Mr. Speaker,  when Members stand up in this House and they pretend to have the interests of this country at heart, while at the same time stripping the country naked, so that whoever wants to do harm to this country can do it, I do not accept it.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you.

MAJ. MAYOMBO:   Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I stand to oppose the motion, because I know and this Assembly knows that my constituency, the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, has been and still is in the vanguard of the struggle of the people of Uganda to have transparency and accountability in the management of the public purse.  There are very few armies on this continent, hon. Members, that can withstand the test that the UPDF goes through whenever we are subjected to the Auditor General or to Public Accounts. Many a time we have appeared before this Parliament and opened our books for all Members to see. We still stand by that principle.  

My constituency is also the consumer of these facilities and weapons the Mover is talking about.  So, I would be failing in my duty if I stood here to support weak procurement systems or not mind safeguards against corruption and the importation of defective equipment.  But let me say, Sir, that there are mechanisms in the place.  

First of all, the spirit of the Constitution which hon. Karuhanga was talking about and which I am very sure that the distinguished lawyer who seconded this motion participated in writing when he was in Committee III of the Constituent Assembly, hon. Omara Atubo; the spirit and the latter is that there are three organs of Government.  One is called the Executive, another one is called the Legislature, and the Judiciary.  Their interplay is necessary, their overlap is necessary;  but the overlap must also come in when there is a problem in one of the organs.  

I would like to state here, Sir, that in this helicopter problem for example, I am proud to have belonged to a probe team set up by the Executive arm of Government.  I am a proud to have belonged to a probe team set up by Government, in particular the Ministry of Defence,  and established that the aircrafts are not overhauled and ensured that the Government does not accept them. I am saying therefore that there are still internal mechanisms which have not been exhausted. I request that Parliament allows these mechanisms to work. The helicopters have now been rejected, they have not been accepted and the security of Uganda has not been jeopardised.  

There was a feeling by some Members that there is graft in Ministry of Defence, that somebody made a promise to another, some element of graft; they wanted to know whether this was acceptable and how far it went. Mr. Speaker, this statement was first made by the President and Commander-in-Chief. What does that mean?   It means that there is no attempt to conceal, there is no attempt by the Ministry of Defence or the Commander-in-Chief to conceal anything from the public.  It means Ministry if Defence is bona fide, there is good intention, there is good faith to find out and expose corrupt elements.  

Having said that, there is also such a thing as national security.  Mr. Speaker, I am happy that you have already made a ruling on this.  Let me state what my constituency is feeling.  The feeling of my constituency is that there are matters of national security which are not being handled honourably by some leaders in this country.  The feelings of my constituency are that we can investigate corruption, extract the corrupt component from the force without jeopardising national security.  And they feel very concerned when some leaders go ahead to brag that they have ever served other intelligence services, that they are in touch with rebels, they feel very concerned.  I would like this House to register this concern that for a citizen and an hon. Member to brag that you have ever served a foreign intelligence service is no source of pride at all.  

Let me continue, Sir, by saying that we exercise a lot of restraint by explaining to the army -(Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA:  I have listened carefully to my hon. Friend Maj. Mayombo. He has just made a statement and I would like it substantiated, that there is a Member in the House who brags of how he has served foreign intelligence organisations.  I would like him to throw more light to the House on this, so that I can be comfortable in knowing who this person is.  

Having said my wish, I would like to know whether it is in order for the hon. Member to make a statement, considering that he has been head of a very important intelligence organisation in the army, like this?  Is it order for him to just gloss over it without substantiating and giving the actual name of the person so that we know who this person is, so that we can start becoming very careful in case such a person moves motions for example? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  The hon. Member is in order.

MAJ. MAYOMBO:  Thank you very much for this very protective ruling.  But I would also like to add that I never said a Member of this House, I said leaders.  There are some leaders on this continent and in our country, I did not talk about Members of this Assembly.  If hon. Karuhanga knows one, I would not hate to receive the information, but in another forum - where I have an office.  

I would like to dismiss this issue of concealment that some Members of Parliament are talking about; that we want to deny Ugandans information, and yet there is information on weapons which can be found on the internet, that it can be found from the source!  Not all the 20 million Ugandans are law abiding.  There are some who have professed and have picked arms, and are fighting the people of Uganda.  They are mutilating their limbs, they are cutting off their noses, they are burning children.  Those Ugandans should not know about the kind of equipment that UPDF has in its armoury and I think it is the responsibility of all of us to be custodians, to keep this information from these people.  

I would like to say that this issue would have been relevant if for example Ministry of Defence had done nothing about the helicopters,  you would say, 'there is a precedent, you have imported defective equipment and we have it in our armouries or on our airports, you have accepted them without doing anything.'  

You know, Sir, that all our contracts pass through the Ministry of Justice in accordance with our laws.  You know very well that some of the information which is being said about tanks, we even use technicians from the Ministry of Works in order to verify the equipment we are having.  In many instances, we have even hired consultants to make sure that the equipment or service we receive is value for our money, and there is a Committee of Parliament.  If there was no Committee of Parliament which has already written a report and is willing to receive more information on the matter,  representing the will and the spirit of this Assembly.  Sir, I would say that there is no reason to demand that that motion be supported.  

I would like also to say that we would like to have new military equipment.  The Mover is saying we have old equipment. Hon. Members,  mover of the motion, UPDF is willing to have F16 Fighter aircrafts.  I can tell you we have very young men from the University, we can fly these aircrafts.  We would enjoy them.  We would be a fantastic army in this region, there would be no problem in the north, there would be no problem in the east. There would be no problem in DRC if we had F16 Fighter aircrafts. But then there would be no UPE, there would be no elections in Uganda, Mulago Hospital will close, Makerere University will close and we are cognizant of the fact that they will be no security in Uganda without education and without health.  So, we would like to say that when we put all this on the balance sheet, we accept that you can buy second hand equipment, because we have ever lived as a guerilla army, we have ever achieved many things including the capture of state power with limited means.  Mr. Speaker, we can still do many things. We can still protect the lives of everybody including the mover of this motion without new equipment.

Finally, I would like to say that the army is the chief component of state power, please, jealously guard the secrets of my constituents.  I thank you very much.

MR. OMARA ATUBO  (Otuke County,  Lira):   I am sure this House is already aware that I have seconded this motion.   I have not seconded this motion out of bad faith,  nor do I wish to endanger the security of this country, nor do I wish to send anybody into exile again, for those who have been there before. I seconded this motion out of the love of this country and out of my conviction that the only way you can have genuine stability for this country is by way of having a well equipped army with more weaponry, and soldiers whose welfare is well looked after.  I would be the last person to go into exile again, and to contribute to anything that would destabilise this House.  

Let me erase any fear that any Member in this House, including Aggrey Awori, have any ill intention in this motion.  Mr. Speaker, those who do not wish well for this country are basically not in this House.  Those of us who agreed - even under very difficult circumstances, to contest elections under the mandate of the NRM system, even in the CA - to come here and interact with the majority of you, surely, are not the type whom you can categorise as having a hidden agenda for this country.  If they are there and sometimes it has been misused, like it did against me in 1991 - if you know what happened to me - the truth later came out because we stood by the principle of having peace in this country, particularly in my home area of Lango.  Some people feared the truth, they were more powerful at that time, they did what they did, but the truth came out.  Where are they now?  I am here with you still continuing with the strength of the truth and I will continue with that.

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA:  I would like to thank my hon. Friend for yielding the Floor.  It is true that hon. Omara Atubo was a Minister of State for Defence and then Foreign Affairs, and I think he was arrested and the truth came out. The clarification I am seeking from him and the Mover of this motion is whether the mover of the motion is carrying a huge basket of information but he does not know where to off-load it.  The clarification I would like to have is, when the truth came out in the case of hon. Atubo, was it through a Select Committee of NRC or Parliament or through trusting and using existing institutions  - which did include going to court. I would like to be clarified on that.

Secondly, the Movers of the motion are talking of emptying this basket of information to a Select Committee. Is there anything in the rules of Parliament, that stops the Standing Committee from setting up a smaller sub committee, sitting in camera, and saving the time of this House,  to also attend to equally serious business? And as hon. Karuhanga put it, one of the things we do is that we set up institutions, we do not trust them, we do not allow them to act, and even make mistakes and we correct them, and in the process we weaken the institutions and keep rotating from institution to institution.  When evening comes,  we have not strengthened any of them. So, I would like to get clarification from you, which is a friendly one.  You managed to come to the truth without a Select Committee. Is it possible also to use the established institutions for this truth to come out?  I just wanted to know.  Thank you very much.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Very briefly, my arrest and subsequent incarceration was never ordered by this House, although this House was concerned, it was ordered by another arm of Government. We had exhausted that arm, it took only a short time, about a year, and therefore, it was not necessary at that stage to come to the House.  What we are saying is that this matter is already before the Sessional Committee and on an issue coming out of that Sessional Committee, this House cannot keep quiet. They are dealing with certain pending issues which the Sessional Committee has not conclusively finalised.  

I think what my hon. good Friend Minister Amanya is saying, is really a question of method, a question of tactic.  Like in my case, it was handled in another forum.  He is saying - and I think that is the second question - that, 'have we really exhausted all internal methods of investigation within the Executive?'  Mr. Speaker, if that is what we disagree on, only disagreeing on the method of investigation, but agree on the substance of this motion, I think a mature Executive would have arisen at this stage and said, 'yes,  we are moving an amendment to the motion.'  And you would leave it to my conscious and that of hon. Awori to say that the Executive agrees on this method.

Hon. Pinto is saying it is an issue of accountability. If that is what the hon. is disagreeing with, that a Select Committee is not appropriate, that was the issue which hon. Karuhanga was saying, that a Select Committee may not be appropriate.  

I would like to listen to the response of the Executive, the hon. Martin Aliker who stands in for the Leader of the Government business.  He simply came and made a blanket position to the motion, opposed it, and never came up with another proposal.  

We stand by this motion awaiting for other things to be done. (Mr Lokeris rose_) Mr. Minister, I do not know whether you can allow me, because I really want to wind up; there are many people who want to -(Interruption).

MR. LOKERIS:  I would like to inform the seconder of this motion that from the time of inception of this motion, there were ingredients of insincerity in them.  

In the first place, it is untimely.  This motion is telling the enemies that all our weaponry, even those we have just bought, cannot work.  Whom are we telling this?  We are telling Bashir, 'move ahead'; we are telling Kony, 'do not worry'; we are telling any other enemy, 'do not worry.'  And this worries the country.  And for this reason hon. Members, it is even a waste of time to entertain arguments of this nature because this motion is alerting everybody to fight.  And I would like to inform you that if you want a country to be safe, even a village, you can even get a toy gun and tell the enemy, 'I am ready.'  So we only need to refer to other modalities of checking accountability elsewhere, but do not tell your enemy that you are weak, otherwise you are destroyed.  Mr. Speaker, that is the information I would like to give my hon. Friend Aggrey Awori who has talked since yesterday, defending a wrong cause which is destructive to this country.  Thank you.

MR. AWORI: Thank you hon. Member leaving the Floor.  I take this opportunity to inform my Colleagues particularly hon. Lokeris that probably he was addressing himself to a wrong motion or probably he has not had access to look at the motion. Never in this motion did we mention defective equipment.  This motion is about accountability and that is all.  And this Motion came under the motion on Budget money.  We are not talking about what he was addressing himself to.  
Secondly, the hon. Minister please,  adjust yourself to the Front Bench; these regular inquiries will come your way, adjust yourself to that condition.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  This motion arises out of a debate on the Budget for the Ministry of Defence.  It did not come out of somebody's head as a trick.  The army which we are talking of today has protected reasonably well the security of this country for the last 13 years, since 1986.  And we are building it.  This Parliament is contributing to building it by passing a budget and a reasonably large Budget every year;  you are contributing to building this army,  since 1986.  I was part of this at one time - in a Ministerial capacity.  

I think the time has come for us that after 13 years of this army being where it is, we can start asking a few questions.  Some of these questions are not abnormal, neither do they threaten the security of this country.  To ask about tanks, to ask about helicopters, this has got something to do with what this Parliament invented.  In fact when we are approving the Budget of the Ministry of Defence, they do not come with the details of what they are going to buy.  I have never seen it anywhere. They do not come with the details of, 'this year we are buying so many bullets, this year we are buying so many uniforms.'  It is just put that, 'this is for armed forces - so much; for this it is so much.'  It is now up to the army to look at the so many billions which we have given them to say, 'this is going for this type of equipment.'  

When this House through the press or otherwise learns that there is a problem with some of this equipment, that there is a problem in the use of our funds in the Ministry of Defence,  Mr. Speaker, it is no longer a secret.  And that is why I prevailed on the Mover of the motion yesterday when I looked at this and said, 'I think there are certain things we have to leave out; things like radars, missiles and so on.  Let us focus on just a few important issues.' When this motion was circulated, it was not yet presented to this House, it was simply circulated. In other words it was not a motion, it was a proposed motion.  So what hon. Aggrey Awori presented was a Motion and I am debating the motion which hon. Aggrey Awori read to this House.  

MR. PINTO:   Hon. Omara Atubo did say at some point that he would want to hear an amendment to this motion instead of leaving it as it is.  When hon. Maj. Mayombo was contributing, he did say that the books of Uganda People's Defence Forces are opened up to the Auditor General and they are open to PAC.  My understanding is that there is a grey area, that the books are not fully opened to the Auditor General and to PAC.  And if this is the issue and we are talking about as accountability, if we can receive the assurance that there will be full access to this expenditure by the Auditor General and by PAC, would hon. Omara Atubo and the Mover be willing to abandon the motion to seek a Select Committee?  If your intention is to ensure that there is accountability even when it is going to be guarded and vetoed with a certain group of people say within the Auditor General and PAC such that your aim is to find that there is true accountability and there is access to this expenditure, would you abandon the motion?

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, probably hon. Pinto did not follow the justification of the argument which led to that conclusion. I was quoting hon. Karuhanga on the issue of a Select Committee, and indeed hon. Pinto himself,  and also on what the Minister of State for Defence was saying that there was already in motion that type of investigation going on.  And that there is a possibility of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs completing that work.  All I am saying is yes, this maybe the case, but as far as we are concerned, this unaccomplished work requires a Select Committee.  And that is the substance of our argument.  

Others have tried to read into this motion unnecessary things, things like we are endangering national security, there is a hidden agenda.  And so I was trying to allay those fears as far as the seconder of this motion is concerned.  That to impute improper motive of endangering security by seconding this motion is not fair to me.  Because if there is anybody who is more concerned about the security of this country I am he.  And definitely, somebody buying tanks or helicopters through an inexperienced rally driver, and the State mark you, using just a rally driver to go and buy helicopters, and then you go to a country which is collapsing and you buy helicopters or tanks from there, Mr. Speaker, I think this is most unfair.  Therefore our concern on this motion has nothing to do with a hidden agenda, rather it has to do with strengthening the army by ensuring that if the army gets tanks, they are good tanks. And I repeat, Mr. Speaker, that if the army gets tanks, they should be good tanks which can be used to defend -(Interruption)-(Mr. Karuhanga rose_).

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga, it seems he does not want your information, so, you resume your seat.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  I will get the information, let me just complete the sentence. I am saying that if the army is to buy tanks with the money approved by Parliament, Mr. Speaker, the country has to be assured that these tanks are good tanks worth the money. These tanks have passed through Dar-es-Salaam, people have seen them, they have counted them, what is the secrecy about it?  We want to ensure that these tanks are good and protecting hon. Lokeris against the Turkana;  surely, they must be good enough. If these helicopters are to transport hon. Mayombo to Kinshasha next time he goes there, surely they have got to be good enough.  

MAJ. MAYOMBO:   I thank you, Mr. Speaker and the hon. Member for giving way.

THE SPEAKER:  He has finished his contribution.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:   I have not yet finished.  I accepted the information from hon. Karuhanga and -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER:  I thought you are winding up?

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Not yet -(Laughter).

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am grateful to my learned Friend hon. Omara Atubo for allowing me to get this clarification from him in particular, and I think it will make us move forward if he can answer it.  The main problem we have now is not the content of the motion, far from it.  We are interested in getting the accountability on all those things which have been going on.  We are concerned, the President is concerned, the Minister has already said that he is setting up an internal committee himself, to investigate the question.  So the question is not what hon. Pinto is raising.  What the House wants to know is, are you prepared in your motion to delete Select Committee and insert Sessional Committee?  That is the question; and hon. Omara Atubo you should just help and we finish our business.  

And if the Sessional Committee finds itself too big to handle a sensitive national issue, they can set up a sub committee within the Defence Committee.  But I am moving this only because I trust hon. Omara Atubo to have the good sense ,since he is the Mover of the motion, to do so.  If he does not then of course we are entitled to move a motion.  That is what I am asking;  that is all.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker,  my good Friend hon. Karuhanga should know that I have already intimated to the Executive or to any Member of this House that the way the debate has gone on, anybody could come up and initiate an amendment. How can I move an amendment to my own motion? I mean that is irregular.

THE SPEAKER:  Are you prepared to move an amendment to this motion?

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Not myself.  It will be irregular, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have about 24 speakers on this matter and I think we should now get to a conclusion.  24, and I think we should now narrow down.  It seems we are getting somewhere, but let someone courageously stand up and do something.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I stand to oppose the motion vehemently and with reasons that I am going to give.  First of all, I was not surprised that the motion came from hon. Aggrey Awori, who is most of the time angry.  

DR. MALLINGA:  This has come up again and again. There is that insinuation to indicate that hon. Members of this House do not love this country and therefore moved this motion for ulterior motives.  Is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to advance this idea in the House, to impute wrong motives; is he in order, Sir?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you know very well that hon. Awori is one of those Members of Parliament who are crusading against corruption.  He is one of them and he has been in the forefront.  I think what the hon. Elly Tumwiine is saying is that given that background, and given that knowledge of hon. Awori's contribution, he is not surprised that it has come from him.  So I really do not read any insinuation of bad faith on the part of hon. Awori.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker, for your ruling.  I only wanted to add that hon. Aggrey Awori in his crusade has been consistent in his utterances in this House.  He has raised issues of serious concern that have on some occasions touched on security.  He has special interest, as he mentioned, and he has been associated for many years with that line.  And I thought by sitting with him I would try to understand him a bit more.  But I am opposing his motion not because I do not want the truth to come out, not because we do not want probes or investigations to take place in matters of security, not because this House should not have access to information - every citizen by Article 41 of this Constitution is allowed this information - but because of the methods that are becoming consistent and repeatedly coming up to divert us from the cause of our struggle.  

Article 41 is even very specific and was considerate of this situation as it says, "every citizen has a right of access to information in the possession of the State or any other organ or agency of the State except where the release of the information is likely to prejudice the security or sovereignty of the State or interfere with the right to the privacy of any other person."  That is the constitutional provision on how to release information.  The Constitution was very conscious.  

My issue is the method in which this information is released and to which forum.  Hon. Omara Atubo has said that time has come, after 13 years of our army, to ask questions about tanks, about helicopters, about sophisticated weapons, as contained in the motion.  The issue is not what questions to ask,  and there is no question on that one.  The issue is, where are you putting this question?  And I think that is the crux of the matter about this motion.  Is a Select Committee called for if you want to get this type of information, is it the right forum?  

Why I was not surprised that it was hon. Aggrey Awori who could bring this was because of his previous utterances here when he talked about tanks when they had just come, he was the first the one to announce and wrongfully reported that they were still in Dar-Es-Salaam when these tanks were actually here.  I was so annoyed with him and I wanted to prosecute him under the Official Secrets Act.  But fortunately for him, the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Statute of 1955 does not allow a person who utter things to be prosecuted.  

But I am concerned about how this information is used by the outside people, by the press, by anybody, because they feel that it is actually okay, when it is actually a big danger to security and the law is there in the Criminal Court.  This is just for the information of Members who use this information because of the freedom that is there as if it does not matter and they do not only use them here in Parliament, but anywhere else.  There are provisions which I would like to inform this House about, so that we inform all the people who are handling issues of security, to be conscious that while the Government would not like to go persecuting people here and there, they should bear that in mind.  
In the Panel Code Act, section 42, talks about seditious offenses; section 41 is about a seditious intent, section 43 is on powers of the court to even seize printers, machineries and all other things.  Why I am bringing out this is because Members of Parliament have been using the press and putting them in danger sometimes, by giving information which is prejudicial to security.  But the one which is more relevant is the Official Secrets Act: "Acts Prejudicial to the State:  Any person who, for any purpose prejudicial to the safety or interest of the territories of Uganda"  and if you go on to (c) "publishes or communicates in whatever manner to any other person, information which is calculated to be, or might be, or is intended to be directly or indirectly useful to a foreign power, commits an offence under this Act".
(2)"It shall not be necessary on a prosecution under this section to show that the accused person was guilty of any particular Act tending to show a purpose prejudicial to the safety or interests of Uganda and notwithstanding that, no such Act is proved against him, the accused person may be convicted if, from the circumstances of the case or his conduct or he is known whatever is proved, or his character is proved, it appears that his purpose was a purpose prejudicial to the safety or interests of Uganda, the punishment is imprisonment not exceeding 14 years".  This is important for the public and for the people to know that actually, it is a serious matter to talk carelessly sometimes.  
If we looked at what the motion was trying to say, when they were presenting it, the mover hon. Awori and the seconder be conscious of what it means to handle these security matters.  First they removed some things, but without making any difference.  They say they removed radar and missile, but then retained sophisticated weaponry.  I did not see any difference, but it means that they consciously knew what they were doing. 

Although the truth should be said, hon. Atubo was saying that some people fear the truth.  I am not one of those who fear the truth.  The truth was that when I asked hon. Awori here that 'why are you moving this motion?  This motion, you have already lost?'  He said that, 'me I have already achieved my purpose.'  And it is that purpose that I am referring to.  What is that purpose?  What is this purpose that is brought out in this motion?
MR. AWORI:  The hon. Member, distinguished Colleague and a good Friend who from time to time we exchange notes, and one time bitter enemy - we were fighting each other, although we buried the hatchet. He is a good christian, I was once a good christian too. Is the hon. Member who has been described, in order to quote secret conversations which were directed at a different topic all together?  The topic had nothing to do with the motion.  

The matter we were discussing with the hon. Member was about the privileges of a Member in this House.  I know he was once a member - a chief spy, and I thought he was trying to extract information from me and on matters of counter intelligence. Mr. Speaker, we were quite a match!  We were exchanging ideas on a totally different matter pertaining to the privileges of a Member of Parliament and I even loaned him my Constitution and he rushed outside to pick up some pieces of paper to justify this application of intimidation of members of the press and I said, 'look, if you want to prosecute and chase the press, you have failed because they have already heard what I have said.'  Is he in order to misuse privileged information?  

THE SPEAKER: If the hon. Member misquoted you, then he is out of order.  
MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I did not misquote hon. Awori because the truth remains the truth and he is the son of a Canon.  What I said is what he told me and hon. Matembe was listening and it was not privileged because there is no law that stops open discussions, which I hold with him. 

I want to say that really this motion is not called for.  We have handled many important security issues.  It is through proper organs.  There are many channels in which we can handle these issues without necessarily having to spend a lot of the two most important resources of life - time and human.  Those are the two most important resources. But if you look at this motion, it is not called for.  I oppose it strongly, there are many avenues that the members of UPDF have laid down their lives on the line for, to allow freedom.  But freedom does not mean it is done out of consideration, that it is done out of not following the important provisions of the Constitution so that we handle information where it should be handled; and I think that the Sessional Committee is a good enough Committee of this House to continue dealing with these matters.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.


MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA:  I am standing to oppose the motion.  I appreciate it that all of us are concerned about accountability.  In fact when you read the mood in the country, the mood in the Parliament and the mood in many other organs of Government and in public, you can see that our society has advanced; more-or-less, we have reached a stage where nothing can be done within our society without it being questioned.  

THE SPEAKER: Were you moving a motion?  I thought you wanted to move a motion.

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA: I was trying to move an amendment in fact.  My amendment is not yet complete, but I am going to specify the lines along which it will move;  because it diverts a little bit from the lines that were advanced by many other Members of Parliament.  Those who have talked were talking along the lines of moving an amendment to have the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to investigate this matter.  But I tend to divert a little bit from that and I hope I will be given time to give the reasons for it.

My line is advanced in the direction of having an internal investigation within the Army.  Let Parliament give it time, a specified period within which a report should be given, and should Parliament not be satisfied with the report that would come out from within the Army, then certainly Parliament would have -(Interruptions).

THE SPEAKER: I thought the hon. Member is moving an amendment to the motion because we have a motion and now you are debating.  You see, you are generating more anxiety.  We reached a point where we wanted somebody to bring us to a conclusion of this matter, and I thought you stood up to do just that.  Otherwise, I will put the question.  

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA:  I would like to move an amendment that the Members of Parliament do hereby resolve to ask the Minister of State for Defence to institute a probe into the Ministry of Defence on military procurement specifically helicopters and tanks, and report to this House within 30 days.  Thereafter, should Parliament be dissatisfied with the probe report; that it tasks the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to give it the mandate to investigate and report to this House within 60 days.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you get the import of this amendment.  It means that first, you decide that an internal probe be set up.  After the internal probe's report comes here, you consider it.  If you are dissatisfied, then you pass it on to the Select Committee, then the Select Committee does its job.  Surely, is that what you would like to happen?  I think I should put the question.  

MR. ATUBO:  There are two motions on the Floor and it was duly seconded.  There was an amendment to the motion.  Now, on which one are you putting the question?  Because there are others who want the original motion.  

THE SPEAKER: According to what I have, there is one motion.  I now put the question that this Parliament, by resolution, sets up a Select Committee to probe allegations and reported cases of abuse and misuse of power and corruption in the military procurement, specifically purchase of helicopters, tanks, radars, missiles and other sophisticated weaponry by the Ministry of Defence, and report back within 45 days.

(Question put and negatived).

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have disposed of this motion, but now we go to the hon. Chairperson's motion - the adoption of the Report. I put the question that this House adopts the Report of the Sessional Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.  

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: The mood is that we call it a day, and therefore, I adjourn the House to 2 o'clock next Tuesday.  

(The House rose and adjourned to Tuesday 16th February, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.)
