Wednesday, 10 February 2010

Parliament met at 10.37 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you, but I want to impress it upon you that we have a lot of work to do - very important work - and some of the work concerns your interests because it concerns reforms of the electoral law in which I know many of you are involved. Therefore, I am appealing to you to sacrifice whatever time you have so that we handle this work, which is key to the elections for which many are preparing. 

I told you why we are sitting in the morning. We are sharing the facility with EALA. EALA is our guest. Therefore, we have to give convenience to them, especially when they sit in the afternoon. So, we decided to sit in the morning for these two weeks.

I appreciate that today is a Cabinet day, but my appeal should have been that perhaps you shift your Cabinet meeting time from morning to afternoon when we are not sitting so that ministers appear in the House.

I know that many committees are also in the field and that one of our colleagues, hon. Mulengani of the East African Legislative Assembly, lost a wife. But here you are; what do we do? Time is running against us. We committed ourselves last year to pass the electoral reforms a year in advance and elections will be next year; exactly end of February or beginning of March. Therefore, this is the time to handle those election laws. So, honourable members, I am appealing to you - you are here - I am appealing to others who are not here, so that they set time off and come to transact business.

I understand that Cabinet has a big commitment; a retreat somewhere with the President. We may not be able to call it off. So, again we shall lose tomorrow because if the cabinet is not here, we are not likely to do much. But time is running against us, honourable members. 

I thank those who were able to attend to His Excellency yesterday when he came to address the East African Legislative Assembly. This was our side; but considering that we are over 300, and the number I saw, I think there was a problem. I understand His Excellency the President of the Republic of Tanzania will next week, on Tuesday, come to address the East African Legislative Assembly and we are also invited to be part of the audience. So, also prepare to be in big numbers on that day. This is a head of state from another country and we should be here in big numbers. 

As for today, I do not know. We can proceed the way we do and see how we go. Maybe we can hear from the Leader of Government Business.

10.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I have been asked by the Prime Minister to stand in for him this morning because the Cabinet is busy deliberating just as much as we are going to be busy deliberating. I just want to assure this House that as Government, we have taken cognisance of your prayers and Cabinet next week will be in the afternoon so that in the morning we can transact Parliamentary business. We also wish to assure you that your concern is our concern. 

Tomorrow and Friday we have got a Cabinet retreat together with the permanent secretaries, to review the government performance, and the Prime Minister has asked me to apologise to you that we did not let you know this in advance. This is simply because there was miscommunication. We are committed to ensure that these laws which you are talking about are passed as soon as possible because we are big stakeholders in these laws which are coming. We can give assurance to this House that the government will do everything in its power to ensure that things move in accordance with the agreed timetable. Thank you.

10.44
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity. If you may recall, on 18 November 2007, the people of Bugangaizi petitioned this august House for help when they were being threatened with being dispossessed of their decade-long dwelling scheme that was looted by high profile individuals in the government. The Leader of Government Business appealed to the House to give him two months so that he can investigate the matter, take corrective action and then report back within two months. On 18 November 2008, I rose on a question, seeking to establish what happened because the report had never come out. The Leader of Government Business promised that if given one week he would come back with a report. 

Mr Speaker, it is now two and a half years since that petition by the people of Bugangaizi was made to this Parliament for help. The situation has become worse than before. I want to ask the Leader of Government Business to explain to this House what has happened as the situation has deteriorated. People are harassed, they are being dispossessed as before and they have nowhere to report. Even when they go to the Police, the officers at the local Police stations say they cannot take statements because the whole scheme involves high profile officials from the government.

We seek to understand what has happened. Why isn’t the report coming out on the floor of Parliament? Even the report which has failed to come out is being flagged out there in the villages that it contains nothing and it will not give a remedy to the people’s position. I want to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, Leader of Government Business, you have heard the Member for Bungangaizi complaining. She says two years ago she raised this issue of evictions and threats to people and no report has come out. It is on record that there was a promise made, but that promise has not been fulfilled. What do we do?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I want to thank my colleague, hon. Bakeine for raising this issue once again. I will handle this matter from two perspectives; one will be from the side of the government; and another will be from me as a Member of Parliament from that area, and the Minister of Internal Affairs.

The report was brought a long time ago. Because there were other reports such as the Mukama report - there were about three reports about events and politics in Kibaale and three reports were submitted to Cabinet. Cabinet is supposed to come and give a joint report on this matter. but I take note of hon. Bakeine’s concern and I will report to the Prime Minister that now the report should come to Parliament, and I promise that.

Secondly, as to the current events taking place, I will undertake myself, to come back to this Parliament because the information which I am getting from Police is not as alarming as the situation being presented by my colleague. I will bring a report to this House -(Interruption)

MS BAKEINE: Mr Speaker, I have individual testimonies of sampled people who have been going through the situations I have mentioned and I will lay it on table. When I hear the honourable minister saying that the situation is not alarming, it means he is trivialising the problems that my people continue to face. To him, they do not mean much, but these are individual cases of the recent record of the situation on the ground. 

If he is not aware and if his Police is not reporting properly, he should try to find out more about this because the situation is deteriorating and it is worse than it has ever been. Can I lay this on Table? Some of these individual cases are up there and they have come because they have been saying -

THE SPEAKER: What do you mean by up there?

[Hon. Member points to the Strangers’ gallery]

THE SPEAKER: Those are people from your constituency?

MS BAKEINE: Yes, and who are currently going through what I am saying, which the honourable minister is not aware of.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the honourable member who said that the minister is not aware of what is happening and the Police has not reported. I would like to know - because as she does her monitoring work, she could have reported to Police - if the minister is not aware, so that the information could have been deeper. Because, if it involves high profile people -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you have heard. According to her, it is high-ranking Government officials. Also, in her statement, she says they have reported to the Police but they have taken no action, and then she has introduced people there. This becomes serious. Can you lay that on Table and maybe give a copy to the minister.

MS BAKEINE: Mr Speaker, before I lay this document of the individual testimonies on Table, I want to make it clear to the honourable minister who was seeking clarification, that when you are too powerful for the common man on the ground, and too powerful in the government, these people will have no where to run to. We have exhausted all the avenues that I could go to. The institution of Police is aware; they are doing their work; I do not dispute that. But our condition remains worse and it deteriorates every day.

I was mandated to come here by the people of Bungangaizi whose affairs I represent today. I thank you and lay this on the Table.

10.54
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA: I just wanted to seek clarification from the minister who is now standing in for the Leader of Government Business. The question that my colleague has raised is in respect of only one aspect of land grabbing through leasing lands occupied by people, and consequent to that leasing, eviction. This was the question that my colleague raised in 2007. Can we have a specific timeframe within which we can get a report from Cabinet and if it is not there then maybe this Parliament should mandate itself and take a position on the matter?

10.55
MS ALICE ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is a concern about how Government has proceeded on this matter. This is something that was brought to the attention of Government in 2007 and has continued up to 2010 and there is no response. 

The question we should be putting to Government is, “Are you serious about helping the people of Bugangaizi sort out this question or not?” Even when my honourable colleague comes here to raise the matter the second or third time, is there no response; because they have not heard? Is that the reason why they are not acting, yet individuals are being displaced from their homes? They are being evicted; children are staying out of school; and they lack what to eat. Then we ask Government the second and third time; three years down the road, my question to Government is, “Are you serious about the people of Bugangaizi or is there another problem?” Why are you behaving like that? 

10.55
MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In December 2009, all field trips by members of parliament were suspended because of the important law that Parliament passed; the Land Amendment Bill.
 
The Land Amendment Bill was brought to this House ostensibly to address the issues of evictions. The honourable member for Bugangaizi brought to this House concerns about the land tenure system and sporadic evictions many years back before the Land Amendment Bill was brought here. Two months down the road, we thought that this Land Amendment Bill had already been assented to by His Excellency. Indeed, it was assented to because there was a very big function. 

I remember seeing on TV and reading in the newspapers a number of pensioners who had gone up to Rwakitura to witness the assent to the Land Amendment Bill by President Museveni. Therefore, if this Land Amendment Bill, which is already a law, was among other things aimed at addressing issues of rampant evictions, why has it started collecting dust on the law shelves so early? What is Government’s position? Is it selective application of the law? Today, you are calling others “Bafuruki” when you are also “Bafuruki” here in Parliament because we were not all born from here. Why is the law being applied selectively? I need an explanation from the Leader of Government business.
Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What I can say -

10.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING & URBAN DEV’T (Hon. Werikhe Kafabusa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true the Bill was assented to by His Excellency, the President. The statutory instrument to operationalise the law was signed last week. So, the law is supposed to be in place now, not so many weeks or months ago. (Interjections)

It is a law but it has not yet –(Interjections)- what we are talking about, is many years ago. The law is now in place and we are going to apply it. The law –(Interjections)- does not select particular individuals and leave out others; it is equitably applied. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, apart from the law you are talking about; from the information given, it appears that it is causing instability. Checking on instability has nothing to do with whether the law was passed, assented to or not. It requires a different way of handling. The matter was reported two years ago as has been said and it is in our interest - all of us as Ugandans; as local people and as the honourable minister will say, from the same district - that this matter is handled now. 

I have guests here whom I did not know. They came over the same matter. They travelled all the way to see what we shall do with their case. There should be a timeframe within which this matter should be finalised because it was first raised in the House two years ago. Even the report was discussed by Cabinet. Let it come here so that we combine wisdom of the Executive and that of Parliament to solve this matter without further delay. I appeal to you - honourable minister, honourable members and members of the Cabinet should do this so that the latest we can have the report is next week. It is urgent. We do not have where to accommodate these people who have come here.

11.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Hon. Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I promise to urge the Prime Minister next week - because as I told you, the report is ready – I think we will come with this report next week and table it before Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR KASAIJA: Since hon. Bakeine spoke what I intended to say when she said that information about current events - I also promise that my ministry will go on the ground with the Police and the leaders and come up with a report. We also promise that we will be able - I will ask for at least two weeks. I cannot promise you that I will be able to deliver next week. We shall bring this report before this Parliament two weeks from today if that is the consent of this House. Thank you

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but do you have an interim measure?  Do you wait to relocate when these people are in a stampede? As a Minister of Internal Affairs, do something so that these people are not caught up in a stampede.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you for that, Mr Speaker. I want to assure this House again; the people of Bugangaizi who are up in the gallery; and my colleague; that as Police, we are doing everything possible to make sure the law is not broken. The people could be having conflicts over land, but we shall not allow people to take the law into their hands. If there are loopholes, I am very willing to receive those loopholes, if the people of Bugangaizi feel that the State is not protecting them sufficiently, until the problems are sorted out. I wish to give that information, before I take appropriate action using my office.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.03
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, District Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. There is massive recruitment of our people who are being prepared to go and offer a service outside this country. I live along Entebbe road and for the last three years, I have been travelling morning and evening but when I reach Kajjansi, there is a point I see crowds at some premises every morning. It is a training place for young girls and boys to go to Iraq and elsewhere to offer security services. 

However, it is not the only place because I am aware of Kigo, and I am also told that one time there was training at Namboole Stadium. I am also aware that there is a training ground along Gayaza Road, among many others, which I may not know. 

My concern is that these Ugandans are being trained to go outside our country but the circumstances under which they get recruited and how they travel outside the country to offer security services is the issue which has prompted me to ask Government the following questions: “Are they aware that a lot of money is being extracted from them – over Shs 500,000 - before they are seconded for that training?” Can they furnish this House with names of the recruiting firms and their procedure of recruitment? 

I am sure that we have a lot of unemployment and, therefore, it should not be that we give away our Ugandans to be mishandled. Please, furnish this House with the criteria used in their recruitment. 

Sadly, you find that even those who have managed to raise that money and got trained, they do not have the guarantee that they are going to go to Iraq and earn the dollar. I have two of my staff: one was trained six months ago but has not been able to go there and yet over Shs 500,000 has been extracted from this person. The second one is my driver. This is becoming a trend in the country and yet as Parliament and as people’s representatives, we are not furnished with the full information to that effect. 

The training and sending of our security personnel abroad started with even offering our national Army to offer services. I recently saw on television that even the Police are being offered to go and offer services outside the country. My people of Kitgum who are going back to their villages are yearning to see the presence of the Police to keep law and order – we have not felt the presence of the Police where we need them and yet we are ready to offer them across the border!

Lastly, I want the government to come up and assure us and the country at large that our Ugandans who are outside this country have knowledge of our embassies abroad because we do not know what happens to them. We do not get to know how they are being treated; women are being turned into sex objects and the security people do not even get the money they were told they would get. 

What guarantee do we give our Ugandans? Are we leaving our Ugandans to be mishandled by unknown security firms that are looming all over? Through you, Mr Speaker, I want this House to be given full information about that and we give guarantees to our Ugandans. Despite the unemployment we have here; we do not have to throw Ugandans to the dogs so that they are mistreated outside this country. I thank you.

11.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): This is the third time that this issue of Ugandans being recruited to go and serve as security guards in Iraq, Iran or wherever the case may be. The government answer has been and will be that whereas we agree that as a state we should not allow people to be exploited - that I agree entirely on - the question of recruitment is voluntary. If these people are being forced into service, then we would like to get that information and we take appropriate action. 

But if I am a businessman and I want to recruit, I will advertise and people come. Mr Speaker, I would like to be guided by this House on how I would react to this –(Interruption)  
             
MS ANYWAR: The minister and the Leader of Government Business is here to respond to the concerns of Ugandans. It is the duty of the state to ensure that its people and property are well catered for. The minister is the one in charge of what the outcry is and instead of him answering how the government has ensured that Ugandans are not exploited, he is going on the defensive by saying that it is voluntary. Is he saying that once somebody voluntarily wants to be employed because of the inefficiencies of creating unemployment in the country, it is not the duty of the state to ensure that such a person is not exploited? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Let us not expand this matter. Hon. Minister, I think the concern was that in the process, people are conned of their money and in desperation, they borrow money and pay to be recruited. They pay the money but then they never go out to earn the dollars they expect. 

Is it not a government concern that they should investigate this? Young men and women are being exploited because of desperation and the little money they have is taken from them, and yet they do not have returns because after all they are not taken or if taken, they are not properly paid. Isn’t this the responsibility of Government to stop this kind of practice that robs young men and women of their very small money on the promise that they are going to be taken to earn dollars? I think that is the concern. 

MS AKIROR: I would like to give the Leader of Government Business further information. I am also willing to provide him with some evidence. About two years ago my cousin came to me very desperate over an opportunity to go and work in Iraq and he needed about Shs 600,000 for training, which I gave him. He had to go through very strenuous training and at the end of the day, he was taken nowhere and yet those people are registered – the firm is along Entebbe Road. 

I will give the honourable minister all the details because all the receipts are there and up today the boy has gone nowhere. At times some of these businessmen are actually conmen because many people are conned. 

There is another gentleman - a former policeman - who was trained and after going through a strenuous exercise, he was not taken anywhere and he got so depressed about it. We know all this information, Leader of Government Business, and we can avail it to you and see how you clamp down on some of these irresponsible citizens. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: And honourable minister, you have said that this matter has come up many times. Therefore, it means that although it has come up several times, a solution has not been found. Isn’t it in the interests of government that you really find a lasting solution so that this matter does not come up again? 

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually I do not seek information but clarification. I would like to take this matter seriously because fortunately enough, it is being handled by the responsible agent – the Minister of Internal Affairs – and you are now in acting capacity; so you have more powers. The Ministry of Internal Affairs is responsible for non-governmental organisations. Therefore, I want to find out from the minister the number of organisations registered in your office to do this type of work. Are these people who are recruiting others legal entities? 

Secondly, I would like to remind the House that we have had a big problem with microfinance institutions that have been extracting money from the public and this seems to be the same case. What is the Ministry of Internal Affairs doing? Put your heart away from the capacity of Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and act as the Minister of Internal Affairs; what have you done as far as this issue is concerned? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But let us not expand this issue. I think we should concentrate on the recruitment of Ugandans to go work in Iraq. I think your issue of the microfinance institutions collecting money from people came up sometime, but let us deal with the issue of human resources. Let him answer. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Two months ago a young man aged 22 came to my office and reported a case that involved an Indian company called Seyani Brothers, which operates in Kampala here as a security company. The young boy was dismissed because he fell sick and did not report for work for two days. 

When he went back to claim his job and to also get his salaries, he was then dismissed from his job. When he asked the company to just pay him his salary and maybe additionally justify why they had dismissed him, these people chased him away. The boy was very desperate in Kampala; he was crying all around as he had nothing at home. Unfortunately, besides the last pay, he had also not been paid his full salary for the past six months and so the boy had been waiting for full payment of his salary and these people refused to give him even a coin. 

I did call the Director of Seyani Brothers – some Indian whose name I have forgotten – and this gentleman was very hostile and he asked me to go to his office. I told him that I am a Member of Parliament and that I do supervise him in this country and I could not go to his office. I asked him to come to my office so that we could discuss this matter. He refused. So the point I am stressing here is that there are number of these companies in the country that are totally exploiting our young people and they brutally handle them. A case in point is in Lira town where I physically saw an Indian beat up two of his staff. This one was reported to the Police, he was arrested and fined. 

But generally in the whole country, these companies recruit these young men; they do not pay them and they dismiss them at will and at times they even grab their documents -(Interjections)- that is the truth! They grab their documents and do not return them. I think this situation is not just a matter of raising an issue of national importance but it is a matter of looking at how we can handle it as government because we cannot let it go on like that. 

Mr Speaker, I plead with you and I also beg that you do plead with government. I plead with you that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes with a clear report on this particular matter and a clear mechanism of how they are going to control the exploitation of young people in this country that are being exploited everywhere by these companies. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of Government Business, I see that these are cross-cutting issues and I think the best solution would be that you convene a meeting involving the ministry in charge of youths and labour, and yourself and look into all these matters, and the report that you will make will be comprehensive to satisfy all the grievances that have been expressed. But it is a serious matter in that in desperation, people are losing their money, their hope and so forth. Give us the report so that as Parliament, we can work with you so that this matter is resolved. How long will it take you?

11.21 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, thank you very much. The good thing is that there is a law applicable to all these issues that have been raised. I think the main problem that I realise is the lack of information on the part of the victims. For example, if we take the exorbitant fees that hon. Beatrice Anywar talked about, if you cheat me and do not pay my wages, there is a law that protects me. 

So, while I entirely agree with you that we need to sit as a ministerial committee to look at all these respects, in the meantime, there should be the following measures:

1. It is a crime to defraud. If anybody is defrauded, report to the Police. I agree –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, can I be protected so that I finish?

THE SPEAKER: Let us finish this matter.

MR KASAIJA: I agree with your proposal but I think our people are being exploited and they are not taking advantage of the law on their side. We shall bring the report, but in the meantime, my prayer is that we as leaders; let us be leaders. Let us inform the victims of what is available to them and this is what I was trying to labour with -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us conclude this.

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, from the first response the honourable minister here told us - actually insinuated - that he permits anybody who has interests in recruiting Ugandans to do so, and now he is telling us that there is a law. Would he specify which law that ordinary Ugandans not Members of Parliament will have to make use of?

Secondly, his first response which supports the fact that everybody who wants to recruit should recruit. Does it also mean that employment in this country should be bought because hon. Anywar said some Ugandans are paying Shs 500,000 prior to getting recruited to be trained? Is this also permitted?

11.23
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before the honourable minister comes to answer those issues that have been raised, there is a particular issue which I think is getting off track, or which we may not be able to recall. It is the issue of the police. I know there is no succinct constitutional provision providing for deployment of our police force outside our boundaries. 

This week, I watched a TV programme where the Danish Ambassador together with I think the Dutch Ambassador were waving off a team of Uganda Police to go for a peacekeeping mission in Darfur. It seems Uganda is now specialised in the whole of Africa, in sending troops and Police for peacekeeping missions as if Uganda is the only country in Africa; there are 53 countries in Africa. What is the provision? Should we just allow our police officers leave this country even without Parliament getting to be informed whether there  is a constitutional provision or not? 

At the end of the day, when these people go to Darfur, a hostile part of Sudan, their safety is still of concern to us as a country. We have invested heavily in training these police officers and here is a situation where they are just being given out to go on kyeyo as it were that; “You just go, we have had experience, 25 years down the road, we are the only stable country, we are the people who have the manpower to go and bring sanity to Darfur”. Can the honourable minister give us an explanation? 

Of late, we have been talking about a lot of heinous crimes being committed in this country as a result of lack of adequate policing but here is a situation where we are becoming so generous to other African countries to say, “We can have this given to you even if our own country needs these services”.

What are we trying to achieve that we feed starving children in the neighbourhood when ours are going without a meal? Can the honourable minister give us an explanation under what arrangement and for how long these police officers are going to be in Darfur? Should anything happen to them, how will government account to this country, the parents and the relatives of these police officers? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us conclude this matter.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker [MS ATIM: “You are dodging it”] No, I am not dodging it, I am answering it. He has asked a very pertinent and good question.

On the question of deployment of Uganda Police Force personnel on peacekeeping missions: One, we are a signatory to a treaty of the UN that all members of UN when approached to provide personnel, will do so if they are capable of doing so.

I am glad to say that all personnel of the Uganda Police that have been sent out either as individuals to these missions have excelled, that is why the demand for our personnel here is so high. In fact, in my view, this is a very good compliment to this country and to the Uganda Police.

As to our own local needs, we are also very cognisant of that. We just do not send anybody anyhow; these are specialised people who go for a specific term. For example, yesterday we received equipment from the Canadian and Netherlands ambassadors that will accompany a contingent for six months in Darfur to help our brothers and sisters to stabilise. As management of Police we are not leaving gaps; those gaps that these individuals are leaving are being filled. We are continually training; we are continually deploying to ensure that the security of Uganda, first and foremost, is taken care of.

We have that obligation also that if our neighbours are yearning for peace and they have no capacity, they share with us. You remember Southern Sudan which hitherto was in turmoil is stabilising, the volume of business we are doing with them now. You had our President yesterday specifically say that now the demand for our goods and services in Uganda is expanding day and day because of the stability of our neighbours. It is in that spirit that we are doing this. We have an obligation under the UN to contribute as and when we wish. 

How long they are away; it is six months. They will be back within six months and if there is still need, then we can look for another contingent that can go.

THE SPEAKER: We end this matter and the Leader of Government Business will have a small committee of ministers of labour and youth to deal with the matter that was raised by hon. Anywar on the recruitment of people to go to Darfur.

Hon. Minister, we expect a statement from you when we meet again about the uniform of our Police. This is a statement, which was promised but other things intervened and we could not make it. I asked you how long it is going to take you because we want to conclude this matter which has been outstanding of Bugangaizi; it has been outstanding for two years, we do not want it to go on for two years. I asked you for a timeframe; you did not give me the time.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I will repeat myself, I thought I had made myself clear. The report will be ready next week, Sir.  Then as to what is happening currently in Bugangaizi, I have asked for two weeks; that means I will come with fully investigated details of what is happening in Bugangaizi the other week. 

On the statement of the Uganda Police, I was even ready this morning but I came in here under ambush because I was supposed to be in Cabinet; the statement is ready. So, I promise that one also [MR WADRI: “Tomorrow”.] No, next week; I will come with the statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010 BUDGET

11. 31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I beg to lay on the Table Supplementary Schedule No.1 for financial year 2009/10. I also beg to lay two addenda; Addendum No. 1 and No.2 to the supplementary schedule No.1. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the appropriate committee take up the document, study it and report back promptly for the necessary action. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2004

11.33
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Johnson Mallinga):  Mr Speaker, I present before this House the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor General on the Public Accounts of District Local Governments for the Financial Year 2003/04. 

Sir, this report was laid on the Table late last year and I believe that the office of the Clerk has distributed copies of this report. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean to say that the Members have copies of this report?

MR MALLINGA: Yes, Sir. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you formally present it.

MR MALLINGA: This report is presented in two parts. We have an executive summary and the details of the individual districts. And I am going to present to you a summary of which details I expect the Members to have read through and be able to respond according to the details that they have read. 

The report of LGAC is presented in accordance with Article 190 of the Constitution and rules 133 and 155 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. This report covers the Financial Year 2003/04.

The committee received and examined the Auditor-General’s reports on local governments submitted under Article 163(4) of the Constitution together with the reports of the District Public Accounts Committees as laid before Parliament under Section 89(7) of the Local Government Accounts.

Technical officers from the Auditor-General’s office, the Ministry of Local Government, consultants and CID (PAC) squad assisted the committee in handling this report. 

In examining the accounts, the committee interfaced with the accounting officers and their technical teams to respond to the queries raised in the audit reports and the recommendations of the DPACs. 

The committee expresses appreciation to the office of the Auditor-General who was represented at all times of the meeting and assisted in interpreting and explaining the queries raised where necessary and verification of documents. And also the CID who diligently handled the assigned duties during the course of the meetings; and some accounting officers who were organised and responded well, hence, saving the time of the interactions. 

I would also like to thank Members who have been sitting from Monday to Friday, including during recess, in order to reach this stage of clearing the financial years of the district responses. 

General Observations and Recommendations

As a matter of concern, nearly all the accounting officers who appeared before the committee were less than five months old at their new stations. The ministry had just reshuffled the accounting officers, which affected their responsibility though they are supposed to inherit the assets and liabilities of their offices.

It was reported that some accounting officers refused to cooperate with incoming ones and hence the committee’s decision to hold the accounting officer who generated the query to make good the loss where necessary. 

On the onset, the committee recognises that the number of queries have been going down from 2000 to 2005. This case is yet to be known but on the general trend, districts have employed competent people especially in finance. 

The following were some of the most common audit queries that contributed to the poor financial management and in some cases loss of funds:

Compliance with Accounting Regulations

The committee noted that the accountability regulations are not adhered to in most cases. Accountabilities are not submitted in time and they spurn into other financial years. This is a major weakness of the accounting officers and their chief financial officers. 

Personal advances should be recovered in time and the official ones should be accounted for within three months as stipulated in the regulations. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that financial regulations should strictly be adhered to and in case of any deviation, the chief financial officers will be personally held liable. 

Accountability of official allowances should not be allowed after the officially stipulated three months of the accounting period, but recovery should be instituted on the earnings of the officer. 

Public officers do not receive new advances before retiring or accounting for the old ones. 

The committee recommends regular sensitisation of the accounting officers and other financial managers of the regulations in order to minimise the abuse and misuse, which in some instances is due to lack of requisite knowledge.  

Embezzlement of Public Funds

The committee observed that there are some cases of outright theft of funds by officers and even when some cases are reported to Police, the prosecution and witnesses are not always there to defend the case. The end product is that culprits are released and government funds are lost. 

The committee recommends that in such instances, the state attorneys in the districts should be brought on board to handle the matter and the district officials should appear as witnesses. 

Administrative and Personal Advances

This is the most abused financial regulation as evidenced from the growing queries on this particular item. Official regulations require advances to be retired within three months and that the committee observes that advances remain unaccounted for by the end of the accounting period. Subsequently these advances are sometimes irregularly written off as bad debts without following requisite procedures or some staff members have died without accounting for their advances in the stipulated time. The situation is further compounded by the lack of appropriate documents and advance ledgers in most cases are not properly maintained which makes follow up impossible.

From the districts reviewed, the total sum of over Shs 4,024,214,827 remained outstanding at the end of the year both as administrative and personal advances un-recovered. The committee noted that Shs 827,268,067 was recovered during the year and recommends recovery of the outstanding Shs 2,687,786,550 from the concerned officials or the accounting officers.

The balance was either accounted for properly or proposed for write off. 

Non-remission of Statutory Deductions 
A total sum of approximately Shs 775 million was not remitted to the respective authorities especially URA and the National Social Security Fund. Out of this amount Shs 37,760,000 was recovered and the committee recommends recovery of Shs 169,768,438. The other balance was cleared by the committee after examining revenue receipts that were submitted. The committee however noted that the remittances and deductions to NSSF were stopped in 1996. The committee tried to get the status of URA obligations from URA and still awaits the response.

A number of accounting officers presented authentic URA receipts to the effect of clearing and also claimed that the evidence was available at the time of audit but the auditors had still raised this as a query.

Some districts have entered arrangements with URA to make partial payments at the agreed sequences, which is agreeable to the committee. The committee recommends that since these are deductions not meant for the district, they should be remitted as soon as they are collected. The committee also recommends that the contractors who do not meet their obligations in remitting tax obligations like value added tax should be blacklisted and made to pay any arrears.

Unauthorised Transfer of Funds

It was noted that the practice of this illegal transfer is common in many districts and the victims are usually the conditional funds, mostly UPE. In most cases, the transfers are urgent administrative undertakings including allowances to councillors. The committee noted that this practice affects the programmes in the districts and the transfers are done without any authority. To make it worse, there are no activity reports for the diversions and to show the urgency.

To us, this is a dangerous precedent because it breeds corruption and promotes poor planning and prioritisation in financial management.

The committee recommends that this practice should be stopped and disciplinary action be instituted to the perpetuators of the practice.

Irregular Procurement Process

There were numerous cases of influence peddling, collusions and conflict of interest in the management of procurement. The bidding process was flouted in many areas especially of maintenance and construction sectors. It was also noted that there were many cases of goods not taken to charge. This means that the purchases were made but not delivered since there were no reports or stores records and in some cases, no stores at all in the district. The excuse of lack of personnel to manage the stores was a lame one because at least the usage should have been documented. The committee, therefore, strongly recommends the improvements in stores recording, adherence to PPDA and other regulations thereof.

Capacity and Competence of Some Local Government Staff

The committee noted with concern that most districts do not have adequate staff which excuse is given for mismanagement. It also noted that government and the local authorities have tried to train some staff, which was evidenced with quite a number of staff being on trained especially in the accounts sections.

Some districts reported segregation in recruitment where some district councils want only the locals to be recruited as personnel and yet they do not have qualified people to recruit. Districts like Kotido and Nakapiripirit have nearly all staff in acting capacity. They are qualified but not confirmed into the posts.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service should urgently work together to fill the posts in the districts with competent and professional staff.

Unauthorised Expenditure

The total amount queried by the Auditor-General is approximately Shs 31,741,615,317 and no funds were recovered during that financial year. The amount recommended for recovery is Shs 1,972,723,049. 

Members noted that this may be a deliberate move by accounting officers to carry out unplanned activities to meet their own interests. We also noted that the funds are spent in billions without authority. There are no activity reports usually and accountability at the time of audit is usually not available, which raises concerns. This is compounded by the fact that council sometimes approves supplementary budgets without due considerations of what was done before.

The committee recommends that authority should always be sought before public funds are committed for transfer and that accountability should always be provided. Any accounting officer who violates this provision should be disciplined.

Poor Revenue Performance

The committee noted that most districts did not realise their budgets. This was attributed to poor budgeting, which failed to consider issues like epidemics such as the Foot and Mouth Diseases, insurgency in some parts of the country, poor releases from the centre and donors, and worst of all, the pressure from the respective councilors to budget high in order to get a higher 20 percent for their allowances.

The committee recommends that professionalism in budgeting be upheld with all district departments being involved. It is further recommended that allowances for councilors be a function of what has been realised in implementing the budget and not on budgeted figures.

As an advisor, the council should scrutinise the activity reports before approving excess expenditures and revise budgets because this is a source of abuse of public resources.

District Public Accounts Committee Sittings (DPACS)

The committee noted that in most of the districts, the DPACS never sit for a whole financial year. This is irregular because it renders the whole accountability at the local levels porous. It is surprising this happens yet there is a budget for DPACS meetings.

The committee recommends that DPACS that draw allowances without sitting refund such funds and the accounting officers report such matters to the councils.

Board of Survey Reports

Whereas part XV of the Local Government Financial Accounting Regulations requires the appointment of boards of survey at the end of every financial year, this practice still lacks despite the earlier recommendation to that effect.

Districts that do not put in place boards of survey should be penalised for incompetence and the accounting officers specifically warned.

I beg to report and request the august House to adopt this report with the recommendations therein.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you, chairman and committee members for that report and the presentation you have made today. 

Hon. Members, the debate on this report is now open, that is if you are prepared to do so. 

11.52
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am inclined to request that we debate this report next week. This will allow us time to study it, the chairman of the committee having just presented its summary now. I just picked my copy from the pigeon hall a few minutes ago. I, like most Members, have not had the opportunity to study this report. If we could debate it next week, it would be much better.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, is that the consensus, hon. Members? Okay, we shall proceed with debate on this report next week when we reconvene. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2004/2005

THE SPEAKER: I think it is good for us to clear this one – or should we receive the presentation? Let us receive the presentation.

11.53
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Johnson Malinga): Mr Speaker, the issues that have been raised in the report of the Auditor-General on the public accounts in respect of district local governments for the Financial Year 2004/2005 are almost the same like the ones that were raised in the previous report except for differences in the amount of money.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, what you can do with your executive summary is to indicate the differences by pointing out paragraphs that contain such. You do not have to present it page by page; just point out the differences. We can then receive it for Members to study both of them; we should be able to dispose of both reports in a very short time.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, allow me to again present to you the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee –

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have been advised by the clerk that the copies for that particular report are not yet ready –(Interjections)- if the copies have been availed, then you can go on to present it.

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hereby present to you the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the Public Accounts of District Local Governments for the Financial Year 2004/2005. 

As pointed out earlier, most issues remained outstanding except for a few figures that I would like to point out now.

On page 7 of our report the committee observed that from the districts reviewed, a total sum of Shs 4,636,057,947 remained outstanding by the end of the year, both as administrative and personal advances un-recovered.

The committee noted that Shs 890,206,790 was recovered during the year and recommends recovery of Shs 2,810,805,844 from the concerned officials and/or the accounting officers. The balance was either unaccounted for or they had proposed to have it written off. 

Section 163; the last paragraph, a total sum of approximately Shs 2,213,665,061 is reflected in this report as expenditure with either un-vouched or incomplete vouching. Out of this amount, Shs 156,235,000 was recovered and the committee recommends recovering of Shs 530,064,108 having accepted the explanation and the documentary evidence of the balance. 

We get down to section 169 – unauthorised expenditure. The total amount queried by the Auditor-General is approximately Shs 12,804,715,776 and the mount reportedly recovered is approximately Shs 1 billion. The amount recommended for recovery is approximately Shs 7,829,331,670. 

The committee recommends that authority should always be sought before public funds are committed for transfer. Any accounting officer who violates the provision should be held personally responsible. 

These are the only variations; I beg to report and request this august House to adopt the report and recommendations therein. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairman and members of the committee for the report. Hon. Members, this report has now been formally presented, but we have not been able to debate the first one. I appeal to you that during this break and over the weekend, you study the two reports and you decide on which report you want to contribute on. That means we will have ten people contributing on the first report and then ten people contributing on the other. Then within a short time, we will adopt the reports or adjust them as we deem fit. Otherwise, I thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a concern about questions that I raised over a year ago to the Ministry of Education and up to now I do not see them on the Order Paper. 

I am particularly concerned because my question had something to do with the performance of our schools in the rural areas. And as you notice, the PLE results and the UCE results came out and the rural schools did terrible poorly. I had wanted the hon. Minister of Education to come to this House and explain to us the strategies government is putting in place to ensure that the rural schools are facilitated to perform as well their counterparts in the urban areas. 

Unfortunately, that question has never had the opportunity to be put on the Order Paper and the situation seems to be getting worse. Mr Speaker, I need your help to ensure that I get the answer or at least that I get another opportunity –

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the answer will be very relevant at this time when the results for the various grades – primary, O’ Level and maybe A’ Level are being released. So the Clerk is directed to remind the minister and if he/she has misplaced the question, he should send him/her a copy so that it is answered within one or two weeks. 

MR STEPHEN KASAIJA: Mine is related to that one. A number of schools have lost their results and it is a concern because parents are paying school fees – even for UPE schools. They put in an effort and at the end of the day the results are cancelled and there is no sufficient explanation given. 

That is a concern all over the country and it was raised some time last year. These students come and sit exams – I would say innocently because UNEB has invigilators and scouts, and we have not seen people going to prison for poisoning these children. If an adult gives them answers, they are not to blame; that is the concern of UNEB, the head teachers and the other relevant authorities. These people cancel the exams and the child has to repeat the exams or go to the village. You can see the problems the parents and children are going through and nobody seems to be concerned. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, your concern is taken. Maybe when the minister is answering hon. Alaso’s question this will also come up. But what I have noted about those results which were not released is that it was not for the entire school this time. You find that there are certain candidates whose results are cancelled; I do not know why they were cancelled, but maybe they have their reasons. We shall find out from the Minister. 

But the other day somebody was giving me an example where examiners were marking and they came to say, No. 5 and apparently, the candidates must have been assisted. He said that when they came to a particular question, because it was too easy, the person who was assisting them told them, “Do it yourself”, and the pupils thought the answer was “Do it yourself”. So all of them wrote “Do it yourself” as the answer and that is how they caught them that they had been assisted. (Laughter)

But I think there have been improvements – it is not for entire schools, but they picked out a few students where they thought that there was copying. But the minister is in a better position to tell us what happened. And also, I think the parents of the concerned students can call upon the management of the respective schools to explain what happened. I think you are entitled to know why your daughter’s or son’s results were cancelled. I think they have a way of detecting exam malpractices and the minister will help us on this. 

12.05
MR JOHN ODIT (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Mr Speaker, two years ago we had a very serious debate following an attempt by the Minister of Agriculture to introduce some new technology in this country under what they call BT cotton. The debate was suspended because we wanted a policy and probably a Bill brought here to support bio technology in the country. The President supported the idea that if GM products were coming in for consumption, there would be no problem but that if they were planting materials, then some regulations needed to be put in place.

Last week we saw at Serere Agriculture Research Institute, local farmers being exposed to BT cotton, which had already been planted. We do not know whether the technology will be released to the farmers this year or next year. We would therefore also like the Minister of Agriculture to brief Parliament on the status of this new technology which is coming in the country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think that if you have a specific question, you raise it and we take it to the Clerk so that we can send it to the minister to make an appropriate answer?

MR ODIT: I will do that, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Make it today or tomorrow so that it is sent to the minister.

12.07
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you. I also have a concern regarding the time we take to have reports. A case in point is the report on the select committee on the pastoralists. This committee was instituted in 2007 and up to now we have not heard from the committee. We have not got anything and yet this still remains a big problem in this country. 

Now that we are going towards elections, can we have this at least early this year such that we remain clear headed – no pledges or this and that as we go towards elections? Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: You will excuse me; I do not remember who the chairperson was. I have been advised that in my absence this matter was raised and by the end of this month we should expect that report to be considered but I would like to know the chairperson of this committee. I will take it up with the chairperson. I now know who the chairperson was. 

12.09
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to repeat my concern regarding the number of road blocks on Masaka-Kampala Road. There are very many police road blocks and I do not know their purpose.

Last night I drove up to Kyengera and there is always a permanent road block there. You cannot know whether you are supposed to stop or not but we just pass there. The policemen are sometimes there and they may be drinking a soda or talking amongst themselves or talking on phone but we do not know when we should stop at the road block.

Sometimes you may be driving at a very high speed and from nowhere you find a road block ahead of you. There are no warning signs to alert you of anything. The signposts used at these road blocks are very faint. Mr Speaker, I am sorry to refer to you, but I think we use the same road -(Laughter)- most of the road block signs are very faint. You cannot know whether it is the stone or piece of wood on the road that is alerting you to stop. I want to beg the ministry to repaint these wooden signs that they use so that motorists can see these signs clearly. The signs that are used are placed on stones and sometimes you cannot tell in advance that this is a road block.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, if you do not mind please give me a minute to complete. 

THE SPEAKER: I think your point is taken. But you cannot ask the minister to explain why the road blocks are put up because this is a security matter. The police have their reasons for setting up a road block. Your concern should be that when they put up a road block, the signs should be visible but they cannot tell you why they have set up a road block.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you. I am not seeking for that information but my concern is that there is no warning of a road block. The road block signs that they use are very poor and sometimes you might be speeding and from nowhere you see a stone ahead - a sign that it is a roadblock. Let us use the right kind of signs to warn people that there is a road block ahead. And sometimes you might not know whether you should stop or drive past the road block. 

I beg you; please assist us who ply the Masaka-Kampala Road because there are very many road blocks on this road. I beg you to treat this road like other roads. Thank you. 

12.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I will not repeat what you said in as far as the placing of road blocks is concerned, because that is a security matter. Through our intelligence system, we may learn that wrongdoers are going in that direction and then we put roadblocks. However, with regard to the signs being clear, I think I get that message very clearly. I will instruct the Police that when they put a roadblock, they should ensure that the roadblock is seen so that people do not pass it. 

Equally, there are some roadblocks which I have also disagreed about and I have told the Police. This business of a roadblock being in the same place every night makes the whole thing lose meaning. Actually, the Police are under my instructions that these roadblocks are either removed or should be improved, so that wrongdoers do not know that at Kyengera, for example, there is always a roadblock at a certain time and, therefore, pass through another panya route to avoid the roadblock. 

Sir, I have taken her complaint on the question of signs and we shall rectify it. 

I am also assuring this House that roadblocks will not be a routine matter. Why are there so many roadblocks on Masaka Road? There are two reasons currently. One is the rate of accidents on that road -(Interjections)- Yes, the rate of accidents on that road. Lately, we have lost lots of lives on that road. So, one reason why those roadblocks are there is to ensure that people are controlled as far as speed is concerned. Two, there has also been a lot of robbery along that road. As soon as the security situation normalises, I want to inform this House that these roadblocks will be removed. 

I will take the message on the visibility of the road signs. Thank you.

12.14
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Mr Speaker, because of that confusion my colleague has just mentioned, people have been robbed on Mityana-Fort Portal Road for the last two months, day in, day out. Police has not taken it as a serious concern despite the fact that we have been reporting for two months; from December up to now. We report but nothing is being taken seriously – (Interjections)- Mainly from Kyenjojo to Fort Portal. Thank you.

12.15
MR YOWASI BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Two years ago, there was a problem of resettling the Basongora pastoralists in Kasese. Government leased land from Mubuku Prison Farm, Ibuga Prison Farm and Ibuga Refugee Settlement Scheme, and some pieces of land were given to these pastoralists. What we wanted to know is whether they were given to them for temporary settlement or permanent settlement, because these pieces of land still have land titles with Uganda Prisons and then refugee. What the people want is to have this land fully degazetted so that it is owned by these pastoralists. That is one.

Two, the ministerial committee that was appointed by the President to handle this problem of settlement went to Bukonzo East and put a political injunction on about 200 acres of land. I am calling it “a political injunction” because the decision to put an injunction was made at a political meeting and it was not regularised in the courts of law. Since that decision was taken, that 150 acres of precious land has neither been used by the cattle keepers nor the cultivators. Hon. Matia Kasaija knows this because he was in that meeting and he was among the people who took that decision that, that land should not be used by either cattle keepers or cultivators for two complete years because there is a dispute. Those are four seasons and that land has not been used. The people who used to cultivate on it are now suffering and do not have any other source of livelihood. 

I request that this committee takes a full decision and degazettes this land which was given to the cattle keepers so that they own it. Right now they are squatters on prisons’ land since it has not been degazetted and given to them. Two, I request that that political injunction be lifted from that piece of land that has been lying idle for the last two years.

12.18
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to raise an issue about the health conditions in my district. I am glad the minister in charge of primary health care is around. 

I want to ask whether the minister is aware that there are only two doctors for Pader District and yet the population of the district is over 500,000. One of these two doctors is also the District Health Director. That would, therefore, mean that we have only one practical doctor in the whole district for that population. To be specific, this doctor is in charge of Pajule health sub-district which is in Aruu County. The general health conditions at the health centre IV are really pathetic. 

Specifically, I want to bring it to his attention, if he did not know, that there is a skeletal building which is being called a theatre in that health sub-district. It does not have any equipment. It has been there for so many years, about four or five years, and we have been raising this issue with the ministry, but nothing has been done about the theatre. 

All this is happening and yet the maternal health condition of that health sub-district is worsening.  Women have to carry their paraffin candles in case they are supposed to deliver at night. There is no antenatal unit in that health sub-district. It is a health centre IV and I find this very funny. I wonder whether it happens in other health sub-districts in the country. I wonder why a health centre IV does not have an antenatal section or something to care for the women who want to deliver in a health centre IV. A pregnant woman coming for antenatal care has to line up with the rest of the patients in the out-patient department and there is no privacy at all. This has discouraged women from going to deliver and going for antenatal care in this health sub-district. 

Emergency care is also not provided at all since they have only one ambulance which is not fuelled. In case a woman is brought to the health centre, she is supposed to provide something like Shs 40,000 before she can be taken to Kitgum Hospital for emergency care. Recently, we lost a woman because there was no fuel in the ambulance and this woman was put on a Tipper lorry to go and deliver in Kitgum Hospital. She died on the way. So, this is actually the maternal health condition in this sub-district. I want to request the minister to say something on this. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you give us a report in one week’s time about the state of health service in Pader District.

12.23
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you have directed the minister to give information about the state of health facilities in Pader District, I would also like to draw the attention of the minister to a presidential directive, which was issued and widely publicised in the papers. The directive was that in no medical unit in this country should medical personnel use exercise books for clerking patients.

I do not know whether there are arrangements in place by the relevant ministry to ensure that medical forms 5 are available in all health units so that patients do not go with exercise books in self-help arrangements to enable the medical personnel to do the clerking. If he could bring us that information, I would be very grateful.

12.24
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add to the health concerns that are being channelled to Ministry of Health. 

As you recall, before we went on recess we had asked Ministry of Health to come to this House and show us how they plan to address matters of maternal mortality. They promised they would come here in one week’s time and they did not. The chairperson of the MDGs in Parliament also talked about MDG 5 and again the House asked Ministry of Health to show us what plans they have to address maternal mortality in this country. They again promised to come here and they did not.

When they talk about maternal health, you may think it is about some poor rural illiterate Ugandan woman and you do not want to think about her. However, I think it is the duty of a responsible government to ensure that we, the Ugandan women, are not punished for trying to sustain this country. I keep imagining if Government is not bothered about how we deliver or whether we deliver safely and our children live, if there was a way of all of us going on strike one day and we just stop producing for this country, you will see whether Uganda will continue to exist. 

It is very annoying because the matters of maternal health seem to be taken so lightly. The mothers are dying. Only yesterday you and a lot of Members of Parliament were at a funeral. A mother, Mrs Mulengani, had died while giving birth. Shall we continue to die as mothers of this nation just because a government cannot find taxpayers’ money to provide a referral system for us? What is required in Pajule for mothers to deliver, say to bring in midwives? 

These are the things we are asking Ministry of Health to come here and explain to us. I should think this ministry would make this matter a priority. Besides, it is the women of this country that President Museveni says are his voters. Can’t they reward the women for voting for them and ensure that we deliver safely? Can’t the minister come here and defend himself by bringing to us a plan to save the mothers of Uganda? (Mr Kakooza rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, you do not have to answer today. It would be unfair for you to attempt because it is a wide subject. I think give yourself time to go and get the details.

12.27
MS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national interest to do with humps on our roads.

THE SPEAKER: You will come in. I think we have concluded on that. Hon. Minister, you do not have to answer now because you will not be able to answer these queries. Go back to the ministry and get the details so that you can make a comprehensive statement that will satisfy them. You want to give information?

12.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): Yes, I agree with you, Mr Speaker. Within a week, I will bring it and give a comprehensive report. However, there is some information I wanted to give on maternal health concerning the question asked by hon. Alaso and Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari. We were asked to come and answer and we sent a copy on 22nd December and last week, we requested to have a slot. The report is already with the Clerk to Parliament. When we are given a slot, we shall come and answer. Otherwise, the report on maternal mortality rates as well as the roadmap is ready. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How about the question from Kasese about de-gazetting land that is being used now? 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, on the two questions that have been raised by my brother concerning land allocated to people and that the process of obtaining land titles is not moving, Government has only one obligation, which is to de-gazette the land so that it is freed. However, I would also request that the individuals allocated start setting the process in motion so that when it is eventually de-gazetted, they will be able to be allocated their pieces and then they can obtain the titles.

As to the 150 acres which - using the words of my colleague - were “politically blocked”, a decision is yet to be taken. If I have my information correct, the owners were supposed to be compensated. I hope we are talking about the same piece of land. The owners were supposed to be compensated. Unfortunately, some of them are refusing to be compensated. That is why the government has not been able to proceed. The owners have said, “No, we are not going to be compensated” and yet Government said, “Please, we would love to have this piece of land.”  As soon as negotiations with the land owners are completed, the process will start. Thank you.

12.30
MS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura District): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to raise an issue of national concern about the humps on our roads. The issue of roads has come up several times in this House, but I want to look at it from a different perspective. We have so many humps, both in the city and on the highways. These humps are of different sizes and are found anywhere. Some are big, some are small. I would like to know from the works ministry how these humps are planned. What sizes are they supposed to be? 

In this country, people should be able to drive any type of car safely. Some of the humps are so big that the exhaust pipes – unless you are driving a four-wheel drive - will always be knocked at the bottom of your car. Some humps are so dangerous that they are not visible. If you are speeding on a highway and you hit a hump, your car can easily overturn. Some accidents happen because of humps. I need an explanation from the ministry in charge of roads; what should we expect? Shouldn’t there be road signs showing that there is a hump ahead so that when you are speeding on a highway, you know ahead of time? 

Surely, I have not seen the humps in this country in any other part of the world. That is what I would like to know. If the humps are meant for our security, they are not ensuring our security. Can’t we have a planned, systematic way of putting up humps so that they are predictable, known and regular? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of Government Business should tell the Ministry of Works to explain the humps on our roads. (Mr Bwambale rose_) I thought yours was answered.

MR YOWASI BWAMBALE: Not fully, Mr Speaker. This is a very serious matter. The decision on the land, which the honourable minister is talking about, was taken unfairly. Here is a situation whereby people own land; they are fully utilising it - it is not idle - they are cultivating cotton, maize and beans on that land and Government comes in and says, “Leave that land; we shall compensate you. We want someone to come and graze his cows on that piece of land.” That is why the minister is saying people are refusing to be compensated.

If you chase me from my land because you want your friend to come and settle there, where do you expect me to go? That is why people are not ready to be compensated. That is where they stay. It is their land and their source of livelihood. The ministerial committee comes in and says, “Leave that land because we want cattle keepers to settle there; we shall compensate you.” Where do you expect them to go? 

Regarding that land on which a political injunction was placed, it was being cultivated by a youth organisation. The ministerial committee told the youth to leave that land because they wanted cattle keepers to settle there. The youth went on strike and in the process, 13 people were killed. Government then comes in and says, “Youth, go away,” but the cattle keepers also do not come. For two years now, the land is idle. People want to use it, but what is the committee saying? 

THE SPEAKER: Can you cause this to be answered by a statement in a week’s time or two?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Yes, Mr Speaker. I will contact the chairman of that committee, where I happen to have been a member, and then we shall come up with a comprehensive statement.

THE SPEAKER: In two weeks’ time?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you. This ends today’s business. As I told you, because of the ministers’ retreat that will take place from Thursday to Friday we will not sit. They will not be with us. So, I adjourn the House to next week. 

Next week, as I said, the President of the Republic of Tanzania will be here to address the East African Legislative Assembly as the President of Uganda did. The details will be given to us. My appeal to you is that you turn up in big numbers to receive His Excellency the President of Tanzania –(Interjections)- It will be Tuesday. I do not know whether we shall be able to meet in the morning. Because of security reasons, sometimes we may not be able to sit here when the President is coming in the afternoon. However, you will be told by Monday whether we will be able to continue with our business on Tuesday at 10.00 a.m. If not, then we shall resume on Wednesday next week. House adjourned till then.

(The House rose at 12.37 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 16 February 2010 at 10.00 a.m.)
