Wednesday, 12 February 2003

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you from the long Christmas recess, which started on the 19th of December. I congratulate you for having completed the year 2002, and in the same vein, I wish you a happy and better year, 2003. 

During the recess, three Members of Parliament were sworn in. On the occasion of this first sitting of this third meeting, I warmly welcome hon. Nyombi Thembo of Kasanda South, Mubende District; Morris Kagimu Kiwanuka of Bukomansimbi, and in particular, I want to welcome hon. Amama Mbabazi for Kinkizi West, Kanungu District. Hon. Patrick Ocheng of Bukooli South also deserves our warm congratulations for successfully surviving a petition lodged against him. 

For quite sometime, hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso has not been with us, but I am delighted that he is back and in position to represent Bukoto West Constituency in the House.(Applause) Perhaps it is necessary to explain that hon. Birimumaaso had problems, but these problems have ended. 

There were some reports in the papers about this, but it was my conviction that hon. Birimumaaso continues to retain his seat. The process was still going on when eventually it was blotted, in the sense that it is no longer there, so he is free with us. I have consulted the Attorney General and he agrees with me.  

Honourable members, during the recess I had the opportunity to represent this House on the occasion of the election of the Speaker of the 9th Parliament of Kenya, hon. Ole Kaparo Francis, on 9th January this year. I also witnessed the election of his deputy, hon. David Musila, as well as the swearing-in of members of the 9th Parliament and President Mwai Kibaki. 

We have had excellent working relations with my counterpart in Kenya and I believe that his election will enable us to promote Uganda-Kenya parliamentary co-operation to a better level.  

However, on a sad note, after the swearing-in ceremony of Members of Parliament of Kenya, a plane crash claimed the life of hon. Ahmed Khalif, a minister in the Kenyan Government, and five other members sustained injuries. Our condolences go to the Kenya National Assembly and the entire people of Kenya.  

I have recently learnt that another member hon. Kihara also died a natural death in South Africa.  

During the recess, I also visited the Parliament of India on the occasion of its parliamentary system Golden Jubilee, since they became a republic. India, as you know, is a country of great diversity in all forms, not diversities that we have in countries like Uganda. But this is a sub-continent, which occupies 2.4 per cent of the landmass of the entire world with a population bearing 17 per cent of the entire world. In spite of this, they have been able to sustain parliamentary democracy for that long. I believe we can also do the same.  

Honourable members, today we begin the third meeting of the second session that is expected to end in the first week of May when Parliament will be prorogued to allow commencement of the third session. Normally, the third session starts with communication of the state of the nation address by the President, which we expect in the first week of June. So it will not be a long recess; it will be a few weeks. 

We are going to transact business in this month and in March and April. But as you realise, this is the period when we get involved with the provisions of the Budget Act. We changed the budget process and now we have to participate earlier than the budget day. So, I expect the committees to have a lot of work. 

Because of the load of work the committees will handle, and the pending work we have to complete during this meeting, I appeal to you to continue to be diligent, maybe more diligent, with work in the committees and in the plenary, so that a lot is accomplished before Parliament is prorogued.  

Early this week, on Monday, the Business Committee had its meeting to chart out the programme for this third meeting. Three weeks from now, the Business Committee will sit again to finalise the programme for the entire meeting. We expect more reports to come from the committees, especially those committees which have been working during the recess. 

The Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline has been conducting business, as honourable members might have noted from media reports of the proceedings. It is, however, unfortunate to note that some members have been expressing opinions and sentiments on what is going on in the committee, yet such things may prejudice the committee’s work. So, I appeal to you and others concerned to desist from commenting in one way or the other on what is going on in this committee, so that it can do its work as it sees fit.

I want to appeal to you to be more careful in what each of you says or does, so that by strict adherence to our code of conduct we deny business to this committee. (Laughter). We should not give it business. It has other things to do.

Lastly, there is one thing, which I did not mention. Dr Khiddu Makubuya and his dear wife survived an ordeal, which you must have learnt of. I want to welcome him back and congratulate him for having survived that brutality. (Applause).

Honourable members, I am happy to announce to you that the retired Bishop, the Rt Rev. Dr George Senabulya, will also soon start work here as a chaplain for some of us. (Applause). Necessary arrangements will be made to accommodate him so that he can do his work well. Once again I welcome you back, and I wish you fruitful deliberations during this 3rd Meeting. 

For the new members, they should indicate their interests so that necessary action is taken for them to belong to one of the committees we have here. However, there is a request by a new member, hon. Ahebwa Godfrey Peres, who before we went for recess had not selected any committee in which to belong. He has now indicated that he wants to join the Tourism, Trade and Industry Committee. Before we proceed, I ask you whether you approve of this so that the member can start work with the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity to seek guidance from the Leader of Government Business on a matter of making statements on issues of public interest. 

Since we went on recess, there have been a number of issues, which have drawn our attention to the amendment of the Constitution. I am referring specifically to the statements by Her Excellency the Vice President, Dr Specioza Wandira Kazibwe, on the issue of Federo. I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business or from the Vice President herself whether she made that statement in her private capacity or as a vice-chairperson of the Cabinet? 

If she made the statement in her capacity as a person who chairs the Cabinet, then in line with what you have reminded us of a few minutes ago, it is really prejudicial. It is subjective to make a definitive statement on a matter, which is going to be debated in this House and prior to that digested, and probably amended by the Cabinet before it comes to us.

So, if she made it in her official capacity, we would like to know. If it was in her private capacity, I have no problem.

MR NOBERT MAO: Mr Speaker, in the spirit of your communication from the Chair, which covered a number of issues, I want to let members know that we who represent areas in conflict are very grateful for the work Members of Parliament did towards the end of the last Meeting. Members then unanimously adopted a motion in support of peaceful means of resolving the conflict. They also contributed financially, from their own pockets, towards the humanitarian relief of those who are displaced and who are suffering.  

I stand to appreciate that, and to report that the situation has gotten worse. The number of displaced people has now increased to 800,000 and we have more problems in the camps. For instance, last week there were incidents of houses burning. As I speak now, over 1,000 families have no shelter in Pabo camp. Many of the roads, like the road between Lira and Kitgum and that between Gulu and Kitgum, are still unsafe. 

Despite the need for commerce, fuel in Kitgum is Shs 5,000 per litre, and sugar is Shs 3,000 per kilogram. This, I believe, is the impact that insecurity has brought. While people there were already poor, the situation has gotten worse, and they are being hit harder.  

I pray therefore that the Members of Parliament will continue to stand together with Ugandans who are suffering and not politicise humanitarian issues. I am very proud of the spirit in which we parted after the last Meeting. I pray that the spirit prevails, because we intend to bring a motion to declare that area a disaster area, in order to ensure that there is a focus of humanitarian assistance there. We also do hope that the Members of Parliament will continue to support efforts to resolve the conflict by means other than the military. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your communication you said the committees are now going to be busy involved in the budget process, as per the Budget Act. However, I have heard of diversions in the budget, with some people talking of 23 percent, others 26 and others 40. Through you, we would like to know from the Minister of Finance about when the committees are going to get involved in approving this diversion, if at all it is there. Thank you.

MR WILFRED KAJEKE: I respect and recognise the opportunity, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Jay Tanna, under Rule 42. I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: Well, why don’t we deal with that after the general discussion? We will definitely deal with it later, but let us deal with general matters first then we shall come to that.

MR SSEKIKUUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On January 13th this year, I read with shock and disbelief remarks made by the Military Assistant to the President and the Chief Political Commissar of the UPDF, scandalising the Deputy Chief Justice. 

The Deputy Chief Justice had made a call during the orientation of the new Electoral Commission members to the effect that the UPDF should desist from interfering with the electoral process. But the following day, the Military Assistant to the President went ahead and said that, “the remarks were redundant, unfortunate, suspect and based on distortion”. I felt sad. This was either contempt of court or it replicates the society we are living in. 

Currently there is one Capt. Muwanga terrorising the people of Mukono. She is going ahead with her terrorism well aware that we have a report on election violence. It is very sad, Mr Speaker, for this country. I do not know if it is the trend of events or if this is how things shall be done. 

By the way, some army officers are very keen now. They know that through violence they get promoted. All of them - I can mention them – and it is a big number of them –(Laughter). It is sad, and I would request the honourable institution of the UPDF to take note. 

It is true, as he said, nobody can claim superior ownership of the democratisation process. It is true and nobody begrudges that of another. It is historical and it is on record. At the same time –(Interruption)

LT GEN. TUMWINE: I stand on a point of order, Mr Speaker. We are aware that Members of Parliament are a result of freedom of democracy, of freedom of expression, and of people expressing their opinions as long as it is according to the law. We should consider the fact that the institution of the UPDF is a strong institution, well represented in this Parliament, and know that if you refer to one, you refer to all. Why then refer to them as an institution without referring to them as individuals? 

Is it in order for the honourable member on the Floor to allege, without specifics - as I hoped he would quote - that the UPDF is bad? He should say that, such and such an individual has said exactly this, so that we deal with the matter on an individual basis. Is it in order to misrepresent the whole institution of the UPDF and cause contempt, bad feelings and bad attitudes towards the good institution of the UPDF? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not read what you have said in the contribution that the member has been making -(Laughter and Applause). The member quoted two incidents, and I do not know whether it is correct that these are tarnishing the good name of UPDF. Continue.

MR SSEKIKUUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling; I am most obliged to you. The point I want to make is that the UPDF have made their contribution, and it is welcome. It is still outstanding by the way. However, they should not hold the democratisation process hostage –(Laughter and Applause). I am here today; tomorrow I may not be here. The same applies to everybody. We are all making our contributions. 

Such kind of attitude undermines the Judiciary. You even undermine the people themselves, who we have said, in Article 1 of our Constitution, that power belongs to them. You denigrate them, you trample over them, and you even cause the Muwangas and many others to do this. I think it is very sad for this country, and with due respect to hon. Tumwine – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But I have already dealt with that issue.

MR SSEKIKUUBO: I wind up, Mr Speaker, by saying that such remarks, such attitudes, such behaviour should be totally done away with. We should condemn it. I also expected him to condemn such. We should not go behind curtains justifying our crude means. Thank you very much. (Applause).

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From your communication, I would like to thank you for bringing us on board with what happened during the recess. 

However, I also followed some events, and there were some serious statements made by various leaders at different levels. One such statement is attributed to the hon. Member for Bugweri, hon. Abdu Katuntu. He is quoted to have said that when we were debating the Political Organisations Bill, he warned this House that the potato growers in the House voted against certain clauses and now we are facing the consequences –(Laughter). 

First of all, I do not see gardens of potatoes in this House. I for one, I am not a potato grower, and I wish hon. Katuntu, who is in the House, could throw more light on this so that I am not scandalised in my constituency.

What I am about to say next concerns an incident I witnessed. It is not before a committee of Parliament. This is an incident where I had to physically separate the hon. Salaamu Musumba from Mr Ofwono Opondo. This was not before a committee, but the words I heard terribly shocked me. I was left wondering if Mr Ofwono Opondo had taken bangi, and an overdose at that, because it was terrible! I am wondering what would happen to members when they are moving around Parliament, especially when confronted by those who are not Members of Parliament!  

Another important incident happened during the recess, namely the awarding of His Excellency Museveni a PhD, therefore joining the other Presidents who have had those honorary doctorates. I think we should congratulate him. This was a very important achievement. 

Also, Mr Speaker, during the recess, a lot of arrests were made. These arrests were unconstitutional, and people spent very many days in unknown places. Now their relatives are talking of torture chambers because others spent more than two weeks before they were produced before court. 

The latest magazine of the Uganda Human Rights Commission features you prominently, Mr Speaker, on its cover. In the magazine, however, they are saying that the state of human rights in Uganda is still wanting. Illegal arrests and detentions persist, and you are on the cover of the magazine with the chairperson of the Human Rights Commission!

When you hear the stories that are being told of about these torture chambers - people are let into cages of snakes, into ponds of crocodiles, to make them confess. How is government going to deny this when these people are not in the gazetted places? They cannot deny this. How shall we know, when people are being blindfolded? 

I have raised these issues before you and before this House. As a Parliament, let us do something about this kind of behavour. I hope the people concerned will make comments. Thank you.

DR FRANK NABWISO: Mr Speaker, there were some issues during the last Meeting, which we did not complete. The first one was the promise made to this House that the Attorney General would come here and explain the legality of presidential advisors. Since the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs is here, can he throw light on this? When will the Attorney General come to Parliament?

The second one concerns my great friend, hon. Rugunda. In November last year, he stood up here and told us that his ministry was preparing cheques for Butamira tree farmers. It is now four months and nothing has happened. May I ask for permission to bring to this House as soon as possible a censure motion on these two ministers? (Laughter)

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. While I greatly commend the spirit in which you have briefed us about what is coming next vis-à-vis what we have gone through, I would like to express concern, as an environmentalist, about the following: 

Uganda recently attended the Great World Summit for Sustainable Development in Johannesburg. A whole team led by the President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, attended. I was one of those who travelled to Johannesburg. Just before we left, the Minister in charge of the Environment officially briefed us about what was happening and what was likely to happen. 

Isn’t it funny then that after attending such a globally important conference, investing in it and spending part of the taxpayers’ money on it, the Minister in charge of the Environment has not found time to officially brief the Members of Parliament - the representatives of the people - about what went on in Johannesburg? Can I put it to him that he is reluctant to tell us about it because in Johannesburg Uganda was mentioned as one of the countries depleting the environment? Thank you very much.

DR STEPHEN MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to welcome my fellow Members of Parliament back from recess. While on recess, what was happening in the country came to the attention of a lot of us. Personally, the state of delivery of health services in the country came to my attention, and especially the state of Mbale Hospital, which was written about by the press. 

However, I have every reason to believe that this is a countrywide concern. As one of the members has just commented, it is a tragedy that Uganda, which used to be exemplary in the whole of the tropical world in delivering health services, has sunk to the bottom. There is nothing commendable in the way we are delivering health services in this country. 

We are saying that infant mortality is improving, but our figures are among the worst in the world. We say that our maternal mortality is improving yet our figures are worse than what was happening in Holland before the First World War. Mr Speaker, basically we have not changed anything. In fact we are getting worse in the way we are delivering health services in this country. We have very well trained doctors but we are not equipping them. 

I will take the example of Mbale Hospital. In 1991 I came here to visit somebody at the Ministry of Works, and that person was stabbed in the abdomen. He was taken to Mbale Hospital but he died there. It is a rare thing that somebody who is stabbed in the abdomen would die in a hospital, because the abdomen is the safest place to stab anyone. (Laughter). If you want to kill someone -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you encouraging people to stab each other?

DR MALLINGA: If you want to kill someone, stab him in the chest or hit him on the head, then you will get rid of him. But you remember President Reagan of the United States was shot in the chest. Everybody was concerned, but when he got to hospital everybody breathed a sigh of relief because we knew he was going to get well. They could breath for him, and they could operate on him and put him back. 

However, there are unnecessary deaths in this country. You remember about two months ago I had a cardio dysfunction - that is a heart attack. I went to Mbale Hospital and I could not believe it. There is no ECG machine in the whole hospital - that is the one used for measuring the heartbeat. This is a referral hospital for the region. There are doctors there who are capable of doing this work but they could not do it. I would have done better going to a witchdoctor than going to Mbale hospital. (Laughter)

I know of somebody who is seventy years old who went to see a doctor in Mbale Hospital several times complaining of abdominal pain. There is a very simple straightforward X-ray called an upper G.I., which is mandatory for anybody over 55 years of age who complains of abdominal pain. Nothing was done for this gentleman because that type of X-ray could not be done in Mbale. This man came to Nsambya where they found that he had cancer of the stomach, but that was after two months. (Interruption)

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: Thank you Dr Mallinga for giving way. I just want to console my brother and to give him some ray of hope that for all the problems he is talking about, federo is the answer.  (Laughter)

DR MALLINGA: I hope so. Mr Speaker, I just want to emphasise that there are unnecessary deaths in this country because of poor delivery of health services. I travel on the Jinja - Kampala road and accidents occur on that road. One day I had to drive somebody to Kawolo Hospital; it is a shame! There was just no service for somebody with a head injury! 

I would have hoped that certain hospitals along roads where there are frequent accidents should be upgraded to the level of trauma centres. Kawolo Hospital, Jinja Hospital, Bugiri, Iganga, Tororo, Mbale, Kiryandongo – all these should be upgraded by now. (Applause)

I read in the press that an investigation is going to be carried out at Mbale Hospital, but this is window dressing. The problem of poor health services is all over the country. A commission of inquiry should be formed and we investigate the level of health services all over the country, not just window dressing at Mbale Hospital. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to start by extending a message from the people of Tororo County to the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications, Eng. John Nasasira, for rebuilding a bridge that had killed nine people in the last three years. The people say, “Thank you very much Minister of Works, Transport and Communications”. It is better late than never. The people appreciate.  

Mr Speaker, the people of Tororo County sometime back accepted government policy when they were told to stop catching small fish. But the situation now can be best described as an animal kingdom, where you have a hen, a goat, a pussycat, a rat and a hyena and survival is for the fittest. 

The people there are asking, “do you have a fish policy?” If you trade in fish, you have to get Wembley operatives to move infront of you, pay them Shs 300,000 and trade for one week. If they find the Special Revenue Protection Unit somewhere, they tell them that they have arrested these people and they are taking them to their headquarters. The Wembley operative then will leave at the market. Otherwise, you have to pay the Special Revenue Protection or LDUs or any authority who finds you there. This is going on and the people do not know what to do because the kind of fish trade they are engaged in is not illegal. 

The same is happening to cross-border traders. When I say this, people say I am a smuggler. But I appeal to you, Mr Speaker, that the only solution to this problem is a customs union. 

At the border, people are so terrified because they are being told that they are engaged in illegal trade. We have army detaches, LDUs, LCs, Wembley operatives and the Special Revenue Protection Unit. Whoever finds you carrying a kilo of sugar, soap, salt or a mattress you have to pay tax to them. If an LDU gets you, you pay something. If an army operative is moving around patrolling, you pay something. If the Revenue Protection Unit finds you, you pay something. The faster we have a customs union, the better for this country and for this region.  

As I wind up, Mr Speaker, you remember when we broke off for recess, the Reform Agenda informed the country that they had information of likely arrests and torture during the Christmas season. Before two weeks elapsed, several people who had identified themselves with an alternative policy of governance in this country were arrested, tortured, and detained illegally under a law that this Parliament should amend; that is treason.  

Honourable members, if we do not ensure that treason is handled very fast, several Ugandans are going to be deformed. Hon. Kazoora just mentioned the tip of the iceberg. There are torture chambers in this country and we have called upon the international community to investigate this matter. A man’s private part is opened up for red ants to eat! These are all allegations. And you have to mention your collaborator, if you do not, you are shown a crocodile chamber; if not, they release a snake around you. Torture is terrible. Today it is somebody else, tomorrow it may be Ekanya and the next day may be yours.

Honourable members, if you read the Hansard, Rwakasisi said sometime back, “we shall stay here and nobody will remove us”. When there was a coup, he was caught up here, and where is he? So, let us make a law knowing that today the law that serves your friend is the same law that will apply to you. 

Up to now, we have several people that Government has not accounted for, and the message is that some people are recruiting rebels. Why don’t you bring them and charge them so that we know why they are in the cell? You cannot charge somebody say from 2001 to the present, from several parts of the country that “you are collaborating, recruiting rebels”. Such amorphous charges, Mr Speaker! 

This is a democratic country; we must respect the rule of law. We have the Constitution that we have to respect. Most of these people are detained in Kigo. Some of them have been there for six months. 

Mr Speaker, I appeal to you to talk to the President to appoint more judges, because when you talk to the Judiciary, they say they have a backlog of cases. Why don’t we have more judges? We have people who are qualified. Ben Wacha is here, and there are so many outside. (Laughter)  

I want to end by appealing to Government because there is a lot of fear. The National Political Commissar is aware that some of the Reform Agenda supporters in the countryside have been terrified. They are so fearful that they cannot even report what is happening to them.  

I had a discussion with the Minister of Internal Affairs and told him that in Tororo County, because of cross-border trade, the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), the District Intelligence Security Officer (DISO) had information that there might be illegal guns. Government did well to move there and they have got some illegal guns.  

But now I have written a letter to the Inspector General of Government and got no reply for many months. I have given a copy to the Minister of Internal Affairs. And I have also written to the Human Rights Commission. Now they have turned to business people and they have collected over Shs4 million from small traders. They get you and they say, “You have a gun, if you want to survive, pay some money”. 

These boys are so terrified and they have paid money. I have their names, which I have submitted to Government. There is no recourse to justice, and these people are wondering whether we have a Government in power or not. I hope that the responsible authority will respond accordingly. Thank you.  

MR NORBERT MAO: Mr Speaker, this point of order is related to a stranger I see in the House. According to our laws, in particular section 6(1)(b) of the Parliamentary Elections Act: 

“If such circumstances arise that if that person were not a member of Parliament would cause that person to be disqualified for election as a member of Parliament under article 80 of the Constitution.” 

This is the circumstance, which compels a member to vacate his seat and it says a Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in those circumstances. 

I know you communicated, Mr Speaker, in your Communication from the Chair, but perhaps the proper thing to do would have been to refer the matter to the Rules committee. Failing that, then some of us will be compelled to petition the entire Parliament to pronounce itself on this matter.  

When hon. Ekemu was convicted, he was even appealing but his seat was declared vacant very fast. We believe that the law should be blind; it should apply equally to everybody. Selective application of the law undermines its integrity. Therefore, Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Birimumaaso, whom I consider a stranger, to sit with us in this honourable chamber?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are right to say that I have already commented and made a ruling on this issue. I am quite conversant with the Constitution and I have my way of interpreting it. I did not say what I said unaware of the provisions of the Constitution. I was aware, and as I told you, I even consulted the Attorney General. 

There was some writing in the papers attributed to the Attorney General, but he entirely agrees with me. I need not refer this matter to the Rules committee. Anybody who is dissatisfied with what I have said, the courts are open; they can petition the courts, which will make a decision.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I am not standing to challenge your ruling on what may be called, “Birimumaaso’s situation”, but possibly the conclusion you reached, which you communicated to the House. I think it would be very interesting for you to give this House some of that write-up from the Attorney General. We shall be very grateful if the way you reached your conclusion is communicated to the House just for our educative interest. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But I have advised whoever thinks that the constitutional interpretation that led me to make that decision is not correct. The only competent person to do so would be the court, because it is not a matter of rules; it is a matter of the constitutional provisions. The rules do not disqualify anybody, they have to follow the Constitution, and I have read the Constitution. I might be wrong, but then what do we do? This constituency has never been declared vacant; who am I to declare it vacant? 

The Constitutional provision you have referred to, if I can read it, provides as follows: The relevant article is Article 80(e) of the Constitution: “is under a sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months…” 

I think you should note the first word “is”, and that means present. The person is not under a sentence of imprisonment in Parliament or on the streets of Kampala, but he must be in prison. 

But further more, you may be advised to read the Halsbury law about pardon and its significance before you move. If you are dissatisfied with that one, I have given you advice. Can we proceed?

MR MICHAEL MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my honourable colleagues in welcoming you back –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I also want to give you other examples. We had the case of the Mayor of Kampala, Ssebaggala. There was an attempt to unseat him simply because a lower court in America had sentenced him. This matter was dealt with. They said that since the process was still going on, we have to wait. They did wait until the final court pronounced itself on it.

But why should we exercise ourselves on a legal matter in Parliament? We do not interpret the Constitution, so we should go to the right forum for interpretation.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to join my honourable colleagues to welcome you back from recess. While you were away, two significant things happened. The first one was that very serious and important changes took place in a country neighbouring us right in the east. 

As you are aware, Uganda is part of the East African Community. And as you are aware, Kenyans have just gone through a democratic election and for the first time, a sitting head of state, who has been at the helm for 24 years, retired peacefully and handed over power to another regime.  

Mr Speaker, this was a very significant and important happening in the East African region. Some of us who did lend a hand are proud to have associated with this development. I wish that this Parliament, though belatedly, extend a word of congratulations to the new government in Kenya. Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I have followed very closely the statements being made by my good friend, hon. Michel Mabiike, about the changes that took place in Kenya. He stated that some of them gave a hand.  I would like hon. Mabiike to tell me how he, as a Ugandan, gave a hand to the electoral process in Kenya, which is a sovereign state.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I just want to make simple clarifications. One, on that particular aspect, which of late became an area of controversy in the school of international relations in Makerere, because it contravenes the UN Charter, Article 23 on non interference in the domestic affairs of another country.  

Two, the agents or the actors in international relations, according to the realities, will take the states as actors. So, I think it would be wise even to open our eyes and think of that aspect in a disciplinary manner. I am saying this just on an intellectual basis. (Laughter). Thank you very much.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my two colleagues for the clarifications they have sought. It is quite unfortunate that my colleagues, despite boasting about having read international relations, do not appear to be quite conversant –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, can you protect me from Capt. Babu.  

All over the world there are democratic forces. Democratic institutions have got a very big network all over the world. It is in order, in international practice, for sister organisations to extend solidarity ties in case of any democratic process taking place in any country where they have a network. In fact, Mr Speaker, that kind of international network and expression of solidarity is in line with the international democratic processes, other than interfering militarily in affairs of other countries.  

Some of us did not participate nor interfere in the affairs of Kenya militarily; we did so through smooth and clear democratic processes. We were trying to promote democratic principles in neighbouring countries.  

Secondly, away from that, because when you go to the streets of Kenya today, Kenyans are proud, but once you come to Uganda, the opposite is true; and the opposite has already been highlighted by two fellow colleagues, hon. Kazoora and hon. Ekanya. 

The second significant happening that took place while you were away, Mr Speaker, was these unexplained and rampant detentions and arrests of civilians who are closely linked to the Reform Agenda. As you are well aware, many Ugandans had pride in the Movement, thinking that the Movement is going to fundamentally depart from other regimes whose leaders are constantly referred to as swine or idiots. But it is very unfortunate that today the Movement is clearly moving in the footsteps and path of the regimes whose leaders we call idiots.  

Where is this country going? Are we returning to Amin days, are we returning to Obote days? (Laughter). The recent happenings are not explainable, neither are they justifiable. No one can justify the existence of torture chambers. No one in the top echelons of the Movement can justify the use of crocodiles, snakes and termites as closely revealed by some of these people who have gone through this.  

Recently, there were very serious and stringent budget cuts. Some of us questioned the intention of these huge budget cuts. We did not know that these huge budget cuts were going towards the purchase of snakes, crocodiles and ants meant to terrorize innocent civilians who are suspected of involvement in illegal activities. We demand an explanation from the powers that be. Where have they got the funds to purchase snakes, crocodiles and termites? (Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of order. I had actually heard two previous speakers making the same allegations, but not to the specialty of hon. Mabikke. Is it in order for hon. Mabikke to make an allegation that the Ministry of Defence received extra budgetary support in order to create chambers to torture people, buy ants, crocodiles and snakes to be used as tools of torture against some unnamed people, without substantiating it? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you substantiate so that this matter can be investigated?

MR MABIKKE:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that while all this was happening the honourable minister was busy in Kinkizi competing against himself. (Laughter). Mr Speaker, as you are aware, a number of arrests have been made and from what we have read in papers -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the substantiation required is on the importation of snakes and crocodiles.

MR MABIKKE:  Mr Speaker, what we are presenting here are words from those people who have been arrested and subjected to this kind of inhuman treatment. When we are talking about degrading and inhuman treatment, no one in this House can attempt to intimidate us. These allegations are true. We have talked to some of these people who are now in Kiigo and they have brought back these horror stories. And in my submission, I demanded for information -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, a point of order was raised by hon. Amama Mbabazi, Minister of Defence, about snakes, crocodiles and so on. If it is true, they will have to be investigated. Therefore, what we need is for you to substantiate. Do you have facts on these snakes and crocodiles so that the matter can be investigated? (Mr Kikungwe rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you wait for him to substantiate?

MR KIKUNGWE: I just want to help him. Mr Speaker, it so happened that some of the arrests were made in my constituency. I had three people who were arrested, namely, Pascal Gakyaro, Eng.Dan Tumusiime and Lt Dan Mugarura.  

Eng. Gakyaro told me he was never tortured.  Lt Dan Mugarura told me he had the worst time in his life. He told me he was blindfolded and his clothes were removed from him for four nights and thrown in a room full of red ants.  

The following day, Dan Mugarura was taken to another room, which had four big snakes, all eager to bite.  I do not know whether they were poisonous or not, but he told me there were four big snakes. They removed the cloth on his face and told him, “the choice is yours now, either say the truth or you go in.” Then he asked, “What do you want me to say?” Somebody told him, “We want to hear what you do with Besigye”. He said, “If that is what you want to hear, I deal with him.” This is because he never wanted to be tortured. So, Mr Speaker, I think what is important is just to set up a committee to look into this.  Thank you.

MR MABIKKE:  Thank you very much, hon. Kikungwe, for giving me information. Mr Speaker, what I have said today can be fully substantiated if an independent commission or committee can be put in place to investigate this.  I would like to urge honourable members of this august Assembly to carry out an investigation. (Interruption) 

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Michael Mabikke was required by you to substantiate the statements he made.  So I would request that he addresses your question in order for you to be facilitated to make a ruling on the point of order raised by the honourable Minister of Defence.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, can you substantiate your statement.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very sad that some of our honourable members are playing the sycophant. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is different, honourable member; just concentrate on the question.

MR MABIKKE:  Mr Speaker, as very ably said by hon. Issa Kikungwe, some of us have had interaction with most of these people who have been arrested.  Most of them are in Kiigo. They have been victims of this kind of inhuman treatment and they revealed that many times they were blindfolded and taken -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, from what you are saying you actually seem not have personal knowledge about the location of these areas other than the accounts given to you by some people?

MR MABIKKE: Yes. I may not have personal knowledge of specific locations of these torture chambers, but what I am giving you is information from those people who have been arrested. I have interacted with them.

THE SPEAKER: Is it possible to give us the names of those people who informed you?

MR MABIKKE: Yes, Mr Speaker.  There is a very clear victim of this kind of treatment who is called Lt Mugarura.

THE SPEAKER: I see; so the source of the information is Lt Mugarura.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- I have a right to express myself and the microphone is free for you as well. The item or the agenda is Communication from the Chair. I want to get your guidance as to whether Communication from the Chair is the opportunity for honourable members –(Interjections)- Can you protect me, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, let me explain. Generally after the communication, we allow some members to make submissions on some pressing matters. It was discussed and found out that it was necessary, especially now that members have been away for quite sometime.  That is why I have allowed a few people to raise some issues. 

We allowed that practice to come in, but substantially we shall have to deal with this formally. If there is a very important matter, then it should take its own form.

MR WANDERA: The reason I raised that, Mr Speaker, is because my colleagues are raising very important issues that would be better dealt with if they were brought as questions or raised as definite matters of immediate public attention so that we discuss them. (Interjections)  

THE SPEAKER: Order! The only way the member could substantiate is to quote Lt Mugarura who gave him the information. He is just confirming what hon. Kikungwe had said. That is the best he could do. The matter is closed.

MR OTTO ODONGA: I want to give more evidence with names and dates.

THE SPEAKER: Since the honourable member is seeking for a commission of inquiry, these other details will come up if we eventually agree to set up a probing body.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to welcome back all the members from recess. According to my observation, we have to call on the Almighty God to guide us, to give us a peace of mind and to pray really hard because it seems our hearts need a lot of prayers. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, try to be as brief as possible because the ministers will have to make some statements over the matters you have raised.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.   Mine is very brief. I have only two observations.  First of all, during our recess we saw a lot of people going to the International Conference Centre. That meant we need your support to lobby for federo.    

Secondly, I have seen the honourable Minister of Lands, Water and Environment and as I speak now, I have a small problem in my constituency. I had reported this problem in the last session to you, Mr Speaker. Though you had directed me to the lands committee, it seems the problem is recurrent.  This is the issue of how the forest reserves have been allocated.  Sometime back, our people in Mukono North Constituency, in the sub-counties –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, among the business we have, we will be dealing with the law on forests. I think that is the proper time for you to bring up that issue.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: This is a bit salient, and I am winding up, Mr Speaker. My people were surprised to hear that all the forest reserves had been allocated to some people. I have some big names here of people who received 50 hectares of land, which is equivalent to about 138 acres.  Maybe I can mention some of the names. 

We have the Vice President -(Laughter)- we have Elongat Odeke, Edward Ononorach, Lagulu Valley, hon. Dan Kidega and many others on the list.  All of them have received 50 hectares, but our local peasants who have been cultivating from those forest reserves have not received anything.  

My people are wondering how Government was unfair to give wealthy people all this land and leave the local people with no land, yet these people come from other places. It pains us! This has happened in the forest reserves of Kifu in Kyampiisi, in Kasaala in Mukono North Constituency. Other people are ministers and permanent secretaries. So how are our people going to survive?  That is why I am raising this important issue, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, honourable members, let us maximally utilise this period. Let the minister answer and then we go to another person.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Bakaluba. I have stood in this House before and reported to honourable members that during the course of rehabilitation of our forest sector, we will involve the private sector in the business of tree planting. 

I told hon. Bakaluba in particular that if one wants to participate in the rehabilitation of forests of Mukono, all they have to do is to go to the Commissioner of Forestry with an application for a size of land that they can manage. If the people of Mukono are unwilling to plant trees in their forests and Government does not have the funds to do so, other people from other areas who are interested in tree planting will do so.  I was very categorical, and it will also be in the law. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: In addition, Mr Speaker, I have been at the district headquarters and I want to correct the impression created by the honourable minister. Sometime back we had infact discussed this matter, and our people were told to make applications and we have hundreds of applications. 

When our people were waiting to receive those plots, just in one week or two, we were receiving information from above, from the centre, from these ministers that they have already allocated land to their friends and wealthy people, leaving out our people. What can we do?  Will our people come to Kampala? 

THE SPEAKER:  Honestly, let us end that issue. I am going to allow ten minutes on this matter and then allow the ministers to respond to the questions.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Land is a very sensitive issue, and I have sat here and listened to my brother, the Reverend, use this issue in a manner that I almost think is probably – let me stop there, I hope the message is clear. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we have the office of the Prime Minister, and the honourable member says we do not have. Whether anybody likes it or not, we have the office of the Prime Minister and one of its functions is to deal with matters that affect more than one ministry, that affect the central government and the local government. And we have dealt with very many of those, Mr Speaker. 

Therefore, I would like to challenge my brother, hon. Bakaluba, to bring those cases of his to the Office of the Prime Minister and we shall deal with them squarely, rather than coming here to make allegations that are probably unfounded.  I thank you. (Laughter).

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your communication and for sharing with us the experiences you had during the recess. In the interest of time, I have three issues I would want to share just briefly.  

The first one concerns graduated tax. During the recess I carried out consultative development meetings with my constituents. The question of graduated tax is a major concern. The manner in which the tax is assessed and collected has caused people to sleep out of their houses for fear of being arrested at night. This is a situation that needs immediate review.  

Number two is the question of salaries for teachers. The teachers are paid low salaries, and to make it worse, when they upgrade to a higher grade, their salaries are never upgraded. There is even a ban on recruitment and yet the teacher student ratio remains out of proportion. This leads to poor quality of educational standards in our schools. This is a major concern across the country, which I experienced as I consulted my constituents.

The last item concerns the allowances for LCIs and the election of LCIIs across the country. The election for LCIIs was stopped and people remained in their positions without being replaced and there is a vacuum. I do not know under what law the minister abolished these. But to abolish them without replacement or without taking action is causing disorder and disaffection across the country.

Allowances for LCIs; people have been working genuinely. They make a contribution towards the administration of our country. Surely there has to be some consideration. Mr Speaker, I could add more but in the interest of time, I thought these three issues should be shared since they cut across the whole country. Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to seek supplementary clarification on matters that have already been touched by my colleagues. I start with the contribution of Prof. Kamuntu. There are problems of paying taxes in his constituency; a constituency that is recognised to be relatively more prosperous than many others but they have a problem of paying poll tax. In my district, the whole of last year the crops failed.  

Secondly, there was a directive for our populations to move to camps, and they are now in camps. They are grappling with the very basic problems of where to sleep and what to eat, and yet they are also required by law to pay taxes. The lower local councils cannot operate without this tax revenue.  

My appeal is to the country to really consider mechanisms for alleviating the problem of poll tax and tax revenue so that in spite of the situation that we are in, some basic administrative services can be delivered.

The other matter that I thought I would seek clarification on is a matter that hon. Kazoora touched on. We were indeed very pleased that Mbarara University, which was the brainchild of the President, did a very honourable thing of recognising his contribution to their existence and the very good work that His Excellency the President has done.  But I was perturbed to read this morning in the papers that a lawyer has challenged the legality of that honourable doctorate of laws.  

I am particularly concerned that whereas it may not be right legally, the process of resolving that dispute in court would be very embarrassing to the President. I am therefore, seeking clarification from the minister concerned so that the issue is put to rest long before the court process goes on.  Could the Minister of Education clarify to us and to the nation as to whether the lawyer, in his challenge of the award of the degree to His Excellency, has a basis. And if he has no basis, can the matter be put to rest? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us end this matter. We started at 2.30 p.m. now it is 4.00 p.m. It is high time we got statements from the ministers on matters raised, so that we can move to other business. We shall have another opportunity, when we make further communication, to lay some matters in the way you have been doing. But now it is 4.00 p.m. and we want to allow the ministers to answer and then we can proceed.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. My colleagues have raised a lot of issues and we plan to share them on the Front Bench. I will touch on six briefly, my honourable colleague from the Ministry of Defence will touch on those related to security and other colleagues will come in.  

First, I want to explain the issue of the statements attributed to Her Excellency the Vice President in regard to the question of federo for Buganda. Under the chairmanship of Her Excellency the Vice President, Cabinet took a decision many months ago that we must act in a collective way as far as this matter is concerned. A committee of Cabinet was set up to ensure that we harmonise our views. This harmonisation is due to be completed, and Cabinet will be able to present its united front on this matter of constitutional review. 

We all read the newspaper attributing this statement to Her Excellency the Vice President. But when we get reports from the press, we do not just act on the basis of the reports. We proceed first to contact colleagues to whom the statements are attributed to, and where there is variance, we proceed to investigate the reason why this variance is there. 

I want to assure our colleagues that I believe the Vice President, who frequently chairs Cabinet, could not have made statements in the direction that she was presenting a specific position on the issue of federo at this stage. So, you should give us time to complete the harmonisation of our positions and we will come back to the House. 
 
Secondly, Mr Speaker, I also wanted to make a comment on your guidance that as far as matters before the disciplinary committee are concerned, we should all respect the committee. That is why as far as the Secretariat is concerned, we have been silent and waiting to be as helpful as we can, as the committee feels there is something that we can present. I do hope we respect this understanding. 

The third issue relates to statements - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is clarification from hon. Musumba; do you want to get it?

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The hon. Minister without Portfolio is making reference to me in the matter of his employee, Mr Ofwono Opondo, and me on the precincts of Parliament. I want to guide him that by now if there was a mechanism in place, he would have already known that it is not a committee matter. It is a matter that infringes on the powers and privileges of a Member of Parliament and other members. 

If the mechanism was ever deployed, by now he would know that the matter does not concern the committee. It is a matter of insult and assault, and I am worried that he is not informed and he has not sought information. I do not like to let the Minister without Portfolio to proceed on the premise of the committee. If he was interested, he would have called me by now to know, but since he does not seem to be interested, he would want to wish it away. 

I would only beg that he allows me time when I move my motion, because I would like the House to debate it. I would want to move a motion without notice later, under Rule 40 (m), on a matter raising the question of privilege. I think the interpretation to me is a breach of my privilege. 

If not, I would like to make a statement to the House so that we are able to debate the matter. I would like to beg the House that they allow me to update them on the subject, and that they will allow me to use audio-visual facilities so that we can put the matter to rest. Thank you very much.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague, Musumba, is obviously a lawyer, as we all know. I am surprised that she would think the statement I was making was in reference to her in particular. 

Mr Speaker, you did say there is a matter before the disciplinary committee. You did indicate that a number of individuals have tended to make comments on this particular matter and that it would be healthier and better procedure if we waited for the ruling from that committee. I was merely welcoming this guidance. In no way did I have hon. Musumba in particular in mind. Indeed, I have been looking for hon. Musumba in respect to this issue, and I am glad that we will have opportunity to meet. (Laughter).

Mr Speaker, let me now move to the issue of the situation in the north of our country. This is indeed a very debatable situation, and I am glad that hon. Mao has given some brief update to the House. Government is aware and has frequently made statements on this situation. We regularly review this situation in Cabinet and everything humanly possible is always being done to ensure that this situation can be eased, both on the side of security and also on the side of the human suffering that is associated with this situation. 

I want to assure you and honourable colleagues that this matter is constantly under review, but I strongly welcome what hon. Mao has said that we should have a common front in respect to dealing with the situation in the North. There should not be two or three sides to this matter. It is only in this way that we can get this situation resolved very quickly. 

I also wish to comment on what my old colleague, hon. Mallinga, has said in respect to health services. I am unhappy that he has left the House. Hon. Mallinga is a medical doctor by training, and I am surprised that he could describe the health services in this country in the words that he has used - that the services have gone to the dogs. 

In my five-year term in the Ministry of Health, we moved many miles with hon. Mallinga, not only in his constituency but also other parts of the country. Hon. Mallinga, who has been in service longer than myself, was appreciative of the progress that was being made in this sector despite the constraints. To say that if you are stabbed in the abdomen you cannot die is obviously not correct. 

I think I will leave it at that and seek to have some further discussion with my elder brother, hon. Mallinga, so that we can put this matter in correct context.  

On the issue of the political pressure group of the Reform Agenda, I do expect that hon. Amama Mbabazi will also say something about this. I am in touch with some senior officials of this pressure group, the Reform Agenda, and I want to make just two brief statements.  

First, some members within the Reform Agenda do disassociate themselves with any member of the Reform Agenda who wants to act through violence.  It is a reality that within the Reform Agenda there are some people who want to take the path of violence. There are also those who want to take the path of politics to negotiate whatever wrong they think is happening in the country. 

So, as responsible members of this country, we should appreciate that there are people in the country whose intention is to cause violence. It is the duty of the state to deal with them so that we can have peace. Obviously if the handling of them is out of order, we have channels that we can use to cause this correction. But to come to this House and speak as if people have been picked randomly and there is no problem is not correct.  There is definitely a problem and some people of the Reform Agenda are part of this problem. 

Those senior members of the Reform Agenda whom I see have not told me stories about this torture chamber. But they have admitted that they have members who support violence in their midst, and they do not – (Interjections)- if I could go to the last point, Mr Speaker. I need to finish so that my colleagues can come in. If it is about Reform Agenda, I would like to advise that we meet and discuss with anybody who is in the Reform Agenda and we deal with this matter.

My last comment is on the LCs as reported by hon. Kamuntu. Mr Speaker, many of us, and I am sure even in your own constituency you meet this question – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I was reluctant to rise on a point of order, but the allegation that the National Political Commissar has made is quite grave and serious to us in the Reform Agenda.

I am one of the senior people in the Reform Agenda. Hon. Okupa is one of the senior people in Reform Agenda; hon. Reagan is one of the senior people in Reform Agenda; the chairman of the Committee on National Economy is one of the senior people; hon. Kibanzanga is one of the senior people of Reform Agenda. The list is long. 

Is it in order for the NPC to lump us together and say that some people have assured him that some senior members of Reform Agenda support violence, without him substantiating?

THE SPEAKER: You are speaking for Reform Agenda, which you want me to recognise? Please, Dr Kiyonga proceed.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to assure hon. Ekanya that I am aware of many members who are in the Reform Agenda. I was very deliberate in my statements. I said I have met some of these people and they have said that some members of the Reform Agenda pressure group do support violence. If this is understood to mean that some of our colleagues here are in that category, that is a different matter but not attributable to him.

Now I will go to the LCs. Hon. Kamuntu has reported that LCIs do a commendable job and that they would like to be paid some form of allowance. My stance on this matter has been to do a calculation for the LCs whenever they raise it. I bring out the total number of LCIs and we go through various scenarios - suppose we paid Shs 1,000, suppose we paid Shs 10,000. And in the fora in which I have been, we have all agreed that it is not affordable with the national budget at this stage. I would request that we all take this line. 

But hon. Kamuntu being our chairman of the Committee on Finance, I would like to have further discussions on this matter with him so that we can have a common direction.  

As I said, Mr Speaker, my other colleagues would like to make statements. I would therefore like to end here. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, this being my maiden speech – (Laughter) – as a new Member of Parliament, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the honourable members, including my great friend hon. Aggrey Awori, for giving me tremendous support. (Applause). I know your support was instrumental. 

There were two Members of Parliament who did not support me who came to Kinkizi West, but they found the momentum that had been gained had reached a level where they were forced to keep themselves under concealment. These were hon. Mabikke and hon. Sabiiti Jack. (Laughter).

Mr Speaker, I am happy that the election ended well. I am happy that we went through the post-election process very successfully. My former opponent, Mr James Musinguzi and I did have a reconciliation meeting under the chairmanship of the President. And in the full realm of Movement principles and politics, we reconciled (Applause). 

I am happy to say that had it not been for state duties which took me out, I would by now have met with Mr Musinguzi to work out a detailed plan to give a face to what we agreed on in principle at that meeting.

Having said that, Mr Speaker, I would like to make comments briefly on two or three points that came out of the debate by members. First, there is the question of the Chief Political Commissar of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, Brig. Kale Kaihura, making a statement on the Deputy Chief Justice’s statement about UPDF. This point was brought out by my good friend and brother hon. Theodore Ssekikubo. It was presented as if Kale Kaihura committed a blunder in responding to the statement about UPDF by the Deputy Chief Justice. 

I would like to make a statement that is clear to all of you. When you go public, whoever you are, you attract public comment. If the Deputy Chief Justice of Uganda goes in a forum and makes a statement about the UPDF, it is indeed the duty of UPDF to respond. If this matter had been a matter subject to adjudication, if it was a matter for court to make a decision, then of course it would be subjected to the well-known rule of subjudice. 

But a high court judge, a court of appeal judge, the Chief Justice himself, if he goes in the realm of the public to make any statement, he or she should be prepared to receive responses.

I would like to make a clear statement, Mr Speaker, that UPDF, as an institution has not been involved in the allegations that have been attributed to it by that statement. Such allegations have not been put to the test. They have been made in many fora but they have not been put to the test. And it is obvious that, therefore, it is not a foregone conclusion that there are two – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you honourable Minister for giving way. Mr Speaker, I think the statement by the Deputy Chief Justice has been put to test by none other than the Chairman of the Electoral Commission. Here with me is a letter dated 7 February 2003, addressed to one Capt. Muwanga David of President’s Office. The subject is “Interference with the Electoral Process.” It is very clear. It says: “The Electoral Commission has received information that you are allegedly interfering with the campaign exercise for LCV Chairperson by-elections currently going on in Mukono District…” (Interruption).

DR CHEBROT: I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker. Hon. Bulamu and some other Members of Parliament in the corridors are making so much noise. Is it possible for you to ask the Sergeant–at-Arms to ask them to keep quiet, because I am unable to follow the proceedings of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER:  Let it be.

MR SSEKIKUBO: The said Capt. Muwanga David intimidated the electorate in Ntenjeru town council, Ngogwe, Buikwe counties respectively using firearms It goes on to say, “It is further alleged that you are involved in terrifying the electorate using armed gangs in the night.” 

The only polite statement I wanted to make as I lay it on the Table is that surely this country has seen many brigadiers, major generals and the like. I wonder where Nasur is at this time! He is lucky he got off the hook because of the prerogative of mercy, but there are many others. The Mariamungus of this country have been here – (Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable Member representing Lwemiyaga, my neighbour, hon. Ssekikubo, to attribute the actions of a one Capt. Muwanga to be the activities of the institution I represent in this Parliament, the UPDF?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think this is a repetition of what the honourable Lt General raised earlier. He is just saying that the activities of such people, if they really happen, tarnish the image of the institution.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  Mr Speaker, since the part I represent, Buikwe North, is part of Mukono and the incident being referred to is in that district, I am seeking clarification. How far can the citizens be able to identify the activities of an individual officer, fully in uniform, armed with government arms, carrying escorts who are paid by government and it is not attributed to the institution?  

Are you saying or are we saying in this Parliament that the wananchi can deal with such people using all possible means within their power in order to protect themselves against an army officer? I seek clarification.

MR SSEKIBUBO: Mr Speaker, just this morning I heard over BBC, the Vice President of Zambia being allayed before courts of law for contemptuous statements like the same made by Brig. Kaihura. I would wish, if it so pertinently fits, that he too faces the same process, because he is pouring scorn on the institution of the judiciary; tomorrow it will be Parliament. I do not know whether he fears the Executive? Such statements are dangerous to our democratisation process and should be castigated with the highest possible terms I lay this letter on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what you are talking about is the brigadier’s language; it is not the disagreement with the statement but the language used. I think what he is saying is not proper -(Interjection)- Well, what you should have done is to lay it on the Table then the Speaker would give it to him.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can only say that I heard what hon. Theodore was saying, and obviously when this comes up, I thought I would grab the opportunity to have a copy now. I will ask Parliament to give me a copy and we will look into that matter. (Applause).  

I was only saying that we must surely be able to make a distinction between actions of individuals and actions of institutions. In law we have something called “people on a frolic” - people acting at a time when they are on what we call a frolic of their own. For example, a driver of an institution, instead of taking the vehicle to the office to lock it up at 5.00 O’clock, he drives upcountry and in the process he knocks someone. It was illegally in his hands although it is a government vehicle and he is a government employee. That is what we call “a frolic of his own”.  

You may find cases where members of UPDF act as individuals but in the process, it gives a bad name to the institution of UPDF. That is why we have very vigorous procedures to discipline anyone who acts in a manner that tarnishes the name of the institution called UPDF. 

I am sure members are fully aware that we do take very strong disciplinary measures against those who act either in a manner that maligns the institution or even illegally, even if it does not malign the institution but as long as their actions are foul of the law.

I would therefore like to encourage Members of Parliament to feel free. Whenever you come across such information, please bring it up. Bring it to the Ministry of Defence or give it to the institution itself. I can only assure members that action will be taken. 

I would also want to hear that such information was given to us, we investigated, found it was true and we did not take action! What I expect of the Deputy Chief Justice, in light of her office, is that she cannot make light statements that seem to reflect on an institution, unless they are on a clear basis. They should be on a basis that is tested. This is not the kind of test I was talking about.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker - I should have started with this. The Attorney General, hon. Francis Ayume, asked me to convey his apologies to you and to the House for not being here today. He was held up somewhere but he knew that he was expected to give some opinions on a number of points. However, he undertakes to come here as soon as he finishes that accomplishment. I am saying this in response to what my good friend Dr Nabwiso raised.

Fourthly and finally, on the question of torture in government chambers by security institutions, I would like to say that this information is now available to me as Minister for Defence. It was not available to us as members of the National Security Council, which covers all security organs of state. I have taken note of what hon. Mabikke said, and we are obviously going to follow it up. 

I was a bit surprised by hon. Kikungwe. I happen to know Lt Dan Mugarura and I am not sure that he is from Issa Kikungwe’s constituency. I would be surprised if he was. But I want to assure this House that this is a matter we are going to take up. We are going to investigate it to find out if there are snakes, ants and crocodiles. And we will find out if –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I am glad that the Minister of Defence has promised to investigate this matter, because the matter is so serious. For Parliament to receive this information from three honourable members, and for it to be corroborated by a fourth member and Parliament does nothing, I think would be terrible. So, I am glad that the minister is going to investigate this. 

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to request that the minister investigates and reports to Parliament the results of his investigations. Thank you.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Speaker, of course it is a very serious allegation and that is why I have taken it up seriously. I actually do not believe it, I should tell you, because of the way it was presented by hon. Ekanya, hon. Kazoora, hon. Mabikke and others. The fact that hon. Mabikke and hon. Ekanya know and I do not know - well, I will take it up. Certainly we are going to investigate it and if we find that it is true, we will take the necessary action.

On the question of the arrest of some members of the Reform Agenda, I would like to assure this House, and add to what the NPC said that Government has not arrested anybody by virtue of their being a member of the Reform Agenda. If we had, then those senior members whom hon. Ekanya has listed would not be here exercising their democratic right of free speech in this House and even outside it. Hon. Ekanya issues press statements and addresses press conferences.  

Only two days ago, the Reform Agenda addressed a press conference.  Their leadership is known. It is not true that anyone has been arrested because they are members of the Reform Agenda or because they subscribe to the ideas of the Reform Agenda, certainly not.  

It is true that Government has arrested people about whom information has been received that they are engaging in subversive activities against the state. Obviously, the due process will apply to those. Some have been brought before courts of law and charged, and they have a right to defend themselves.

I think we should not prejudice court or act in a prejudicial manner. We should allow our judicial system, our process of administration of justice, to take its course. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, GENERAL DUTIES (Capt. Mike Mukula): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May I take this opportunity to first of all welcome Parliament to this new year. At the same time I would like to take the opportunity to respond to a position which was raised by hon. Mallinga, the Member of Parliament for Butebo, who is also a doctor and a captain. 

I was flabbergasted and shocked to hear my honourable colleague articulating issues as if he has not been in this country. Needless to say, I wish to respond as follows:  

The Ministry of Health has a very clear vision and policy framework. Under Dr Kiyonga we were able to bring together a Health Sector Strategic Plan, which is rolling out initially for five years. This plan is being supported by a number of our development partners, who have laid out very clear benchmarks for their support to this sector.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the focus of the Health Sector Strategic Plan is mainly and primarily on primary healthcare. We would like to make sure that our outreach goal is applied more to what I would call a horizontal approach; that is reaching out to the rural person and child. The main emphasis is the reduction of infant mortality and morbidity.  

Along the same framework, I would wish to remind hon. Mallinga and other colleagues that by the time the National Resistance Movement took over power in 1986, infant mortality in Uganda was at very alarming rates. One hundred and eighty nine children out of every 1,000 were dying before they reached their first birthday. Because of the strategic thrust that was put up by the National Resistance Movement in terms of immunisation, these figures have dropped. By the year 1985, it was about 82 children dying out of every 1,000. 

However, when we moved towards decentralisation, because of lack of effective capacity on the ground, these figures were slightly elevated to about 88 children out of every 1,000.

A few more strategic approaches, from the time we rolled out the Health Sector Strategic Plan, have been put in place. One of them is the revitalized immunisation package, which His Excellency the President was able to pronounce last year on the 17th of July at the International Conference Centre. 

Combined with that dual approach, His Excellency also unpacked the Roll-back Malaria Strategy, which is aimed at what you would call the home-based care programme. This strategy has already been made available in ten pilot districts and so far I wish to report to the House, in districts like Kumi, Rukungiri and Adjumani where we have unpacked the Roll-back Malaria programmes –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, we have had a number of policy statements from Capt. Mukula, and he has given us these figures before. The pertinent issues we want now are: are these facilities available in the hospitals along highways, and in referral hospitals? Give us those statistics so that the authorities can handle accident victims These statistics you are giving us now were issued at the launching of the population census, and we have them in the policy statements. Thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, with this sector, particularly medicine, you do not have to hurry. It is not about guesswork. It is important that we irrigate Parliament with the correct statistics and the flow of our policies. We must base our arguments on scientific and empirical evidence supported by statistics. We are not going to come here and debate on hearsay. 

It is along that framework that I wish to report to the House that if you are talking about infant mortality and morbidity - as Dr Mallinga was - you must base it on scientific evidence. The strategies we are employing are the ones that will reduce infant mortality in this country.

Empirical evidence means that -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Given the data you have just narrated, are we still using torches in the theatres, and are we still giving out blood that has not been purified? Given what you have told us, are we still using torches for operations in Mbale Hospital, and are we still giving out blood which we have not classified as HIV positive or not? Those are the simple things I want to know. The data I have already.

MR MWANDHA: I think we have no basis for disputing the figures. However, hon. Mallinga was coming up with practical proposals. He was telling us that some of the machines for testing the chest are so cheap and it is terrible that a referral hospital like Mbale, a regional hospital for the whole of the eastern region, does not have one. 

He proposes that basic equipment be put in hospitals along the trunk roads, so that at least people who are involved in serious accidents are attended to with this equipment in place. It is not the figures we want. Let us accept your figures as they are, but can these practical steps be taken? This is the question.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I just want to make a few clarifications, if members could only be calm. 

One, hon. Mallinga, with due respect, was admitted to Mbale Hospital due to a cardiac arrest. He came out of the hospital that he is castigating, alive and able to debate and discuss issues on this Floor. (Interruption)

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: Mr Speaker, what is on the ground is that Mbale Hospital is lacking the basic minimum tools and equipment to carry out operations, and to sustain certain lives. Dr Mallinga was lucky, he is an MP, he was brought to Kampala and he is alive and kicking. However, the truth is that people are being operated with torches as the source of light. Is the honourable minister in order to give us figures yet we want to know what he is doing about such a situation? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under the circumstances, the Chair is required to rule on a point of order yet the issue relies on facts. That is not easy because I am not equipped with the facts on the ground. 

What you can do now is that if the minister is not aware of these facts, it is for you to tell him otherwise. Say to him, “honourable minister, you have said this but the facts are these.” That way, he will take into account the information you give him. He is perhaps saying what he is because he lacks necessary information on the matter.

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I wish to respond as follows:

On maternal mortality and maternal care, the Government of Uganda is building 868 health centres country wide, 214 in every constituency. This will effectively address the issues of maternal mortality. We are making it possible by sending equipment to upgrade the Health Centre IIIs and Health Centre IVs. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to assert very clearly that as I talk right now, 10 theatre equipment sets have already been procured.  

Two, I also wish to put on the ground –(Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, given that the information the honourable minister is labouring to give is fully contained in government documents, which are public documents and are already available to Parliament, is it in order for him to take up the time of Parliament when there are other more sensitive issues to tackle? He could actually just answer the specific issues raised to him. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I suggest that you go and investigate these issues and try to find a solution to them, if you can. As he has said, you already gave out those statistics. 

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. I wish to respond by saying that we have dispatched a team of experts to Mbale Referral Hospital, led by Dr Kiryapawo, to investigate and ascertain the situation prevailing. We also have engineers on the team. As soon as the report is received, we shall take appropriate action. 

However, it is also important for the honourable Members of Parliament to know what we are doing about establishing accident centres countrywide. I wish to respond that in this year, 2003/2004, we intend to bring before this Parliament a framework under which the Ministry of Health will be able to place Kawolo, Iganga, Masaka, Mubende, Itojo, and Kiryandongo hospitals under what we call accident and trauma centres. These will be managed, coordinated and financed by the centre.

Finally, I also wish to report that the Ministry of Health has, this Financial Year, already purchased a total of about 82 multi-purpose ambulances, which will be distributed countrywide. Currently, under the budget framework, we intend to purchase another 80 of these ambulances so that the trauma and referral centres in this country can be improved. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to assure Parliament that the Movement Government is working strategically to make sure that health care for all is achieved, within the Health Sector Strategic Plan, even under the difficult conditions of financing. I thank you.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Okumu-Ringa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There was only one issue raised pertaining to my ministry. It was raised by Prof. Kamuntu. It is in regard to the payment of teachers’ salaries and the variation in payment of salaries, particularly when teachers acquire further qualifications and grades. 

I would like to state that the ministries of Public Service and that of Education have put in place an inter-ministerial committee to look critically into the grievances of teachers, in as far as their pay package is concerned. The ministries are about to complete that inter-ministerial committee meeting, and then we shall liaise with the Ministry of Finance. After that we shall be able to advise Parliament accordingly.  

On the issue of variation of salaries of teachers, particularly those who are at Grade III and who acquire more qualification to upgrade to Grade V, they are not paid the required salary as per the new grade they have attained. That issue is also being addressed by the Ministry of Public Service together with the Ministry of Education. We shall be able to get back to you as soon as possible. 

I can give an undertaking that we shall be able to address this matter and incorporate any increases within the new Financial Year, 2003/2004’s budget framework. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE MINISTER OF WATER, LANDS AND ENVIRONMENT (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Nabwiso did raise a point about the Butamira tree growers, which was of course not surprising. He normally does this and I am glad that he raised it. 

It is true that there was no money in the Budget when this decision to compensate the Butamira farmers was made. However, Government quickly - and I thank the Ministry of Finance for this - through supplementary funding, raised about 75 percent of the money and actually paid the tree growers. 

What is remaining now is about 25 percent of the money, and the Ministry of Finance in November and December approved re-allocation in my ministry, to finish the payment. We are now waiting for the actual release of the money, and I am sure that the hon. Minister of Finance will now make a categorical statement on that very point so that we bring it to a speedy close. With your permission, Mr Speaker, we could get this clarification. 

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, the statement that my friend made in November last year was that cheques were being prepared for these Butamira tree farmers. So the question now is, is the minister in order to make another general statement instead of talking about cheques and how soon they will come?

THE SPEAKER: This is not an easy case. The minister said that cheques were being prepared; unfortunately, we do not know at what stage the preparation was. That is why I am not in position to rule on this. Honourable minister, you said cheques were coming in November, what has happened to these cheques? 

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as I said, we have an authoritative person in Government who deals with money. I propose that with your permission he clarifies the position.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to assure this House that we will ascertain the stage at which the process of payment is now, but we want to reiterate that this is a matter that is being addressed. We will be able to inform this House, in due course, exactly why and where this process is.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the issue of Butamira is a very serious matter, and I can see the people of Butamira living against hope because we are at a stage where cheques are being prepared. The Minister of Finance has just informed us that they are also trying to ascertain certain factors towards making these cheques ready for payment. Can we be clarified by the Minister, tentatively, when these people will be paid?

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to clarify. The statements that have been given are in consonant with what I wanted to say. But what I wanted to say is that the initial cheques, which were prepared, were prepared for those people who are willing to accept compensation. 

There was a group, which was led, unfortunately, by even some Members of Parliament. It was a pressure group which was resistant from the beginning and were not put in record –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister in charge of the Environment is mentioning a very important point that concerns trust of Members of Parliament, our reputation and role in society. When he says there were some Members of Parliament behind a revolution to refuse the cheques, he implies that many of us may be part of that group. 

Is it in order for him to say words of that kind without specifying the people who could have been behind this? By leaving things in space, could he not be talking about you and me? Is it in order for him to talk anyhow without specifying?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these points of order are intended for certain situations. It is not all the time that you differ with the presentation of another that you say they are out of order. Normally, it should be on the procedure and the rules but not difference in opinion. So, I think we should minimise raising these points of order so that we proceed.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was just specifying that the people whose cheques were prepared by the time the Minister was giving information to hon. Nabwiso were the willing farmers who, from the beginning, agreed that Government had a programme. They were willing to take money. These were valued, and their cheques were prepared and handed over. The pressure group did not accept that time. They came much later and their money delayed. That is the 25 per cent that is coming later on.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The minister has said that he is going to follow up this matter. I would request the committee concerned to follow up this particular matter and report in due course. I think this ends the issue.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Another point, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi did raise a point about reporting on the outcome of the World Summit on sustainable development. 

Uganda sent a powerful delegation led by His Excellency the President, and the delegation performed well. The delegation included hon. Members of Parliament who were sponsored by Parliament, and I am assured by hon. Kawesi that their report is being made. 

However, we recently had a post World Summit session in Mukono and we want to make a report to Parliament to benefit from the proceedings of that seminar. So, a report to Parliament will be coming in due course. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Prof. Ogenga Latigo raised the issue of the doctorate awarded to His Excellency the President by Mbarara University of Science and Technology. I do not have an immediate answer to Prof. Ogenga Latigo’s concerns. 

What I had known was that the University had gone through all its procedures and had a degree approved by the relevant authorities there, and they regularly awarded it. Then there is a citizen of Uganda, a learned one, who seems to be raising some questions about it. Sir, the ministry will investigate and make a formal statement on the matter in two weeks. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, before the honourable colleague resumes his seat, you will recall that on the 1st of February, at a function where the guest of honour was the President himself, he made it very clear that he does not acknowledge nor recognise that honour.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I attended the ceremony you are talking about. This was breaking the ground for the Church House. I think the President did not say that, he only said that he does not want to be referred to as a doctor: “It was an honorary degree, which I received, please, do not refer to me….” He did not say that he does not recognise it. I think other members were there.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, Capt. Byaruhanga did ask whether the 23 percent cut was regular, whether we appear before the Budget Committee and whether it was in order for Government to make this supplementary allocation soon after the Budget. (Interruption)

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I wanted information from the Minister of Finance because the committees now are going to be involved in the Budget process as they were involved last Financial Year. I wanted to know from the Minister of Finance whether the committees were involved in this 23 per cent Budget cut, or whether they are intending to involve them.

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, we intend to involve them.  Thank you. (Interjections) We intend to involve them under the Budget Act and in keeping with the provisions of the Constitution. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, FISHERIES (Dr Byaruhanga Fabius): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ekanya raised the issue of lack of a national fisheries policy. I wish to reply as follows. There is actually a National Fisheries Policy but it is very archaic. This is a 1963 policy, which was followed by the 1964 Fish and Crocodile Act.

As I have said, the law and the policy are very archaic. We are now through with a very long consultative process and have the final draft of the new fisheries policy. We are only awaiting a certificate from the Ministry of Finance, which we hope to get within this week so that we can take this new policy proposal to Cabinet. 

Therefore, in a month or so, we should have a new fisheries policy. I would also be able to come back to Parliament with a new fisheries bill.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence.  I am under instructions from my senior colleague to give further clarification. The further clarification I am giving to Capt. Byaruhanga is that we have already compiled the necessary data relating to the 23 percent. And we have passed it on to the chairperson of the Budget Committee, for inclusion in the biannual budget performance report. Mr Speaker, I beg the House’s pardon.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL FORESTRY AND TREE PLANTING BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: Before we come to the next item, the honourable Member for the Youth, Eastern had some urgent matter.  

MR WILFRED KAJEKE (Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Jay Tanna, under Rule 42: 

Whereas Parliament notes with deep sorrow the untimely demise of the late Jay Tanna, former Eastern Youth Member of Parliament, which occurred on the 11th day of February 2003 in an accident on Bugiri-Tororo road yesterday; and

Noting that the late Jay Tanna was a dedicated, vastly experienced, industrious businessman, and the first Member of Parliament from the Indian Community of Uganda; 

Now therefore, this Parliament resolves as follows:  
That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this gallant and industrious son of Uganda;

That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered, and contributions made by the late Jay Tanna, particularly in the field of economy in Uganda;

That a moment of silence be observed in memory of the late Jay Tanna.  I beg to move.

THE SEPAKER: It is seconded. I can allow some members to contribute before I put the question. Does somebody want to speak to this motion?

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. You know death invokes sympathy, and when a person dies, people are advised not to say anything negative about them. I am very constrained, but I want to ask the mover of the motion a simple question. The person he is talking about left Parliament, he resigned. It was subsequently discovered that the reason he had resigned was because he did not have the requisite qualifications to come to this House.

THE SPEAKER: Was it on record?

PROF. KAGONYERA: I have said, “we heard”.

THE SPEAKER: No, was it on record?  Because what we have is a Member of Parliament as any other member saying, “I have resigned”, and that was the end of it.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, the mover has talked about distinguished service. Where is that distinguished service?

THE SPEAKER: For the period he was here.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Is it on record? I want to be on record as a university teacher who has always insisted on qualifications. We may even have to change the rules so that whoever wants can stand!

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. When you are on the Floor of the House, you do not say, “people say this, people say the other”. You must have facts. As far as this Parliament is concerned, Tanna was elected, he came here and served and at one point he decided to resign. That is on record. But the things you hear in barazas cannot be used on such a matter.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, in the light of your guidance, I beg to move that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to hon. Awori’s motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to hon. Kajeke’s motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, it will be prudent for us to accomplish the requisites of the motion. There was a mention that we observe one minute’s silence. I beg to move that we observe it.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry. Thank you very much.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I recall that this afternoon you reminded us that we shall be getting involved in the budget process by sticking to the provisions of the Budget Act. I have, on a number of occasions, raised the matter of certificates from the Treasury regarding bills to be laid here. Consistently, the excuses have been that the certificates would be produced at a later stage. 

The fact of the matter, and why it is necessary to have these certificates, is for us to look at the entire perspective in which that certificate is issued. And provisions of the Budget Act are very clear that every bill must be submitted together with the certificate. 

I know that I received a copy of the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do we want to talk in a vacuum? We have bills here, why don’t we wait and see whether the certificate is there? This is not a general debate; we are dealing with a specific bill. If it is presented without that certificate, then you will raise that matter. Otherwise, you are opening a general debate.  

In future these bills shall be presented with certificates. Now let us see what happens to this. It is only then that you may raise it; if they have not complied with it.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. But the import of the matter I was raising was that if I am enabled to cite a bill, I should also be equally enabled to cite the certificate.  It is not a question of being laid on the Table. I think every Member of Parliament has a right to get copies thereof.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, when the bill is read, it must be accompanied by a certificate, as we have said. The next step will be for me to commit the bill to the appropriate committee of Parliament - that is, the bill together with the certificate. The committee will scrutinise the details of the bill and the certificate, and if they have anything to complain about the certificate, they will do so and may not present a report until that matter is sorted out. Why don’t we really see what is happening and then proceed.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I remember your earlier ruling on this matter was that when they are giving copies of the bill to members, they should be accompanied by certificates. That was your earlier ruling. I do not know whether we are changing it so that they bring them to the committees, because that will disorganise us.

THE SPEAKER: No. You are talking in a vacuum, in the sense that I do not know the bill. The act has not been taken. If it is taken, that is when you will make the query. But you are starting the query before the minister has even presented. Maybe he is not presenting; I do not know.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I think it is better for us to go back to why we have these certificates. I thought we should have them in order to be able to plan and find out whether what we are passing will be implemented. 

Particular certificates should go to the committee so that the committee can discuss further with the ministry whether what is being planned has been budgeted for and what is going to be legislated can be implemented. I thought that was the gist of it, and therefore, the reason why it should go to a particular committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, because the plenary cannot start debating a bill on the first reading. The bill will definitely go to the committee of a few people. You can go there and attend and even raise issues on the certificate. But let us see whether this one has a certificate or not.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I move, may I show the honourable Members of Parliament the certificate for this bill. (Applause). Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the National Forestry and Tree Planting Bill, 2002 be read a first time.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament to scrutinise and make the appropriate report.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled, “The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read for the first time.  

Sir, pursuant to section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001, the bill is accompanied by a certificate of indicative financial implications, which I beg to lay on the Table. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for scrutiny and to present an appropriate report.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Mr Speaker, some of us have a problem with the issue of certificates, which has been raised by Members of Parliament. Parliament committed a bill on the National Council for Persons with Disability to the Committee on Social Services. You gave us permission to sit during recess so that we can prepare the work.  For the last two weeks, we have been in touch with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to see whether we can receive a certificate, but always the excuse is Finance, Finance, Finance! 

Now that the Minister of Finance, who is supposed to authorise a certificate is here, could we know whether if we sit from tomorrow, we should begin considering the University and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill? We should do this instead of looking at the bill, which we have started, whose financial implications we do not know, and which is not fulfilling the requirements of the Budget Act. I wish to hear from the Minister of Finance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Gender and the Minister of Finance should make a complete report to the House tomorrow.

MRS  SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I think what they are doing is rather redundant because the rule is very clear. Rule 93: “Bills to be published in gazette.” 
“93(1) All Bills shall be published in the Gazette and shall be accompanied by an explanatory memorandum setting out the policy and principles of the Bill, the defects of the existing law, if any, the remedies proposed to deal with those defects and the necessity for its introduction.  

(2) In addition to the explanatory memorandum, the Bill shall be accompanied by a certificate setting out its financial implications (Budget Act 2001) including- 
(a)	the specific outputs and outcomes of the Bill;
(b)how those outputs and outcomes fit within the overall policies and programmes of government;
(c)the costs involved and their impact on the budget;  
(d) the proposed or existing method of financing the costs related to the Bill and its feasibility. 

(3) The explanatory memorandum and the certificate shall be signed by a minister or by the member introducing the Bill.”  

Mr Speaker, how did that bill get to the committee and take on a lot of Government money and resources when it was not competent? I think we have failed our duty in the House. I would not want to hear from the Minister of Finance  –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is going to happen is, if a bill goes to the committee and is not accompanied with what it should be mandated to be accompanied with, they will come and make a negative report to the House. 

In the same way, if the bill comes here, reportedly accompanied by a certificate that is not a certificate as envisaged in the rules or in the law, again the appropriate committee will be competent to say, “although they sent us a bill accompanied by the so called certificate, that was not the certificate for this reason or the other.”  

But as far as we are concerned, at this juncture this House is not really competent to deal with those details. We expect the committee –(Interjections)- you cannot say anything because at the first reading, there is nothing you say. It is a question of the minister involved and the clerk reading it, and that is the end of it. That is the position. But if the minister presents a bill and it is not accompanied or he does not even show us a document which he purports to call a bill, we shall say, “No, we cannot receive it”.  

We dealt with this matter before we went on recess, and I think there is a ruling which we made for further bills. At the same time, we should know that there are some bills pending in the committees, which were not accompanied by the certificate you are talking about, simply because of the time factor. I am talking of the time factor in the sense the Budget Act you are talking about has not been in operation all the time. So, it is only those bills that were presented after the coming into force of the Budget Act that we are concerned with. There was no retrospective provision for bills that had been presented earlier without certificates. I hope that is clear.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, while we are concerned that some bills come without certificates, I think this afternoon we are witnessing a certificate coming without a bill. I am not aware that the Forestry and Tree Planting Bill was ever distributed to members. So, I think the minister should make steps to distribute the bill.

THE SPEAKER: Can we proceed to another item?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $150 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) FOR BUDGET SUPPORT UNDER POVERTY REDUCTION SUPPORT CREDIT PRSC II

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isanga Musumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this House considers and adopts a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US $150 million from the International Development Association, World Bank, for budget support under the Poverty Reduction Support Credit II.  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can you explain and then the chairperson comes in?

MR ISANGA MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, in a bid for Government to raise money to provide for primary education, health, water and sanitation and agriculture as priority social service sectors, Government did agree with the World Bank, in the year 2001, that they would support our budget with an amount of 150 million dollars per year, between the years 2001 and 2004, and this money would be used in these priority social service sectors. 

Sir, each year as we come here, we do incorporate in our Budget the 150 million dollars, which was earmarked and allocated annually for this purpose from the World Bank. The purpose of this motion therefore, is to request Parliament to give us authority as Government to access this money so that we can continue providing for these social service sectors, which are part of our plan to eradicate poverty.  

Mr Speaker, this matter has already been presented before the relevant committee of Parliament, and it has considered it and I believe they will in due course be in a position to provide a report of their findings to this House.

However, I do want to make two clarifications that arose from the discussions that we had. It is true that our generation of domestic revenues are not yet sufficient to support our budget one hundred per cent, hence the need to request donors to support part of our budget.

However, Government is working towards ensuring that progressively, the percentage reliance on foreign funding reduces progressively as the years go by. For example, it is our intention to ensure that whereas in the year 2002/2003 we have 54 per cent as a percentage of aid to our total expenditure in the year 2003/2004, we do intend to have this percentage reduced to only 42.5 per cent. 

This will progress through to the year 2004/2005 and 2005/2006, by which time our reliance will be 40 per cent - (Interjection)- I heard a member saying “only”; the 40 per cent to which we intend to reduce to doesn’t consider the fact that our domestic revenues will have increased. Also, our expenditure increases every year as we take more children to primary schools, as the population grows, and our obligations continue to require more funding. 

So, we will do two things, we will increase the domestic revenue on the one hand but also decrease the reliance on the debt. These figures are here; we will pass them on to the Budget committee for deeper consideration. But in the meantime, I will lay on the Table a document that has a statement of those figures.

Sir, we are considering also another method of work, and we are in consultation with the relevant committee, since these amounts are actually part and parcel of what we present to this House as an amount, which we will spend in the year and this House appropriates it. We are in consultation with these committees and also examining the permissibility of our laws and Rules of Procedure to see whether we cannot comprehensively address these credits, which are part and parcel of our Budget, at the time when we present the Budget, so that it expedites the work both of Government and the work of honourable Members of Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, this, as I have already told this House, is part and parcel of a loan that is going to assist our Budget, which has already been considered by this House and actually passed.  This money has been appropriated by this House, and so I do not intend to waste much of the time of the House but would wish to beg that the motion be considered and be passed. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to correct some impressions I got - which were put across by one person - when I read the the East African and some letters from some Members of Parliament insinuating that the Committee of the Economy is not in position to work on this loan request. The procedure for loan requests is well known and laid down in our Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

It should be noted that the budget was read in June and this loan request was presented to Parliament in November. It was vital that the request be presented immediately, for purposes of being passed early enough to support the budget.  It is important that in future, such issues should be put in place in time to avoid apportioning blame, when the relevant people who are supposed to do it are the ones turning against the others. 

However, this is the report of the Committee. Mr Speaker, the PRSC II loan request was laid on the Table on 13 November 2002 as per Rule 99 (5) of the Rules of Procedure and the provision of Article 90 and 159 of the Constitution. The request was committed to the Committee on National Economy and the Committee now wishes to report as follows:

Background: 

PRSC II is the second of the series of poverty reduction credits that support the Government budget and form part of the resources budgeted for in the financial year 2002/2003.  These credits are to support the implementation of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan priority programmes. 

This loan request is the second batch - having passed the first batch in the year 2001/ 2002 - out of the 600 million dollars of the loan.  

Observations and comments: 

• Members observed that this loan facility is to be implemented in the same way as PRSC I, since they are all both budget support credits and not the project support arrangement. 
 
• We further observed that since this forms part of the budget, it should have been brought to the attention of Parliament for approval before it was incorporated in the budget.  

• PRSC II will be implemented and monitored under the policy matrix indicating the actions and output targets. All members have this matrix.  

• The four PEAP pillars, i.e. economic growth and transformation, good governance and security, increasing income for the poor, and improving the quality of life will be supported during the planned period using the credit support, but each release will depend on the outcomes of the previous activities.  

• The Government is to address the weakness in procurement units.  The bill to this effect is already with Parliament. The Committee noted that there have been reforms in the procurement sector, by suggesting to set up procurement units in ministries and local governments.   

Recommendations: 

• Government should bring to Parliament all support credits for approval before incorporating them in the budget to avoid problems in case such requests are rejected.

• These credits should be used to fund development and not recurrent expenditures in order to improve the social economic welfare of Ugandans. It should not be used for consumption.  

• Government should provide a schedule of how it is reducing donor funding of the budget from the current level - we had said 53 per cent but we were told it is 54 per cent. 

• This credit should be approved since it forms part of the 2002/2003 budgets that the House has already approved.  

• Comprehensive progress reports should be submitted to Parliament on the utilisation of this credit and on the development projects being supported.

The Funding:

• The total funding under PRSC is $600 million over a four-year period, from 2001 to 2004.  The funds are already accommodated in a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). 
 
• This credit facility is concessional and in line with the standard IDA credit terms and the Government’s debt strategy. 

• The repayment period is 40 years, with a grace period of 10 years and an interest rate of 0.75 per cent, which is good. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the Committee wishes to thank all those who participated in the discussion of this loan request. The Committee requests the House to approve 150 million US dollars for PRSC II to help in poverty eradication problems I thank you and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that you exercise the powers conferred upon you under Rule 46 (1) and you adjourn the House until we are able to debate the matter the following day. And I can justify, with your permission.

THE SPEAKER: Why? Are you tired? This is too early; we have just started. Why don’t we continue?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, we started this House under a very rigorous note, and members have been away for a period of eight weeks. So our capacity to debate such an important matter has been diminishing as time goes on. 

On top of that, some of us have serious contributions on this matter. I know some of our colleagues who want to contribute but for various reasons, especially the number one reason I have mentioned, they have left. So, I beg to move that you adjourn the House until tomorrow when we are fresh and we tackle this matter of poverty.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I told you we have a lot of work to do during this meeting.  We have earmarked particular business for every day. As you see, we have earmarked discussion of a report on UCB, which is holding other business. So, I suggest we go on with the debate and see how we proceed. I have given the opportunity to the member from Gomba.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Committee on National Economy for this precise and clear report. I am particularly concerned about their recommendation on page three of the report, the last bullet, which says, “Comprehensive progress reports should be submitted to Parliament on the utilisation of this credit and on the development projects being supported.”  

Mr Speaker, this is very important because this is money that is supposed to help fight poverty. As Parliament, we would be interested in getting at least a report once in while as to how far we have gone in the battle against poverty. One of our worries these days is that when such money is approved, much of it is spent in seminars. Most of these seminars are normally in Kampala. 

Some of us have got a fear that when we talk of fighting poverty, the poverty we are fighting is the poverty around the capital city and some of these major towns in Uganda. As Members of Parliament, we want to see poverty reduced in the rural areas. 

This programme has been running for a whole year, but I think many of my colleagues will testify that there is not so much on the ground. You go to the countryside anywhere in this country and there is biting poverty everywhere, and yet every year we are approving money to fight poverty. How come we are not seeing a change? Why are people in the rural areas always crying of poverty? 

In my constituency, we already have people going without salt; they cannot even afford salt, they cannot afford paraffin! 

So, my appeal is that we as policy makers should focus more on the rural areas other than on Kampala and other towns. Almost every time we get money, it is spent on seminars, and these seminars are in Kampala and the man in the rural areas, who is supposed to benefit, is not benefiting much.  

It is my hope that next year when we approve another 150 million, the Minister of Finance will be able to stand up and tell us, “poverty is now reducing”. We should be able to see it and feel it.  With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I would like to support this motion. Thank you very much.

MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to support the motion, but I have to raise the following observations. When you look at page three of the report, the first recommendation makes me wonder as to why we have to approve a budget before we have agreed on the possible sources of funding for that particular budget. This will one day tantamount to blackmail or arm twisting so that the Legislature will be forced into approving loans which at the end of the day may not be beneficial to this country.

It is interesting to note that we are left with around four months to the end of the financial year, but now we are considering approving a loan of 150 million US dollars. So, how this money is going to be spent in this short time, the Executive will tell us.

I am also concerned about the quality of the services delivered in this country.  We have tagged everything under the heading, “poverty eradication”. But when we go back to our respective constituencies and take stock of what is being done there, we find that there is a lot left to be desired.

Recently, I visited the Ministry of Health and raised a complaint from my constituency, which relies 90 percent on non-governmental organisations as far as health service delivery is concerned. I found out that the Ministry of Health is even not supervising. They are giving some money to these NGOs but they are not supervising. They do not even go there to find out what they are doing with the money they are giving them monthly. 

The beneficiaries, my constituents, are also not happy, and they are also complaining. They say that Government has ignored its responsibility of delivering health care. So you find us at crossroads. Government purports to be doing its best but the wanainchi are not happy with what the Government is doing. So, I think we need to take care of this.  

Now that this credit is for the recurrent expenditure, I would request that we spend some money on data collection and supervision and monitoring so that we are able to track down the developments on the ground.

In the same way, when it comes to primary education, it is a well-known fact that urban schools are performing far better than rural schools. What is the problem when the teachers teaching in rural areas also come from the same teacher training colleges where those urban teachers come from? Something has to be done.  

Much as we would like to have everybody go for primary education, we should also look at the issue of quality. Otherwise, we are going to end up spending money and when we no longer get enough credit, we will find that we have not done much during the time we have been borrowing much of this money.

I would also like to request the Minister of Finance to update us on the total indebtedness of this country. We have been approving loans ever since we came to the 7th Parliament, but we do not know the total loan package. If we could be advised and updated, maybe before we approve these budgets, so that we are able to know how our country is proceeding. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I support the motion.  Thank you very much.

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Worker’s Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Whereas I support this motion, I would like to make a few observations.  The honourable Minister of Finance and the chairperson of the Committee of National Economy have informed this House that Government considers very seriously the need to reduce funding of our budget by foreign agencies. In particular, the Government would like to see a reduction of foreign funding of our budget from 54 percent to 42 percent. 

However, what the minister has not said, which I am interested in knowing, is how this is going to be done? I would be very interested in knowing the areas in which the tax base is going to widen, because I am very doubtful whether Government is committed to widening the tax base at all. 

I will use the pay-as-you-earn as an example. Mr Speaker, I have said in this House before, that URA and the Government find it very easy to levy Pay-As-You-Earn (PAYE) on the workers in formal sector employment. Figures that I have from our research department show that only 230,000 Ugandans pay PAYE. I have been wondering whether it is only 230,000 Ugandans who earn more than Shs 130,000 out of the 24,000,000 Ugandans.  

There are many people down in Kikubo who earn a lot more money than the schoolteachers, but PAYE is not levied on them. There has been argument that it is very difficult to track their income, but these people transact other businesses that show that they have money. For example, they import luxuries into this country. They buy Mercedes Benzes and pay customs duty. 

I wonder what the Ministry of Finance is doing to link the customs and excise department with the internal revenue department. So that if you are importing a Mercedes Benz of Shs 40,000,000, there should be a system within URA to look through the computer and see your income tax folio and see whether you paid income tax. Because you cannot buy a Mercedes Benz of Shs 40,000,000 without earning an income!  

It is very unfair and contrary to the principles of taxation for some people to be heavily taxed while others who earn more than them are not taxed. I would like to know from the Minister which specific areas he is going to get into, and whether he has plans to make sure that these people in Kikubo and the informal sector also contribute to PAYE. 

There has been an argument that when they import goods, they pay customs duty and import duty. But we know that the final burden of indirect taxes is borne by the consumers. What they do is that they factor all the taxes they pay into their costs and they pass them on to the consumers, so that at the end of the day, there is no tax they pay. I would like to know what the Ministry of Finance is doing to make sure there is fairness in the tax policy in this country. I thank you.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion for approval of this budget support facility. But before I make one or two comments, I would like to talk about the statement the chairman gave at the beginning, because I am the one who wrote a letter to you clarifying about this money and its relevance in budget support. 

This is because the Ministry of Finance, when they addressed the letter to you and copied it to the Committee on Finance, they also copied it to me as the chairperson of the Budget Committee. I thought there was an oversight and that the committee they were talking about was not Finance but National Economy. I thought that was a genuine mistake. 

So, when I wrote to you to give the explanation about what I know in as far as budget support is concerned, I thought it was prudent to copy the letter to the honourable chairman of the National Economy Committee. And as he rightly puts it, a mechanism should be found in which this money is brought to Parliament beforehand, since it is part of budget support, so that they do not have to come each and every time a small sum is going to be released.

It is in that vein that I went further to say in that letter, that Parliament should not be blamed for any delay. Actually, I was saying the Minister of Finance should have brought this to Parliament at the beginning. So, I did not like this insinuation that “some Members of Parliament have been writing”. I am the one who wrote. I was responding to a letter, which was copied to me by the ministry, and I thought it was prudent to copy it to the chairman of the Economy Committee who had actually not been given a copy, I thought, by error. I thought I should clarify that.

Mr Speaker, I was also irked when in that letter they attributed the delay in passing this loan to the deficit of Shs 1.26 billion in the budget. That is why I was saying no, it is not the fault of Parliament. It is your fault; you should have come up at the beginning. So, if somebody landed on that letter and saw that Parliament has not passed this loan and there is a budget deficit of Shs 1.26 billion, automatically somebody might interpret it to mean that Parliament is not doing its work. I thought I should clear that.

I support this budget support, but I also would like to share the sentiments of hon. Wandera. Although hon. Musumba has categorically stated that they are doing their best to reduce the donor dependency to 42 percent, we would like to implore you to do much more so that the budget dependency on donors gets less. 

This money is being borrowed to support the budget. The pillars of PEAP are known. Is it possible for this Parliament to be given a review or a status report on how the interventions under the four pillars of PEAP are performing? They should tell us that since PEAP was put in place, we have moved from point A to B, so that we do not just continue passing money for budget support, for PEAP – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, is it not provided for in the Budget Act?

MS KIRASO: Yes, there is budget performance. We have got this Poverty Eradication Action Plan, which is specific and its pillars are here; they are well stipulated. If we get information in relation to the four pillars of PEAP, I think it would come out more clearly than just having general budget information.  

I am glad to note that some of this money is going towards the reforms in the procurement sector, because we did pass, I think in the last sitting, the Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Bill. I do not know whether it has been assented to, but it has got a lot of provisions which if implemented, we think they would go a long way to closing the loopholes where Government has been losing a lot of money through fraudulent purchases of goods and services.

Mr Speaker, I have already alluded to the first recommendation. I agree with it, and I think my colleague talked about the total loan portfolio or indebtedness of the state. I just wanted to take the opportunity to remind my colleague that the Budget Act required the Minister in charge of Finance at any time, before or at the time of presenting the Budget, to come up with comprehensive information on the status of total indebtedness of the state. 

We did receive a report, which was circulated last year. So, we expect, honourable minister, that it will follow suit this year and we receive this information in time. I beg to support this motion, Mr Speaker.

MRS AIDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for this report, and I would like to support the motion. But I would like a few clarifications before I am really convinced that this budget support is going to do much better than those we have passed before.

Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister to let me know what capacity has been built in the local communities, the very communities which we are giving these social economic services. What capacity has been built to enable them to appreciate the services that we are taking to them, so that they can own them and protect them and actually even at the time these projects are being put in place, be part of them and supervise them?  

In the past we have seen a few projects taken down to the communities. There has been a lot of corruption and shoddy work done. And what is even interesting, the ministers have always come here to seek for permission to borrow money but they never reported back to us on the quality of work that was put in place and sometimes even the distribution of the services that were delivered. So, am I convinced that this time this money is going to do better work and be handled better than it has been in the past?  

Secondly, I would like to be clarified on what has been put in place for the honourable Minister to say that this money this time will be well used and well monitored. When we talk about corruption, there is always an excuse about decentralization. We get money from the central government, we hand it over down to the local governments and there seems to be no system to follow it up and see how it is used. We get the money, we hand it over and we forget all about it.  

What system are you putting in place, honourable Minister, so that the services that get to the people are better services, of better quality and they reach down to the people? 

Sometimes the local people never get these services. There are many services, which we talk about here, but when I am visiting my constituency I do not see so much of them. I even see shoddy work down there and nobody is complaining about it. Even the local people who should have complained are not aware that this is theirs and they should take care of it.  

If you build a strong building, it will be in the area for long. If you build a shoddy building, it will just collapse in a short time. So, I would like to know what has been put in place to monitor and see that this money is well used. Otherwise, I do support the motion. Thank you.

MRS WINFRED MATSIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to air my disappointment about the method of work. If the credit has already been part of the budget, then why should it come here at this point in time to be discussed? I think this is something that was already done. Maybe if we are to improve, we should do it right before it is put in the budget. 

Suppose we do not approve, but how can we even fail to approve this? We cannot, because we have already committed ourselves. So, maybe it could be termed as something else; maybe you would bring this to be approved, rather than us commenting on it. Even if we do not like it, I do not think there is much that can be done.

Mr Speaker, within the recommendations that were put forward, I do support the recommendation that this credit should be used for development programmes and not for the recurrent expenditures. I hope this can be adhered to. 

What I do not understand is that sometimes capacity building is in-built, and in this capacity building you find a lot of training, which is covered and which is abused in many cases. So, I hope that this capacity building which comes in terms of training is not going to be pushed into development expenditure, because I have seen it in many programmes that the government has been implementing; training takes a lot more than even what actually goes down to the poor.   

Mr Speaker, I hope that this money will percolate to the rural poor. I think it is important that we report on how this money is used in detail, because the reports we get here are so general that you might not find it easy to actually know who has benefited. So, I would really appreciate a report that is detailed. 

In this report, they also talk about strengthening the procurement units. I am aware that we have passed the bill to that effect. But, Mr Speaker, I become very skeptical when people talk about strengthening or putting procurement units at the local government level. 

I am aware of decentralisation and all the good we hoped it would bring, but from experience and looking at what the tender boards and the tendering process has been like in the local governments, it has been quite frustrating. 

It is common knowledge that because the tender board is appointed or is put in place by the mandate of the local government councils, they have to adhere to whatever they want. So much so that the members of the tender boards cannot make any decision without being pushed by the members of the local government council and the chairmen of the districts or town councils or city municipalities.

It has been so bad that most of the work that has been done in the districts is shoddy. Because of that kind of conniving with each other, they produce substandard work. Therefore, when I read here that the procurement units are going to be at the local government, I hope that this is going to be thoroughly monitored and they would strictly adhere to the rules and regulations of what actually we expect these procurement units to be. 

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, if it also operates just as these tender boards are doing, we are likely even to produce worse work and get bad results from this kind of borrowing that we get. I do support the borrowing, because I do not have much to do about it. 

But I hope it could change so that our hands are not tied before we debate or suggest anything on this motion. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR PETER MUTUULUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Members of Parliament have already expressed their dissatisfaction as far as these loans we are passing are used - my fellow Member from Gomba and the rest.  

Sometime back, I had a seminar in my constituency and I was asked to say something about the achievements and challenges of the 7th Parliament.  Among the achievements was that we passed resolutions borrowing money to a tune of - I do not know how much. So much money has been borrowed since this 7th Parliament, but my audience asked me to what extent the money borrowed has been utilized? In fact, I did not have much to say because to say the truth, I do not see any change on the ground in my constituency.

On page three of the report, the recommendations are that this money is just borrowed for development purposes not recurrent expenditure.  Mr Speaker, I just wanted to request the honourable Minister since we have already used -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you, honourable Member from Mawokota for giving way. The information I want to give, since I am a Member of this Committee, is that part of this money, yes, has been sent to local governments under various codes, under for instance the LGDP, under the school facility grant which is the monies used to build or to construct the primary schools we see in most of our constituencies, particularly added on the already existing schools, but I think the basic area of concern is the quality of work. I think I should at this juncture support my prior colleagues who have expressed the issue of local capacity and the issue of strengthening the procurement methods at the local government. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MUTUULUZA: I thank you honourable for giving that information but then we are told that the money used for this UPE exercise partly is just debt relief. Am I wrong? That is what we have been hearing in seminars. The amount we get from debt relief is what is used to help us run this programme of Universal Primary Education.  

MRS BITAMAZIRE: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way; thank you Mr Speaker. The information I want to give my colleague is that the money we use for UPE does not come from one source. UPE is a poverty alleviation programme and it is a long term one. It is assumed that if we can make people literate, they will improve their lives in the long run. Therefore, it comes directly under the monies we are discussing now and of course there are many other sources which run the UPE programme.  I thank you.

MR MUTUULUZA: Thank you for that information. Mr Speaker, before I conclude, page one of this report, last paragraph it seems to me that the first bunch of this money was actually released which was 150 million dollars. I just wanted you to request the Minister to tell us, before I recommend or pass this resolution, what that money has done.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, simple calculations show that 150 million dollars is equivalent to shs 270 billion, that is at the rate of shs 1,800 per dollar now it is even shs 50 more. This is just a lot of money! If it was used for development purposes, I believe there would be some visible, tangible results.  

Mr Speaker, I thank you, but at the end I will raise the issue of quorum before we pass this resolution. thank you.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two concerns and the first one is on page 4, which states that the repayment period is 40 years. And I note that most of us will not be alive by the time this loan is paid back. I also note that we are passing on this loan to our grandchildren and in light of this, I wanted to hear more about this schedule of how Government is planning to reduce donor funding of the budget. Because indeed as my colleagues have said, ever since I entered this House July 21st, one of the highest items on the agenda has been loans and I get perturbed.  

If you have loans, which stretch for a period of 40 years, and you have others, which stretch for 20 years, 10 years, how are these harmonized?  What is in place to ensure that there is less donor funding?

My other concern touches on the issue of – when you look at what these pillars are, no one in this House would refuse to support these pillars. On page 2 it states: “These four pillars are to support economic growth and transformation, good governance and security, increasing income for the poor and improving the quality of life.” When you read this, one thing that strikes out, that is significant is security and of course this takes priority. I think what Members are saying here is that if the Ministry could clearly show us how this funding would be apportioned to tackle these four pillars, then we would feel comfortable passing this particular loan but right now we doubt because we do not know exactly what this loan is going to do. We do not have any progress reports and we cannot pass and support what you propose to us in good faith. 

We have come to a point where we feel that we are being taken for granted, and we would like to get these reports as soon as possible. I support the motion, nevertheless. Thank you.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe North, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee for a job well done, and on time too. 

I think we need to salvage the name of Parliament. As a Member of Parliament I very often get concerned when I read reports in the press that such and such a law has not been passed because Parliament is not done with it yet. I read with concern that this money has not been dispersed because Parliament has not passed a resolution to do so. 

It is on record that this Parliament has been on recess. It is also very well known that this Parliament has been at times adjourned at will, even when there is serious business before the House. There was an incident when Parliament was adjourned when a motion was at Committee Stage, and still some members of the Executive found time to talk about Parliament. They said that Parliament had failed to pass the bill on micro finance institutions. This time round, we have been blamed for having failed, or neglected to pass this resolution in time.  

Mr Speaker, at a very convenient time, I intend to move a motion recording Parliament’s indignation at the Executive for always making us the punching bag. It is indignation for the Executive’s failure to realize priorities, not presenting them on time, and then blaming Parliament for that. 

There are times when we have passed bills in record time of 30 minutes. That shows that Parliament is efficient, and that it can rise up to the occasion when the interests of this country demand so. But why should the Executive make us their punching bag? The Committee has noted the anomaly in the method of work. It is only that in this country the word “sorry” is very rarely used, and very many people do not want to adopt it. 

The Minister of Finance should be saying “sorry” to Parliament because Parliament was appropriating funds that did not exist. The certificates we have been getting have been containing some of this money, which technically is not yet available to Government. Therefore, all these certificates have had inaccuracies in them. 

Mr Speaker, very often we have heard statements from the Executive saying –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I want to assist you. You alluded to a time when this Parliament was adjourned with a bill still at Committee Stage. Apparently that was done by the Deputy Speaker. If you know the facts, then I think you should be ashamed. 

What happened is that there was a bill being debated and there was lack of members’ presence. One of you stood up and said to the Deputy Speaker, “You are dealing with a matter when there is no quorum.” The sitting was adjourned, and the following day the same thing happened. Do you think the Deputy Speaker should have continued with the Committee Stage without quorum? Would she just say, “I adjourn to tomorrow, hopefully members will decide to form quorum then.” 

The Chair has powers to adjourn if it sees that the situation warrants so. However, you should study the matter. You will see from the records that what you have said is not true. The Deputy Speaker would not have continued with lack of quorum.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank you for that clarification, Mr Speaker. 

As I was saying, the passing of this resolution has my backing. I will definitely support it. However, it should be used as a moment of reflection. We should realize where we stand as a country, and what our economy can shoulder and what it cannot. We should stop making irrational and inflammatory statements, telling the donors to pack and go home, threatening that Bujagali can be financed from our own financing, and exciting my constituents and those of hon. Nabwiso. 

So far we are still waiting for this Bujagali project to take off, we are waiting for a resolution, or for Government to say, “We are releasing money for Bujagali to be built.” Why should you excite our voters for no cause? (Interjections) Well, I represent the part on Buganda not Busoga, so we call it “Bujagali”, not “Budhagali”. Although when I cross and go home, I call it “Budhagali”. That was on a lighter note, Mr Speaker. 

The concern I am expressing here is that we should tell our people what our economy can shoulder and what it cannot. That is better than making statements that we think will please the people at a particular time, excite them, and then we do not deliver. I hope that as the minister winds up debate on this issue, he comments on how we stand about the financing for Bujagali, because I think the Bujagali project will go a long way in assisting in the alleviation of poverty in the whole of Uganda.

Finally, I wish to support the view that as part of our method of work, the approval of resolutions of this kind should come either before the budget or together with the budget. I was dismayed when one official in the Ministry of Finance alluded to the fact that since Parliament had appropriated the funds, we had therefore approved the loan! I think those are two different issues. Even the funding agencies actually require a resolution of Parliament. However, let us do it more neatly. Let us bring all these things together with the budget proposals. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Since you have addressed Bujagali of Buganda, let us balance with the Bujagali of the other side.

DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I might be the only person who is opposed to this motion. This motion should not be approved until a few things have happened. If you look at the report on PEAP, page 2 has the four pillars. These pillars conveniently left out an important factor and that is population growth in this country and the matching resources. 

A lot of people talked about poverty alleviation and so on, without talking about the rapid increase in population. I am even surprised that the Minister of Finance, who has been going on about population growth, has not spoken to this motion. I do not know when Parliament –(Interruption)-

MR KITYO: I think population is mentioned in this paper because they say they want to improve the quality of life. Normally quality of life goes hand in hand with social services and population. 

DR NABWISO: I am talking about rapid population increase in Uganda, as per the recent national census. I do not know whether this Parliament will ever have a chance to debate the rapid population increase in this country and its consequences for poverty alleviation. So, it is extremely important that when we are talking about improving quality of life and services, we also look at the population that we have. 

Mr Speaker, if we continue to hear statements from people like Naduli, about closing family planning clinics in Luwero; if we continue to get statements from some of the people in Government - highly placed people - talking about the need to not improve on reproductive health; what are we trying to do? 

In 1988 I attended a course in Kyakwanzi. It was Cadre Course 9. We were being told by the people in Government that this country has a lot of land, we have a lot of resources, and therefore we should continue to produce at will. Mr Speaker, if we do not tell the people what is going on or what is likely to happen – you know, some other countries like China, Cuba and so on, have taken the population factor into great consideration. So, my suggestion is that –(Interruption)-

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Dr Nabwiso, for giving way. Whereas I want to appreciate your contribution, I have been informed by the minister that this credit facility, which we want to pass now, has already been incorporated in the budget in this Financial Year. 

I wish to inform you that when you look at the observations of the Committee, the second last bullet talks of the four pillars. One of them is to increase income for the poor and improving the quality of life. The money for improving quality of life, this money is geared towards primary health care, primary education, sanitation and water. 

I wish to inform you that in this year’s budget for health, one of the top priorities was reproductive health. Here we are talking of family planning, we are talking of increasing maternity facilities, increasing health workers in the area of midwives, and of support of the health sub-district system. We are also constructing Health Center IIs at parish level, Health Center IIIs at county level and Health Center IVs in every constituency. 

This year the priority as far as the health sub-district is concerned, was consolidation of Health Center IVs. So, what you are alluding to has been addressed this Financial Year. Thank you.

DR NABWISO: Let me conclude, Mr Speaker. I am grateful for that information. However, I happen to have worked in the family planning movement for many years and I know that the population of Uganda, in spite of all this that has been done, is increasing -(Applause)- and at a very high rate compared to other countries in sub-Saharan Africa. 

One other thing that we do not talk about here is employment. We are talking about decreasing poverty and so on, but I have not heard Parliament discuss the rising unemployment in this country. We have a lot of graduates from many universities, and we are just continuing to establish more universities. These will be pouring out people with University degrees in Lusoga, in Atesot and so on, and these will not be employed in the present national economy. 

I think it is extremely important that when the President is addressing us at the beginning of –(Interruption)-

MRS BAKOKO BAKORU: I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. I thank him for raising this issue, because in the PLSP, employment is not a key issue. However, the Social Development Sector Investment Plan, which the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is discussing with donors, brings out clearly the issue of creation of jobs. It also addresses transformation of the communities to improve their quality of life. I thank you.

DR NABWISO: So, I move that we temporarily withhold approval of this until this policy statement has come out. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one point that has been made, and I believe the minister has taken it up, is of dealing with this type of loan early enough during the passage of the budget. If you pass the budget with anticipation, suppose the thing is not approved? 

We are due to deal with the budget. I hope there will be sufficient notice for the ministry to look at all the loans that we would be giving support so that when we pass the budget, it is passed as a package. That way, we would not face this problem, and hon. Nabwiso would not tell us to stop. In any case stop what? You already approved it, and it is part and parcel of the budget. You would only be contradicting yourself if you stopped it. 

However, you are right to raise these issues. I am only saying that we should change the way we deal with this type of loan. I do not know whether honourable members think we should continue. However, I suggest that tomorrow we can have about two other people to contribute to this motion, because I do not intend to put the question to it today. I will put the question to it tomorrow. The chairperson and the minister will respond to the queries raised and then we shall proceed from there.

After we have disposed of this matter, we will deal with the UCB report.  

I thank you very much for sitting here for so long, and for the deliberations you have made today. I think this is the convenient time to adjourn today’s proceeding. We shall resume tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. House is adjourned.

(The House rose 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 February 2003 at 2.00 p.m)







