Thursday, 14 February 2008

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I am sorry about what happened yesterday when we were not able to transact business but the fault was found and I hope that it will not happen again. I intend to adjust the Order paper to allow hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar to present a report on a visit she made sometime back to the United States. This is in accordance with our Rules of Procedure. 

Furthermore, we will adjust the Order paper to include the duty of the Prime Minister to announce Government Business on every Thursday for the coming week.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Mbaguta Sezi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, Article 166(3), the Public Service Commission is obliged to make an annual report to Parliament about its functions and activities. I want to lay on the Table the report of the Public Service Commission for the year 2006/2007. 

2.34
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to lay on the Table a report of the delegation from the Parliament of Uganda to the 14th ACP/EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly (JPA), which took place in Rwanda. This report is accompanied by a number of resolutions that were adopted by the JPA and I wish to lay all these on the Table. I beg that at an appropriate time, Parliament may commit time to go through this report and have a common understanding of the resolutions that were passed. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The appropriate committees should handle the report and subsequently, debate will follow.

2.35
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. On 17 October 2007, hon. Everline Tete, hon. Grace Oburu and I left for Washington, D.C to participate in the Women Lead in Promoting Peace and Stability Workshop, which was held from October 22 to November 16, 2007 and organised by the Centre for Development and Population Activities (CEDPA). We are pleased to report to you that the trip was facilitated partially by the Parliament of Uganda and the organisers and that the deliberations therein were very fruitful. 

Uganda was well represented by three Members of Parliament, and other participants were from nine countries namely Afghanistan, Georgia, India, Liberia, Nigeria, Peru, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Sudan. 

Mr Speaker, the issues which were discussed and which the Members of this House influenced included: peace and resettlement of the people of Northern Uganda, reproductive health of women in Uganda and female genital mutilation in Uganda. I presented on peace and stability in Northern Uganda and I was given an opportunity to address the US Congress where I urged them to support women empowerment and leadership as a step towards mediating conflict in the world. I addressed the Congenial Empowerment for International Peace where causes of the conflict in the Northern part of Uganda were discussed and the way forward was highlighted. 

Hon. Grace Oburu affirmed to the Congress women the prevailing inadequacy of health facilities for women in Uganda and called on the US Government to increase funding for reproductive and maternal health to alleviate the health problem of women in Uganda. She also called on the US Government to urge investors in health sectors both for public partnership and private ventures in the manufacturing of Malaria and HIV drugs, which can be affordable to the people of Uganda. 

Hon. Tete decried the continuous female genital mutilation in Uganda. As a result, she said, women status in society is diminished and rights violated. She called on the US Congress to fund the Uganda Government so that it can put in place more institutions, for instance girls’ schools, which will end this practice completely. 

She also highlighted another source of insecurity in Uganda. Apart from the struggle for power, she said, the struggle for resources is also causing insecurity in the Eastern part of Uganda. This includes cattle rustling, which has displaced people into IDP camps and particularly the women and children who have suffered as a consequence. Having grown up in an IDP camp herself, she testified that she is living testimony of displacement and suffering of women in that area. She appealed to the US Congress to help address this problem. 

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, we were able to meet various dignitaries in the US, Washington and New York among others. In the US, we met the Speaker of the US Congress, Rt Hon. Nancy Pelosi, whose concern for Uganda was also put across.

Lastly, we have as a result of going for that workshop shared experiences of conflict and peace resolution with fellow participants whom we have mentioned from the various countries above. And as we came back to our country, we have various experiences, which will help mitigate the conflict in this country. 

The workshop imported a unique experience and training of participants on how women can politically, socially and economically be engaged in conflict resolution and thereafter in situations of resettlement. Women empowerment was critical to the workshop participants. Women were networked, resource persons were involved – they were invited from various angles, and this has enhanced our struggle for women emancipation. 

As we speak now, honourable members, each of us has a specific objective and activity to implement from the experience gained from this workshop and I would like to take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to thank the Parliament of Uganda, the organisers – Centre for Development and Population Activities – CEDEPA - for facilitating us to gain such an experience; and we promise to share this among the womenfolk in Uganda and other colleagues in the country at large. For God and our country!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Copies should be made for Members. 

2.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I wish to present the following Government business for next week: 

1.	Motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to capitalise National Water and Sewerage Corporation’s long-term debt into equity by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
2.	Motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to capitalise Phoenix Logistics Uganda Ltd’s debt owed to Uganda Development Bank into equity by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
3.	The Local Governments (Amendment) No.2 Bill, 2007 by the Minister of Local Government. 
4.	Loan request for the Uganda Public Service Enhancement Project by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
5.	The Law Revision (Fines and other amounts in criminal matters) Bill, 2006 by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

I thank you sir.

2.50
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the issue of non-compliance with the laws passed by the Parliament of Uganda and as a result, good governance in some institutions is resulting into strikes and confusion, as you may be aware, like what is happening in Makerere University. 

Article 17 of the Budget Act, 2001, if I read it verbatim, it says: A Minister responsible for any vote on appropriation in aid shall make quarterly reports to Parliament on the manner in which the funds of the vote are expended. A report made under sub-section (1) shall reflect specific data on value-for-money on the involved expenditures.

Article 18(1) says: “Where any department, institution, organisation or commission fails to meet any requirement under this Act, Parliament may compel the relevant minister to appear before it and give an explanation on the circumstances leading to the failure.”

Article 18(2) says: “Where it is evident that any officer intentionally or through negligence led –

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you can tell us the gist of the section. What do you want to say?

MR BANYENZAKI: It is a short one, I am about to finish, Mr Speaker. It says: “Where it is evident that any officer intentionally or through negligence leads to the failure of the department, institution, organisation or commission to meet any requirement under this Act, that officer shall be held personally liable.” 

The gist of this is that an institution of higher learning in this country, Makerere University, as you may be aware - Mr Speaker and honourable Members, the cause of the strike in Makerere University is mismanagement of the university as a result of non-compliance with this Budget Act, which resulted into misappropriation of funds. 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has several times given directives that the ministers responsible should lay the reports as required by the law but the responsible ministers have not complied with this. Given the circumstances, Mr Speaker, that with the confusion we are having in this country to the extent that a national university is about to close, I would implore that the Leader of Government Business does give a proper explanation to this Parliament as to why Parliament sits here and makes laws and they are not complied with. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Who is the minister in charge of that sector? Is he here? Do we have a minister in charge of the sector so that we can ask when he is going to bring this? Is it the Prime Minister?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government Business and the former Chancellor of Makerere University is here and if the minister is not here, there must be some arrangement, and there must be a sitting minister –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, you should have directed your question to the Minister of Education who is answerable for that institution. If he is not here then the Prime Minister can –

MR BANYENZAKI: The question is directed to the Leader of Government Business because this is Government business -

THE SPEAKER: It is misplaced! Since there is a minister in charge, you ask the minister. This is how you ask the question.

MR BANYENZAKI: So if it is misplaced, Mr Speaker, can he give me guidance as to where it should be?

THE SPEAKER: Ask the minister in charge of Makerere University. To my knowledge that is the Minister of Education. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Now, therefore, Mr Speaker the issue is that you could give guidance and direct the minister responsible to come and give an explanation to our Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: No, ask the minister in charge of the sector.

MR BANYENZAKI: But, Mr Speaker, this is a matter of national concern; it is a matter of national concern and you are aware that if we ask such questions –

THE SPEAKER: When we prepare ourselves, we shall deal with it next week.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I am guided by the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy that it is the Minister of Finance. Because the Minister of Finance –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you are being guided, let us ask the Minister of Finance.

MR BANYENZAKI: She is –

THE SPEAKER: Next week when you are prepared, you will ask your question. 

2.50
THE CHAIRMAN, SELECT COMMITTEE ON CHOGM (Mr Onyango Kakoba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg the indulgence of this House to give you a brief update of the activities of the CHOGM Committee. 

As you remember in December last year, the Select Committee on CHOGM was mandated by this House to evaluate the just concluded CHOGM event. What the committee was supposed to do was to look at the overall performance of CHOGM in as far as different sub-committees were concerned. We were also to look at the accountability. As I speak now, we have covered 60 percent of what we are supposed to do and we expect to present a report to this House not later than mid next month. Mr Speaker that is the information I wanted to give Members. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I presume that the information we are being given by the Chairman of Select Committee on CHOGM results from the concern I raised last week, which you said you would follow up. Parliament made a resolution requesting the ministries responsible –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Banyenzaki, why don’t you allow him to make his report and if he does not satisfy you, you ask the question? 

MR BANYENZAKI: But, Mr Speaker, this Parliament sat and passed a resolution compelling -(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know.

MR BANYENZAKI: No, you should know because you are the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No; I cannot know when he has not been allowed to say what he wanted to say. Why can’t he tell us what he has done in respect of that and then you ask questions. Why do you pre-empt what he wants to say?

MR BANYENZAKI: That resolution was not meant for - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, please, give other people a chance to talk. Do you want to make a report on what you said?

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Yes, the report will be ready on the 12th of March, according to our timetable.  

MR BANYENZAKI: (Interruption)- Thank you, Mr Speaker for your protection because Members thought that you had denied me a chance and yet you had given it to me. What I want to make clear here in the House is that much as there is a Select Committee on CHOGM for which hon. Onyango Kakoba is the chairman, when we passed this resolution that was unanimously supported by Parliament we were compelling the ministers responsible for CHOGM to lay on the Table the accountability and activities regarding CHOGM. 

During the debate on that day, it was so clear, Mr Speaker, and the motion was passed after the Prime Minister had urged the Auditor-General to bring an audit report here within three months. But in the subsequent debate we had, it was very clear that we even had to have political accountability, which Members wanted to give us within one month, and that one month has passed. 

Given that that one month has passed and it was a resolution of Parliament, which had nothing to do with what the select committee is doing, neither the audit report of the Auditor-General, the ministers responsible are under obligation to lay that accountability report on the Table. We should know the activities they did, money they expended and how they used it. They are compelled - whether hon. Onyango Kakoba brings a report next year or when, they are under obligation to table that report before Parliament as a result of the resolution we passed. 

2.56
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the House, all Members and also urge the government, if it is acceptable, that since the Committee on Local Government Accounts is handling complaints regarding the sale of Nakasero Market, the committee feels that Government should allow the vendors to continue operating in the old status quo until a report is brought here and the House so decides so that the vendors are not disadvantaged. Because the vendors brought complaints to this House and the committee is looking at it. So, I want to urge the Minister of Internal Affairs to ensure that the market is open and the vendors continue to operate in a peaceful manner –(Interruption) 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the concern of hon. Banyenzaki is important and he has raised it not once; not twice –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I said Nakasero but it should be Kisekka Market.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on the issue of CHOGM. You are aware that Parliament put up a Select Committee on CHOGM and I am aware that the committee is proceeding with its activities. In this event, isn’t the select committee in a way helping Parliament to get the accountability that the resolution this Parliament passed on was urging Government to do? We need your guidance. How do we proceed to urge Government any more when there is a select committee investigating the same area?

MR BANYENZAKI: My concern is why should Parliament sit and pass resolutions and those resolutions are not honoured? The question you are asking me is the same question that was asked when we were debating that motion and it was unanimously passed by the whole House. In such circumstances when the House passes such a resolution, the ministers are under obligation to lay on the Table how much they received, and how they spent that money – the various areas. Once they lay them on the Table, it would be upon Parliament, under your guidance, Mr Speaker, to see what to do with that information.

MR OKOT OGONG: I would like to inform my brother hon. Henry Banyenzaki, that a minister should lay a report on the Table of Parliament so that it becomes an official report to Parliament. That way the committee can debate official statements from ministers. But when a report comes from a committee, it is not an official report of Parliament, but once it is laid before Parliament, then it becomes an official document that can be used by the committees. 

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, the information I want to give is that if it is laying of papers, that is a different thing. But if it is looking at the accountability, that is what the committee is doing right now, and I hope we will come out with a good report.

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BUSINESS

PETITION BY THE SITTING TENANTS OF BUGANDA ROAD FLATS TO PARLIAMENT ON THE DISCRIMINATION OVER THE PURCHASE OF FLATS

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Sempala Nabilah. Well, she is not here. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 41/2/08 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

3.02
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): “Is the Minister aware that Uganda Spinning Mills, Lira that was sold to Jinda International Textiles Corporation Ltd in 2004 to date has never resumed operations but instead the factory premises are being rented by the World Food Programme to store food and that the machines are being quietly sold off?

Is the Minister aware that the staff were laid off illegally and those who were injured in the line of duty were laid off without compensation?

Would the Minister inform the House what plans Government has to revive the once productive enterprise that added value to cotton production in Northern Uganda?”  

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Ms Lukia Chekamondo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague, hon. Obua. Before I respond to his question, I want first of all to go through the background.

Uganda Spinning Mill, Ltd was set up in 1972 as a subsidiary of Uganda Development Corporation and was 100 percent owned by the government of Uganda. The factory closed in 1984 due to prevailing internal insecurity at the time and remained un-operational for years. Government, nevertheless, retained some staff at the premises, who carried out basic care and maintenance activities. 

Following the enactment of the Reforms and Privatisation Law, the company was listed under Class III of the PERD Act, which therefore meant that the company was scheduled for full divesture of Government interest to the private sector. 

Mr Speaker, my answer to question one is that over the years, that is, 1992 to 1994, Government initiated efforts to attract private investors to take over the company and resume operations. But this was hampered primarily due to post-insurgency uncertainty, which negatively influenced market responses to offers. 

Fresh attempts to divest Government interest in the company were made in February 2000, and following a public competitive bid process, only two bidders responded namely: Guostar Enterprises Ltd and Lake Kyoga Cotton Company Ltd. 

The competitive tender process also never attracted the attention of the company creditors. One of them, Placid Weli Iga, applied to courts of law in a suit, Placid Weli Iga Vs USML H.C.C.S No. 381 of 1996 and a warrant of attachment was obtained for the assets of Uganda Spinning Mill Ltd, which comprised in LRV-813 Folio 22, plot M16 Lira Municipality for a granted judgement of Ug Shs 64 million. The auctioneers went ahead and advertised the sale of the property and Goustar Enterprises Ltd purchased the mill at US $300,000. The Auditor-General’s appeal against the sale was dismissed with costs. 

Mr Speaker, it is therefore true that the Uganda Spinning Mills Lira was sold to a private operator but this was done following an act of courts of law to which my department and indeed the Executive had no control and hence it is not necessarily directly under the privatisation process of Government by the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Act cap 98 of the laws of Uganda.

Sir, Government nevertheless is aware that at one time when Guostar Enterprise Uganda Limited expressed interest in Uganda Spinning Mills Limited, it had indicated then that Jinda International Textile Corporation Limited is their joint venture partner.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, we seem not to really be catching up with the speed. Maybe the speed of the minister is fast. Could we get copies of the answer the minister is giving? I have difficulty in following the answer being read.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to draw your attention to rule 38 especially (5), which says: “The reply to a question shall be limited to three minutes. However, if the Speaker considers that the matter is of sufficient importance, up to an additional two minutes will be added to this time.” As I see this question, which says: “Is the Minister aware that Uganda Spinning Mills, Lira that was sold and to-date has not resumed operations but instead the factory premises are being rented by the World Food Programme?” What you needed to answer is either you are aware or you are not aware, and this is what is happening or is not happening; instead of labouring for the explanation, which should be given by those actually operating. I think this question could have been answered in two minutes.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think from that clarification, we are aware; and for other details, whoever wants them we have a very detailed report on this matter and whoever is not satisfied today is free to come to our office. We shall provide all the detailed information on that area -(Interjections)- on that note, I go to question No.2 -(Interjections)- please, give me time. It says: “Is the Minister aware that the staff were laid off illegally and those who were injured in the line of duty were laid off without compensation?”

Mr Speaker, I am aware that staff was laid off but the right rules were followed and people were paid just as the law indicates that before you lay off people you must pay them. And on this one also, we have a detailed report where the Auditor-General did all the assessments and gave the details before we paid off these people and still this information is available. So, I am aware that these people were laid off and they were paid according to the laws of Uganda.

On the third and last question, Mr Speaker, this is an area that can be best addressed by the relevant sector Ministries of Agriculture and that of Trade and Industry. I, however, already brought the matter to the attention of my colleagues and at an appropriate time, a response will be given to the honourable member and the House at large. On that note, I thank you.

3.12
MR OBUA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to inform the minister that I still look forward to a day when Lira Spinning Mill will be fully revived and revamped under the leadership of the NRM. Honourable minister, whereas I salute you for the answers that you have given, I want to state categorically clear – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are to ask a question. (Laughter)

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, my supplementary question No. 1 is, although the situation on the ground still remains that Lira Spinning Mill is non-functional, what are some of the prior conditions that are normally given to investors? In fact, immediately after showing interest to invest like in Uganda – because I see in certain countries you apply, you are vetted, and you declare what you have; because looking at the situation where a very big factory of that status is non-functional since 2004, that leaves a lot to be desired. In fact, if it is within the rules of this Parliament, I would really say that the minister should lay before this Parliament the Memorandum of Understanding that was signed between Government of Uganda and the investor – Jinda.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is it possible for you to produce before Parliament the memorandum concerning this particular transaction?

MS CHEKAMONDO: Mr Speaker, I think whenever Government enters into any transaction, it always has to have memorandum of understanding and I think to that extent, we shall bring that memorandum of understanding. 

MR OBUA: I think that is a strong commitment before this Parliament. My question would go ahead to ask possibly as courtesy; when? 

My second, supplementary, honourable minister, why do you make work so hard for us leaders from Northern Uganda? You know many times we are said to be people who do not support investment. Why do you bring to Northern Uganda non-productive investors and yet there are productive investors? Why don’t we set a good precedent and a good pace for the people really to appreciate investment in the North? Because normally we are blamed as leaders from the North that, “You do not support investors.” But when a non-productive investor is brought, definitely, the people would have a bias.

Mr Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware that in Northern Uganda there are no productive investors? (Laughter)

MS CHEKAMONDO: Mr Speaker, I am not aware and I want to put it clear to the august House that Government has no intention to sideline Northern Uganda and I want also to put it clearly that when we enter into selling off any asset of Government, you do not know whether the person who is coming in is going to be productive or not. So it is not the intention of Government to do anything. 

So, Mr Speaker, I feel that this is a general question, but I must assure the House that there is no sidelining and that as Government, we are really ready to support everybody in this country. Thank you. 

MR OBUA: Honourable minister, the said investor up to now does not allow any leader to enter the premises of Lira Spinning Mill. A team from Lira Municipal Council, headed by the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services went and they were turned away. [Hon. Members: “In the mill?”] Yes, in the mill, taken over by JITCO. Don’t you think that they are hiding some of the bad things that they do inside the mill? Thank you, Mr Speaker. That marks the end of my supplementary question. 

3.17
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I heard the hon. minister answer that sometimes they do not know whether the investor will be productive or not, I got so scared. Because, we are inviting so many investors and if we do not have mechanisms of deciding or of finding out who a productive investor will be or not, then it scares me. I want to ask the honourable minister, as the minister in charge, how do they intend to invite other investors without actually having anything in place to know the capabilities of those investors? (Laughter)

MS CHEKAMONDO: Mr Speaker, still with the hon. minister from the North, in the first place, I think the failure of this factory to produce was because of the insurgency. All of you are aware of the insurgency that was in the North.

Secondly, as I have already told you, this company was listed under Class III of the PERD Act, which indicates that all the government interests in that company were sold off. It means that Government sold everything and it does not have any powers over it. So, once you divest all your interests, it means that you do not have powers over that thing again and I think everybody is aware of that. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the question from hon. Seninde was, do you have a mechanism of selecting or knowing who is a better investor than the other?

MS CHEKAMONDO: Mr Speaker, we do due diligence but we cannot rule out the outcome. So, we really try all possible means to see that the person we are entering into business with is a serious investor. We do that. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we – (Laughter) – okay, let us have the member representing the area. 

3.21
MS AMUGE OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for having given the information, but I want to give you some additional information. Lira Spinning Mill had a lot of equipment, worth over Shs. 2 billion, and I think that it was sold off at about Shs. 300 million. Honourable minister, I want to let you know that that equipment has been sold off and that the premise is now empty. Are you aware? (Laughter)

3.22
MR PAJOBO BRUNO (NRM, Worker’s Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for her explanation. She says that the workers who were laid off were all paid. According to my investigations, these workers were never paid and they were demanding Shs.200 million from the government. I want to know when these people were really paid so that I advise some of them who keep coming to me, to go and get this money. When were they paid? Thank you. 

MRS SSENTONGO: On a serious note, I think we must be very clear to this nation, because we have seen a number of industries that have been privatised and workers are never paid. I can give an example of the former UTC. I have a bulk of complaints, and these people went to court and the court ruled in their favour. Up to now, they have never been paid. What is happening with the Privatisation Unit? Look at the people from the former telecommunication company – whatever it is – they are so many. Let us be clear and sincere to our own people. 

THE SPEAKER: There should not be information as far as questions are concerned; you should ask a question. 

3.24
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is, now that the Jinda Company has failed to run the Lira Spinning Mill, I am a local investor; can I know in order to assist the industry? 

The second question is, do you know the number of workers who were employed at the Lira Spinning Mill, compared to the current workers? If you are not aware, then that is why on many occasions, the party and the government have been doing very poorly in Northern Uganda. Thank you, very much. 

3.25
MR ISSA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to ask the honourable minister two questions. One, Lira Spinning Mill used to employ over 2,000 people and since then, they have all been laid off. Could the hon. Minister explain to the people of Uganda how many of these workers were compensated and when specifically; to be honest and to make us understand that what the minister is saying is realistic and real?

Two, the honourable minister said that Lira Spinning Mill was auctioned out. Whom was it auctioned out to?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should really close this subject.  Can you answer please?   

MS CHEKAMONDO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my fellow colleagues for their concern – (Interruption)

3.26
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the honourable minister giving the answers to the oral question. As Members from the area- I am part of those Members because we used to pass through Lira to get to Kitgum most of the time because it was the most viable road.  There is some contradiction in the answers that the honourable minister is giving.  Even at one time she referred the House to the ministry if we have not grasped what she is trying to present.  I would like to know procedurally, Mr Speaker, since the minister has no concrete information on the question put to her, would it be procedurally right for her to continue submitting that rather than going back and consolidating her information and coming back to the House and informing us later? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think she has answered to the best of her ability but what I can suggest is that we end the debate on this question. She has given the circumstances. So, instead of pressing on with the issue, if there is no other detail, we can ask another question and then she will get the information and pass it to you.  I rather think we really end this item, please.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must appreciate the concerns of all the hon. Members in this august House. In the first place, the closure of the normal operations of Uganda Spinning Mill was due to insurgency and non-stability of viable business that affected a number of people including the company staff. 

Mr Speaker, in 1995, Government through the Office of the Auditor-General appointed Justus Semu and Associates to compute terminal benefits for Uganda Spinning Mill Limited.  The auditors presented their reports on 13 April 1995, which put the computed benefits for over 1,200 workers at 48.9 million.  

Parallel to the above computation the management of Uganda Spinning Mill carried out their own verifications and put the benefits at 1.3 billion for 1,405 workers.  Whereas the computation by JS & A on behalf of the Auditor-General was contested by the workers on the ground that benefits were too low, the management’s computation had several weaknesses. It disregarded the current reform of 1987, incorporated salary reviews from 1984 to 1995 as it included a lot of ghost workers.  This thing is very detailed and whoever wants to know that we have all this information can come to our ministry. We shall avail this information.  

And to the former speaker, usually there are companies which are handled by more than one ministry.  For example, when you talk of the Spinning Mill, spinning handles cotton and agriculture immediately comes in.  And when we spin the cotton, we now enter into trade; so, Ministry of Trade also comes in and that is why we have the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Trade integrated into this system.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO CAPITALIZE NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE CORPORATION LONG TERM DEBT INTO EQUITY

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, INVESTMENT (Ms Rukiya Chekamondo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I present the resolution to Parliament to authorise Government to capitalise the National Water and Sewerage Corporation through – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I recall that sometime last week, I think, the Minister of Finance was here presenting a resolution to capitalise National Water and Sewerage Corporation and we requested for information to be presented. Now, I do not know what the minister is reading because what they would have done is to bring the documentation, which was requested for.

THE SPEAKER: Did you want some information? I thought that when this business started the minister brought it here and laid it on Table and then we directed the relevant committee to handle the matter. What she is doing now is to remind us of what she had done previously so that the chairperson of the committee can come and present to us what they have found on this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is true. The resolution was supposed to be presented as you are saying but there was need for the board resolution, which she is aware of, if she was in charge. Hon. Omach was around.  Of course, it will increase the share capital of National Water from a certain price to a certain value and it was agreed here.  So, if they have it let them present it to us; the chairman of the Committee - 

THE SPEAKER: I think what we should do is that the committee should be able to tell us whether the necessary details were there and whether the formalities were complied with, and if they were not, then you can ask the committee why they overlooked some those issues. That is how we should proceed.

3.33
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kadunabbi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  This is the report from the Committee of National Economy on the request by Government to capitalise National Water and Sewerage Corporation through conversion of National Water and Sewerage Corporation’s long term debt amounting to 153.6 billion into equity.  The request Mr Speaker and honourable Members-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we have a problem. National Water and Sewerage Corporation is 100 percent owned by the government of Uganda. If we are going to change debt to equity, that means we are increasing the share capital of this company. But then from where are  we moving it and to where are we moving it? Because to issue share capital, there must be shares and that is why we are saying that we know how to increase share capital of the company: There will be a board resolution or whatever, the resolution to increase it from x to this. What are the shares? 

And two, Mr Speaker, I think National Water and Sewerage Corporation is a company, which is talked about with excellence, that is, it is doing very well-(Interruption)-Yes. That is what-

THE SPEAKER: What you are saying, hon. Member should be part of the contribution you are going to make after you have heard what the committee has said. It could even not be recommending what they have asked. So, I think you should wait to get the report and then raise those points in your contribution.

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, the committee accordingly considered this request and now wishes to report.

The method used by the committee
We interacted with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and officials of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. 

The committee also analysed the following documents: the minister’s brief; National Water and Sewerage Corporation corporate plan 2006-2009; National Water and Sewerage Corporation external services; National Water and Sewerage Corporation capacity building courses offered; National Water and Sewerage Corporation financial reports from 2003 to 2006; National Water and Sewerage Corporation information on donor-funded projects and Government of Uganda and National Water and Sewerage Corporation’s performance contracts. 

The committee also toured the water facilities at Gaba I, Gaba II and Gaba III projects. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the committee proceedings; National Water and Sewerage Corporation corporate plan 2006-2009; the performance contract between the government of the Republic of Uganda and National Water and Sewerage Corporation, dated 17 December 2003; National Water and Sewerage Corporation information on donor-funded projects; annual reports from 2003 to 2006; National Water and Sewerage Corporation Uganda capacity building courses offered and National Water and Sewerage Corporation external services. 

I wish also to lay on Table, agreements between the government of Uganda and the World Bank granting debt freeze to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation dated, 10 January 2000. And since there was a concern last time, I wish also to lay on Table a Certificate of Financial Implications for the capitalisation of National Water and Sewerage Corporation dated 12 September 2007. 

The background to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation long-term debt

As the case was with most Government corporations, National Water and Sewerage Corporation faced a turbulent period in the 70s and the first half of the 1980s. During this period, there was dilapidation of infrastructure and decline in service delivery. With relative stability realised in the latter half of the 1980s and 1990s, the corporation secured debts and undertook massive rehabilitation and the extension of water facilities in the major towns. 

The new projects were provided on the basis of the need to provide the services without putting into consideration their commercial viability. This led, therefore, to the accumulation of huge debts with a big debt-servicing burden on the corporation.  The total debt portfolio stood at Shs 84.98 billion and had accrued interest of Shs 68.59 billion by 2006. 

As a way of reducing the debt-servicing constraint on the corporation, coupled with the need to further extend water services to other towns, Government entered into agreement with the World Bank to freeze the corporation’s accrued debt service obligation as at the end of financial year 1999/2000 up to the end of the financial year 2001/2002. This was extended to the financial year 2005/2006. 

This relief enabled the corporation to register a number of achievements, including extension of water services to Budo, Nabbingo, Gayaza, Bunamwaya, Kitezi and Bulenga- all in Kampala- Mukono, Matugga, Buloba and Katigondo. 

It also led to the bringing on board the water and sewerage supply services in Bushenyi, Ishaka, Arua, Soroti, Mukono, Malaba, Iganga, Lugazi, Mubende, Hoima and Masindi which were formerly not under the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. It also led to ensuring that the water services are affordable and accessible by keeping the water tariffs at an affordable rate although the operations in most of the towns were not viable and imposed a financial strain on the corporation. 

Despite the aforementioned improvement, National Water and Sewerage Corporation is unable to do the following:

1) To internally generate the required $ 3 million to mitigate the consequences of the receding levels of Lake Victoria water that have affected the supply of water in towns of Kampala, Mukono, Jinja and Entebbe. The current water catchment area has become shallow, polluted and expensive to maintain, especially treatment of the water. $ 3 million is required to construct water intakes and water pipes to extend it by 1.5 km into the lake to access adequate clean water. 

Also, National Water and Sewerage Corporation is unable to resume servicing the long-term debt, which stands at Shs 84.98 billion and Shs 86.59 billion as interest.

Mr Speaker and hon. members, the object of converting the loan into equity is that the unserviceable loan on the balance sheet of National Water and Sewerage Corporation technically implies that the corporation is insolvent. Turning the unserviceable loan into equity will clean up the balance sheet of the corporation and make it possible for National Water and Sewerage Corporation to:
1.	Seek market financing to help it mitigate the impact of the receding Lake Victoria water levels and counter the impending water shortages in the towns of Kampala, Mukono, Jinja and Entebbe.
2.	It will access short-term loans financing for such critical investments, which at the moment is made impossible by inclusion of the unserviceable debt commitment on the balance sheet.
3.	It will build a history of profitability and credit worthiness enabling it to access financing from the domestic market in the long run.
4.	Use the improved internal revenue streams to finance key investments aimed at expanding production and services in the areas it operates in. The investments include: water and sewerage main extensions, development of the new water sewerage systems, contributions to the donor funded projects and provision of services to the urban poor. The total projected investment portfolio for the next five years from internal sources amounts to Shs 168 billion.
5.	It will improve its network from the current Shs 74.7 billion to 266.5 billion. 

Observations

The committee observed that the freeze in the debt servicing has resulted in tremendous improvement and service delivery by National Water and Sewerage Corporation. From 1999 to 2006, billing efficiency increased from 51.6 to 70.3 percent- (Applause) Water connections increased from 54,367 to 152,138. The annual turnover increased from Shs 21.908 billion to 59.540 billion and the operating profits from negative Shs 2.081 billion to positive Shs 4.237 billion.

The committee further observed that Government departments owe the corporation a substantial amount of money in unpaid bills.

Sewerage coverage stands at less than 10 percent within Kampala and its suburbs.

The corporation has kept water bills low to make water affordable. The occasional increments have been made to mitigate the effect of inflation and cost of electricity.
The committee therefore recommends that:
The corporation should embark on expansion of the sewerage infrastructure especially within the city and the major towns in the country.

The Government departments that owe the corporation should make good their debts.

The committee recommends to this House that the request to capitalise National Water and Sewerage Corporation be approved.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee implores this august House to support the request by the hon. minister to capitalise National Water and Sewerage Corporation through conversion of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation long term debt amounting to Shs 153.6 billion into equity. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.08
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have seen the resolution from the company which is talking about equity. But as I said, National Water and Sewerage Corporation is 100 percent owned by Government of Uganda and under the Company Act, if you are increasing the share capital of a company, you must register it with the Registrar of Companies. As far as we can see, there is nothing here, which has been registered by the Registrar of Companies which signifies that we are not increasing share capital, but trying to move figures from one sector to another. If Government wants to do it better, I do not think we need to capitalise National Water. 

If National Water and Sewerage Corporation is doing well, then there is no need for us as Parliament to write off the loans. But we want to demonstrate to the chairman and the committee that what he has read, the P and L shows that operating profit before reverse of impairment for 2006 was negative Shs 5 billion. That means it was a loss and for 2005, it was negative Shs 5.5 billion. That is after taking into consideration the net finance costs. To be able to show the right position of the company, you must declare everything. We do not know which figures will be useful; the one after financing costs or the other one before financing costs.
Mr Speaker, this company has debts to a tune of Shs 22.3 billion in 2006 - the finance accounts. In fact, there was no need for you to present these accounts because they are with us in Parliament. But the majority debtor to the company is Government. I think if the company is having liquidity problem, Government should pay off its debt instead of thinking of capitalisation. 

Having stated that, if something being done is being done illegally, I think we better do it better. I know we have made an error, like capitalising Civil Aviation; we made a mistake. We would propose that the committee thinks about recommending writing-off the debts. When you recommend writing-off the debt, it means that the debt is represented by the Asset; the Asset will remain and they will move that as a capital reserve, not increasing share capital as you are saying; not even equity. 

Mr Speaker, why we have been saying that we are proceeding wrongly – I do not know and maybe I will be corrected by the Attorney-General – is that our people who should advise us legally have left us take the wrong direction, yet they shouldn’t; they should advise us properly. I am saying this because we know that this company is 100 percent owned by Government. That means there are no shares. So, what are we increasing? If we want to give more loans to the company, let us declare that and I think that will be the best way forward.

Mr Speaker, I have the accounts here and they say, “Interest payable is Shs 68.5 billion while the loans are Shs 43.6 billion.” From this I fail to understand where the chairman is picking the other debts from; I need to be guided. I can see from the report that Government funding is Shs 65 billion and borrowing is Shs 43.6 billion. So, what is this Shs 158 billion, he is talking about? I am asking this because I do not see it here in the balance sheet. 

If a company fails to pay its interest rate, it means that such a company has got a problem; it means that such a company is not fit to operate. But we have National Water and Sewerage Cooperation as one of the companies excellently performing. I will tell you that in 2005, National Water and Sewerage Cooperation declared a profit of Shs 24 billion. This was possible because they did what we call, reversal impairment of Shs 26.2 billion – those are your accounts; you can check the P & L – plus a charge of Shs 3.6 billion. That meant making a reversal, in the accounts, of Shs 30 billion on the profit side so as to declare a profit of Shs 24 billion.

Now, as a committee, did you see what this impairment meant? I am asking this because that meant declaring profits when there were not supposed to be profits.  This is the reason why the company wants the loans to be written off. It is because the company is declaring profits when there are no profits.

To help the company do better, Mr Speaker, we have seen that the cost of running the company is the biggest. If you look at it, they are saying, “we have increased collection to Shs 57 billion” and when you add the costs they get to about Shs 62 billion, but we can knock off Shs 9 billion for depreciation because that is not a cash outlay. Already the expected cash outlay is more than the income we are getting from this company. So, if that is the case then it means that the company is under stress and we should get it do better rather than saying we move it to equity. I think it needs more money because it is running the investment at a higher cost yet the returns on the investment are very low – (Interjections) – well, I am not interested in buying Government companies. The people who buy them know it. 

So, we cannot privatise National Water and Sewerage Cooperation because it is one of the good companies that are providing us with good services; it is a public utility and that is the reason we believe that the committee could have made better recommendations than saying we move it to equity; we are in reality committing a big crime. We are willing to provide technical and professional help. I thank you.

3.58
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee for the report though I will respond to it with a lot of reservations. 

Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, I would like, first of all, to state that I belong to the Committee of Natural Resources to which National Water and Sewerage Cooperation reports and often interacts with us. This report was made but when our committee was invited by the Committee of National Economy, I think only one Member was able to respond because the invitation came during the recess.

Anyway, if I had had the opportunity to attend, most of what I want to say would have been put across during that time.

Mr Speaker, we are all aware that the main objective of the existence of National Water and Sewerage Cooperation is to provide water and sewerage services to Ugandans – (Interjections) - I can afford double costs. Above all water is life and we are talking about our very own existence. This report is, in essence, asking us to move National Water and Sewerage Cooperation from mainly providing services, because it is 100 percent owned by the government, into consideration of commercial viability in a commercial sector. 

When you analyse the operations of National Water and Sewerage Cooperation, you realise that the government subsides a lot in order for Ugandans to enjoy its services. Should Government then push this service provider to go into a completive market because it wants it to be viable and commercially competitive? This is my source of concern. I am saying this because at the end of the day none of us will say, he/she does not need the services of National Water and Sewerage Cooperation. Yes, because we are talking about life for all of us. 

The worry I want to raise hon. colleagues of this august House – well as they have projected, National Water and Sewerage Cooperation will become independent and be able to look for funds to finance its operations. But you and I, as Ugandans, what benefits are accruing to us? This is my focus.  

There is a very big danger that having changed systematically to being more commercially competitive, the services provided are going to be determined by market forces because they will be looking at where they can operate from viably. As a result, how will a poor district like Kitgum, with no National Water and with the people unable to pay the set tariffs when it goes commercial, get these services? Since it is already independent, Government will not easily - because they will have already pushed them to operate on their own and that is the danger. 

Furthermore, if we let National Water, which is our major service provider get too focused on the commercial aspect, there will be a conflict of national interest and tomorrow when they fail to deliver the required services, we will have ourselves to blame because they are already focusing on how to be commercially viable like any other business person. What shall we do? I want us to focus on this. I would like to also say that it is going to be very difficult - right now we know that National Water has been a glittering institution and it is going to be very difficult for the sewerage services -

THE SPEAKER: What is the disadvantage of approving? That is what we want to be educated on; the disadvantages and advantages.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I am giving the disadvantages and that is why I am saying that I have reservations. The cost of services is going to increase and the extension of the services of National Water to other areas, which are commercially viable is not going to be possible and I mentioned a district like Kitgum. I am saying also that the services of for example sewer expansion are quite costly and as such will only go to areas, which are competitive. Market forces will come into play and this is going to be a disadvantage for ordinary Ugandans. 

As my colleague has already said, I am still wondering if National Water is the most efficient corporation that we have in the country. They have been doing very well, as we were told, and they have been telling us that from exporting services they are earning US $1 million. This should be revenue that can service internal operations. The fact remains that as much we have sugar coated it, National Water and Sewerage Corporation has a lot of internal costs – (Interruption) (Mr Dombo rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, she has declined.

MS ANYWAR: Internal and administrative costs, which are consuming much of what would have been viable profits, and I have reservations about this. We must not allow this to take place because it will curtail their original mandate or objective of providing cheap water to ordinary Ugandans. We shall not be able to do that and -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. When you look at the recommendations of the committee, they are about three and they have not told us that National Water and Sewerage Corporation is going to be commercialised. So the point of order that I am raising is: is the honourable member in order, given the fact that she was a worker of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, to confuse this House that National Water, according to this loan, is going to be privatised when in actual sense they are talking of giving it money to capitalise it? Is she really in order when she was a worker there and when she should be educating us as far as National Water is concerned?

THE SPEAKER: Well, she has her own appreciation of the facts on the ground and you have yours and they may differ. I think her stand differs from yours.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling. As I conclude, I give this as a light to all of us. As we look at this, let us examine what it entails. How will the ordinary Ugandan benefit if we change this? I think we are leaving a lot of things untouched, which is causing National Water to appear a darling of the nation when the truth of the matter is that internally, there is a big problem of administrative costs, which are eating up what should have been used for expansion. I can give you an example from the top management where the managing director’s salary is Shs 36 million while the next in rank earns Shs 7 million. The internal management is the one that is causing the high overhead and administrative costs. 

I advise this committee to go further and look into that so that we can reduce on the internal and administrative costs and make National Water able to service its operations from within. It is my humble appeal that you look at this from a nationalistic point of view. Thank you.

MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker, hon. Anywar said she is a member of the Committee on Natural Resources and that is the sessional committee, which is mandated to do exactly what you are saying. The work of the Committee on National Economy is not to go assessing who is getting what and who should get what. Ours is a specific Government requirement. 

MR BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy knows very well that when he is considering a loan or request from any sector, he must invite a relevant sessional committee, sit together with them and give them more information. Is it in order for him to come and say that it is not their duty to look into salaries when there is somebody earning Shs 36 million and they are coming here for equity? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Just access that.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before I make my contribution, I want to say that this is my first time for quite some time to speak here as I have not been able to stand and make contributions. I want to thank Members for their contributions while I was sick.

THE SPEAKER: If you don’t feel comfortable, you can sit and make your contribution.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I will bear it. There is some clarification that I would like to make so that maybe it could help us generate meaningful debate on National Water and Sewerage Corporation. National Water and Sewerage Corporation has two major roles: one of them is the development role and the other one is commercial. When you read the report of the committee, it shows that many of they projects they embarked on are not profitable. And you know it is the responsibility of Government to extend services to people who do not have them. So, you cannot equate National Water with a purely commercial business. From the onset, you must know that Government has a role to play to extend services to citizens. (Applause). That is why in the Seventh Parliament, we totally objected to the privatisation of National Water and Sewerage Corporation –(Interjection)- I am not aware. (Laughter). 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, in some of the projects they undertake - the language used in the report is that they “supply” but I would call it “supply leading”, not “demand leading”. You just go there and provide water not necessarily that you are going to generate money. 

Finally, I listened carefully to my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and really it comes to the same thing. It is only the language you choose to use. Technically, one way of helping somebody is to give, the other one is to save him that expenditure. In this case, National Water and Sewerage Corporation has a problem on its books because it is highly leveraged. So by capitalisation we mean that we are cancelling off the debt, we are actually cleaning their books so that they can do business. It is very simple -(Interjection)- Yes, whichever way you look at it, it comes to the same thing. 

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Ms Jennipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and all the members on the committee for a comprehensive report on National Water.

I want to bring out some of the facts, which I hope will give light to the august House so that we make decisions that are going to help the people of Uganda. 

One, apparently National Water is not running on a commercial basis and the reason –(Interjection)- I hope honourable colleagues you will listen because I have really sat down and listened to hon. Nandala-Mafabi and it is just common courtesy that he can also listen to me. 

When National Water got these loans, the entire water system was in a very bad state. We had leakages throughout and at that time the unaccounted for water was 45 percent – with pipes just bursting and so on. National Water has now been able to replace most of these pipes and apparently the reason I was telling you they are not running on a full commercial basis - if we allow them to do that they would increase the tariff to more than 90 percent. Tell me, can the people you represent afford that? And I want colleagues to appreciate that at the time they took over we had only 10 towns that were covered. 

Apparently now we are at 22 and with Kaberamaido coming on board, we are going to have 23. And even when we develop these towns, normally the connections are few and it is National Water, using their own funds, which do more extensions. Right now we are taking water to Mukono, covering the areas of Seeta and I want colleagues to appreciate that areas like Mukono that are growing by 15 percent every year, the project that –(Interjection)– just wait. Wait and let me develop my point. The project of Mukono alone, whose ground breaking I did some time last year in July, is going to cost National Water Shs 11 billion; their own money! 

Honourable colleagues, you should also know that as Government, it is our obligation to provide water to the people of Uganda. So, if National Water is doing it on our behalf, I do not think it is a crime. But I also want Members to again appreciate that with this loan, we are not carrying money to hand over to National Water. It is merely a book entry just to clear their balance sheet and allow them to go and borrow money from the commercial banks. 

Honourable members, right now National Water is paying through its nose to treat water because of the receding water levels of Lake Victoria and we are saying we want to extend the pipes and it is a cost. Right now the US $3 million is less because we wanted it last year but one. As we talk, they have to get even more money to extend the pipes into the lake. 

Honourable colleagues, we have the urban poor in hon. Kamya’s place, her constituency of Lubaga, Nateete, we have been able to provide water to those people. Even when we get money from development partners, they need counterpart funding and the money, which is paid is from internally generated revenue from National Water. 

Gulu town; the water that is there is not enough and National Water is the one, which is going to use its own funds to expand but also to rehabilitate the water system there.

Mbale, where hon. Nandala-Mafabi comes from is in a bad state! We are looking for money to cover the entire Mbale town but also you should appreciate that the issue of sanitation is a big issue. If you did not know, in Kampala alone, sanitation is only at 8 percent coverage. Yes, 8 percent! Most of the people are using onsite sanitation, septic tanks -(Interjection)- just wait, you need these facts. Okay, I can take the clarification from my Shadow Minister.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. She is saying that internally in Uganda - but right here in Kampala, I stay in Akright Kakungulu Estates where there are no National Water services at all and she has mentioned other parts of Kampala and other districts of Uganda. I would like to seek this clarification; if we have not even satisfied our home market, why is it that National Water is exporting the services across borders while internally here, Ugandans are not yet fully satisfied? 

MS NAMUYANGU: Rt hon. Speaker, I am happy that the honourable colleague who is my shadow minister and I normally encourage her to stay in the shadow because it is not easy in the light -(Laughter)- that is the very reason my colleague should support this request because we need to cover all these areas. And we are saying that we cannot borrow money because our balance sheet is tainted with this loan.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Minister of Water. The information I want to give you is that currently National Water is not paying Government the interest due. Likewise, it is not even paying the capital element, which means that it should be saving money to be able to do expansion but it has not done it. But let me help you so that you are able to understand this fully. This is the National Water Act,;section 4(4) says, “The Corporation shall operate on sound commercial practice and shall ensure that its revenues are sufficient.

(5) All precisions, immortalizations and interest costs, all operations and maintenance costs (should be) under a reasonable return on investment”. This is the law. You are saying that they are providing a service but the law gives them power to make a return.

Our argument with you, Madam Minister, is that you can mention any town, even Sironko, even Soroti, even Kaberamaido but recall that Government got money to do water in 2001 from BADEA but that is not part of the loan in the books of National Water. 

THE SPEAKER: Before you contribute further, there is something, which I should announce: we have our colleague here, Maj. Gen. Francis Okello who was promoted and is going to command our forces in Somalia. We wish you well in Somalia. I am also happy to see hon. Odonga Otto back; he was operated on. [Hon. Members: “Will you give him leave?”] Yes, I will give him leave.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to give to the honourable minister and the House two pieces of information, which I feel can help us to make an informed decision: 

Hon. Anywar has just sought clarification as to how National Water would be exporting services when the same services are not sufficient here. This clarification creates an impression as if National Water is selling water outside while there is no sufficient water here. I would like to make this clarification that National Water is not selling water outside Uganda. National Water has got an external services division, which talks about services and improvement in management skills. Other corporations outside this country wanted to borrow the experience National Water has gone through in order for them to do the same management system outside Uganda. 

This is what has been happening and for us as a committee, we have encouraged them to do so provided they can maintain the standard and even improve further the standard they have set at home.

The second piece of information is about what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has just quoted from the Water Act. Mr Speaker, that is the ultimate objective. We would wish National Water at the end of the day to operate on commercial principles. But what do we say about the development objective of National Water?  

All these Members of Parliament, including some of my colleagues on the Opposition side, have been working together in appealing for the extension of services to our people. And our people cannot pay for those services and yet we want this water extended. Mr Speaker, under the circumstances what would we do? I thought that this information would help this House to make an informed decision. I thank you very much.

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, first of all I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for extending to me a copy of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation Act. In addition to what he read, that is, section 4(4) and in addition to what hon. Dombo has said, I would like him to read further sub-section (3) of the same section. It is very clear, for those who are emphasising the development role of the corporation: “The Corporation shall carry out its functions with a view:
(a)	Of providing its services efficiently and economically; 
(b)	To exercise its powers in accordance with
	(i)	any national action plan adopted 		under the Water Act; 
	(ii)	The economic, social and environment 		policies of the government.” 

Thank you. (Applause)

MS NAMUYANGU: Rt hon. Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to conclude by appealing to you that issues to do with water are issues to do with life. I want to appeal that as we talk about this issue, let us look at the Ugandans out there who we must serve. So I want to appeal to colleagues to really support this resolution.  

As I said earlier, it is just a book entry; we are not giving money to National Water. But when they asked for the US $3 million, we told them as Government that, “We do not have that money but you go out and look for money from the commercial institutions”. The commercial institutions are willing to give money for investment in water and sanitation when we clear the balance sheet. That is why Government is coming up to convert this loan into equity. And as I said, it is the role of Government to provide water. 

Even what my hon. brother mentioned that development of water in Soroti, Sironko and Kaberamaido is as a result of money from BADEA is true. You know that water development is normally capital intensive. But as I mentioned earlier, when we put this infrastructure in place, we do not cover so many people in terms of extension. So it is again National Water, through their own revenue, who go ahead to cover the rest of the population.

When we get the money from our development partners, we do not use it to cover all the population. The example is here in Kampala. Many of you stay here in Kampala and Wakiso, and many of you come to us often wanting extension to your areas. So I humbly appeal to all honourable colleagues to support this resolution so that National Water can provide –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to get this clarification. We have talked about exportation. And when we talk about exportation, it does not mean that it must be the literal water; even the technical expertise can be exported. But the honourable minister was denying that there was nothing to do with exportation in National Water and Sewerage Cooperation. So can she clarify that? If the expertise of NWSC is sold out, what do we call that; isn’t that part of NSWC? Thank you.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank my colleague, hon. Betty Aol. Apparently the personnel in National Water are ranked and recognised among the best on the continent. Therefore, other countries normally come for external, technical services. So these people go and offer their services and it is one way of generating some revenue. I can tell you that part of that money is what we are using here, not only in extension but also in issues of research in water. 

Hon. Amuriat is talking about the green water. We have time and again told you the causes of the green colour of the water. And this is one of the reasons why we want money to extend the pipes so that you can get clear water instead of green water. Thank you.

4.32
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have attentively listened to the honourable minister. We all know and strongly believe that water is life. But I think the questions we are asking will help you a great deal to improve your management systems in water. It is not a good practice for you to borrow with the right hand in order to service a debt, which was got with the left hand. I think at this point in time we would be more convinced if you came out with an explanation on how NWSC went into incurring all these debts for which you are now looking for money to offset. 

Secondly, give us an assurance from the onset that we shall not again be led into such doldrums where we are going to continue accumulating debt. What measure do you have in place to convince us that when this money comes and offsets all these debts, we shall have a firm foundation and never be embarrassed again in future asking us for permission to borrow money in order to offset debts?

That is the type of explanation that we would wish to hear from you. We should be convinced that we shall not again be approached and have a motion asking for money from outside to service debts that are incurred and accumulated as a result of poor management. You have to convince us on this, Madam Minister. Thank you.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, let me explain how these loans were incurred and what we used the money for. I will then sit down and Members will contribute, and I will come back again to respond towards the end.

The first loan was from IDA and this was credit line 2124. This money was got in 1990 and it was 36.02 billion. The purpose was to rehabilitate six towns, that is: Masaka, Mbale, Jinja, Mbarara, Tororo and Kampala. 

The second loan was again from IDA, credit line 2583. That loan was to cover Njeru in Jinja, and it had a component of sanitation in Jinja; and the total amount was 17.47 billion.

The third loan was from the government of Austria, and it was 27.77 billion, and this was mainly to extend the connections within Kampala.

The fourth loan is the French loan, which is referred to as the French Protocol. This was to create a water unit in Namasuba and to connect Namasuba to Kampala. This was 3.72 billion and it was borrowed in 1996. So, those are the loans we are talking about. But I should also tell you that, for example, the first loan, which I mentioned as 36.02 billion, has now accumulated interest of 34.28 billion. 

On the Austria loan, the interest has accumulated to 22.06 billion, yet the money borrowed was 27.77. 

So, Mr Speaker, this is the information I wanted to give to my colleagues.

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to seek guidance. Considering the statement of the Leader of the Opposition, which to me seems like he actually supported the motion but with caution that NWSC should be a little more efficient in future; is it, therefore, necessary to proceed debating this issue since –(Interjections)- no, I am seeking guidance from the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What is the question?

4.38
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman for the report and from the onset, I want to make it very clear that hon. Anywar has been trying to allay fears to the people that when we let these people get the money the prices will go up but that is not true. That is not true; National Water and Sewerage Corporation will continue operating in the same manner it is doing now.  

We must be very appreciative that National Water and Sewerage Corporation have been able to take services to the people who are not economically viable. I want any MP here to be on record that, “In my area, if it is not economically viable, National Water should not come”. Those who are courageous let them tell us that they do not want the policy of National Water and Sewerage Corporation that if you are not economically viable they do not come. Tell us now! 

So, I am very appreciative of National Water and Sewerage Corporation; the minister has clearly told us how the loan was used and nobody has questioned that. Further to that, when Government asked the World Bank to freeze the accrued interest, a lot of work was done and nobody has questioned that. That shows the corporation is doing a good job and we must support it.

It is in the interests of all Ugandans to see that we distribute development; we do not want to be governed by economic means alone. We want to take water to Karamoja, to Gulu, to Luwero, to Soroti -(Applause)- so that we have equitable development. And when we provide clean water, we are effectively also handling water borne diseases. Health is going to improve; which one of us here does not want clean water; which of us here says, “In my constituency, do not bring clean water”?  

Mr Speaker, apart from the water, the minister has told us - and the report of the chairman - that they are going to increase the coverage of sewerage –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, the question in point is not about wanting or rejecting. The question is about effective use of the meagre resources we have; the funding, the loans, value for money. It is not just about rejecting. All of need clean water, safe water, but the question is: how are we using the meagre resources to let this water reach our communities? It is not about that. My information to the previous speaker is that you should know that all of us need water; but we must make sure that we follow where our money goes. Thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much for the information but as I said, nobody has stood here to challenge how the loan was used -(Interjections)- I also said that the freezing of the accrued interest was properly used and it is documented here; nobody has doubted it. Then on what grounds can I say that there was no value for money? So, I conclude by saying: let us support this request by the minister under the report of the chairman. Mr Speaker, I would like to move that let us put this to vote so that we can move on. Thank you very much.

4.43 
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I am one person who believes in the efficiency of the private sector-driven development approach, due to increased efficiency and effectiveness that can be realised through private sector initiatives. If Government is taking a leading role in getting into direct investment through capitalising National Water and Sewerage Corporation for it to be a corporate entity that can have the ability to access financial services from commercial banks or development banks for that matter, it would be indeed a very welcome idea. However, I feel that the position is lacking in terms of other technical perspectives that could have reinforced this House to unanimously agree with this otherwise very well intentioned perspective of scaling up operations of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation.  

What has not been clearly put here is that the capitalisation of National Water and Sewerage Corporation is going to lead to Government having a 100 percent control interest, while it is transformed as a private entity with 100 percent Government shareholding and that can access loans from the bank by showing the equity, which should be realised through this capitalisation. But Government has not put this position clearly and if that is the position, then you make us understand that it is precisely what is to be done because what would be very dangerous would be – because when you capitalise it and there is equity and then the government of Uganda later turns and says that that is the equity our Government is going to show and then another entity can also show some substantial equity that will eventually lead to them having interest in National Water and Sewerage Corporation; I think unanimously that becomes a very big no. Because when it comes to private entities operating, in the end that might also lead to Government losing a lot in terms of foreign exchange because whether we want it or not, the water sector, being a necessity, will always remain very profitable.

Therefore, I would think this idea should have been accompanied by a technical brief on the sustainability plan, while not losing direction of the social responsibility of National Water and Sewerage Corporation; this is one thing that has not come out clearly. 

It also leaves a lot of doubt when in this submission, Government is wondering about the current tariffs. So, how are we going to balance - because if you are saying the current tariff is too low, so it is the more reason it should be privatised? That means somehow we are leaving people prone on a utility which is a matter of life and death. 

Therefore, I think there are key areas that should technically be clarified. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources and I would be the first person to support this move if Government is clear on some of these perspectives. Thank you.

4.48
PROF. WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine will be very brief. I will just concentrate on the report. I appreciate the government’s move to provide clean water to the people of Uganda and appreciate the government’s move to capitalise National Water and Sewerage Corporation. But my problem is that according to this report’s observations page 4, observation two, is that Government departments owe the corporation a substantial amount of money in unpaid bills. 

It is a recommendation of this same committee, recommendation No.2 that Government departments should pay. Unfortunately, the committee did not tell the House how much Government owes the corporation. It would be useful for this august House to know this amount because this amount may be more than what the government intends to capitalise National Water and Sewerage Corporation. So, I think the minister should –(Interruption)

4.50 
THE CHAIRPERSON, THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, Professor, for giving way. The Government owes National Water and Sewerage Corporation Shs 20 billion. We are saying, in fact they want US$ 3 million to borrow. If Government paid, there would be no need even to go out to borrow.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for the information- (Interruption)- I always take information because I want to learn. (Laughter)

MR SIMON TOOLIT: Thank you my colleague and thank you Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give my colleague is that for the year 2006, Government owes National Water and Sewerage Corporation Shs 22 billion, which bill Government has not paid. Thank you.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for the information. This actually reinforces the need for Government to really make good its obligations, because if you are taking public money to give to a corporation, which you owe more than what you are giving, I think there is no logic in that. And I would like, therefore, to urge the government to find ways of paying this money so that the corporation asks for less money from the commercial banks. Thank you very much.

4.53
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have few concerns about this motion. The first concern is the honourable minister’s statement that this is not really a serious business, when actually this is a corporation and we have been told that it has realised some profits. So – you know when you are sympathising with a case like this we need the truth. The truth we need is that perhaps even now as you present this paper very well as the chairperson – we, therefore, need an external body report. I am not satisfied with this internal report, because if you do not believe that some profits have been realised and now it has been utilised, then that is one question. 

The second concern is how come that the government has not been paying National Water and Sewerage Corporation? Same thing is happening with UMEME - that is power. So, very soon we shall also be facing a similar problem of overturning debt into equity.

Mr Speaker, one thing that I have not understood about these loans is that when were these loans supposed to be serviced, because we are told when it was borrowed? And then for how long, we do not know when the loans were going to end; causing the interest, which is more or less the same like the principal of these loans. 

If you look at the first one from the IDA, the CR 2124, the total principal is Shs 36.2 billion and is now running an interest of Shs 34.28 billion, even there is also still a loan of Shs 27.77 billion, which is now coming to Shs 22.06 billion, and even there are others. Now does it mean the government has not been servicing these loans at all and why? Because now this causes a lot of concern, since Government has been requesting for these loans and then not servicing it, and now we want – now the request is to turn it into equity. Does it mean that the government has not been performing? What about requesting for total cancelling of this loan from the source? Have we tried that opportunity and we have failed?

And then one thing that I do not understand is after now, giving this opportunity to equity, are we going to service this loan anymore? That is where we have not understood you, honourable minister. Otherwise, water is life and when you put us on that line, you want us to sympathise with you when there is a serious weakness, which should be put right first. Thank you very much.

4.56
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for your prayers when I got a slight problem. I am now fine. I am sorry to say that we seem not to have clean hands when we are talking about National Water and Sewerage Corporation, and if anyone insists, then I may ask that we have a session in camera because those who should be doing Parliamentary work as committee chairpersons are those who are least incapacitated and in full support of this move, clapping hands and nodding heads for any argument, for and against it. Even those who carried green water into this Parliament have no business now with opposing this motion.

The minister has given wrong information to Parliament, and at an appropriate time I will beg that we put a select committee of Parliament to investigate the entire National Water and Sewerage Corporation, and not the existing standing committees. Mr Speaker, when you invite me to your Office, I will give you evidence to show that these existing committees may not be able to do the work we want.

The Managing Director of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, who happens to be one of the MPs, left National Water in August 1996 with $12 billion in cash on a Stanbic Account and Shs.4 billion on a government account. We can have a print-out of all those accounts. So, where are these losses coming from that the honourable minister is talking about?

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, while I appreciate what has been said since we started discussing this issue, I think many of our colleagues, if not all, have greatly contributed as far as finding a solution to this problem is concerned. But is hon. Otto in order to undermine our committees which are going to actually look at the National Water and Sewerage Corporation? Is he in order to underrate our committees, that we will not be able to do a thorough job? Are our committees substandard committees, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not think that is what he meant. What he meant is that there are occasions when we do not use standing committees, but put a select committee; and in his opinion, he thinks this is a matter that should be handled by a select committee which does the work and disbands.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker – (Interjection) - just let me develop this point; honourable minister, just relax. Mr Speaker, recently I went to pay my water bills at Namasuba and one of the staff told me, “Please, Parliament, help us and investigate National Water; the way money is being abused.” In fact, the smaller units which supply water for instance in my village in Namasuba are totally in private hands. They collect the money and take it or leave it, National Water is not making losses. For the last nine years, National Water has made a lot of money but the money is not ending up in the right hands. This particular staff requested me to request Parliament to investigate how the proceeds of National Water and Sewerage Corporation are being handled. 

Mr Speaker, as I talk now, this green water that appeared –that hon. Dombo was carrying in a Mineral Water bottle in Parliament, arose as a result of the collapse of Gaba III project. Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, can the chairman of the appropriate parliamentary committee tell me if they have been allowed to inspect Gaba III project? As of now, soldiers surround it; you cannot even access it to see that the entire project, which the President commissioned six months ago, has already collapsed. That is why green water is appearing in some channels across Kampala. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I want to welcome my dear colleague and wish him a quick recovery from the operation that he recently underwent. I have been listening attentively and I had restrained myself from responding because I knew that involving my colleague in an acrimonious debate especially when he gives ineffectual figures could easily exacerbate his health problem, and I had deliberately declined.

I wish to inform this House that the green water that I carried in the Mineral Water bottle was directly from the lake. It was not water that had been extracted from the taps of Uganda; this water had been brought by the staff of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, and the argument they were bringing to the committee was that because of the decline in the levels of water, the suction pipes which suck in water for purification are so close and they need to be extended deeper in the lake so that they can suck more water for purification. That is why at that time, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation was seeking a loan or a grant from Government of $3 million so that they can extend those pipes to the intakes for the water. 

Mr Speaker, this is information that I wanted to give, because when that picture appeared in the media, it was purely mismanaged and it was not my duty immediately at that time to come up and give this information. But since we are now informed, in making a decision, I feel I should volunteer this very useful information so that my hon. colleague can make an informed debate.

MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker, the Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Natural Resources actually toured Gaba I, Gaba II and Gaba III water projects. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that I personally met an Israeli who has been contracted to measure sites for sinking 200 water boreholes in Kampala and that is the plan which National Water and Sewerage Corporation is planning on taking, in order to suck water from underground because the Gaba III project has failed. And if disagreements persist, I would want a Parliamentary committee to go there even tomorrow and see how some German experts are fidgeting with rectifying the pumps that have sank underground. 

Mr Speaker, this issue is very sensitive and I was very reluctant to talk about it because we are dealing with very influential members of the society. Should this Parliament sit down today and say, “We are just doing book reconciliation,” we would have cleaned very many dirty hands. Just in case the vote does not hint in our favour, let us remind whoever is concerned that this book reconciliation will not redeem you from ripping Ugandans of their hard earned money. 

I really pray, Mr Speaker, that if you could stay this debate pending further consultations, I would personally be willing to come to your office with a committee chairperson, the honourable minister and the relevant people you may ask for, so that the writings may be put clearly on the wall. Otherwise, I do not want to risk saying certain things that will lower the reputation of this institution and yet I have the information. 

5.04
MR PETER LOKERIS (NRM, Chekwii County, Moroto): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, I would like to thank the minister for bringing up the issue of capitalisation of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. I am happy because whenever I go to any town, there is a lot of rehabilitation work by National Water and Sewerage Corporation going on in those towns to provide water. Because we are creating towns all the time, whenever there is a new district we want water to be provided, the requirements for water become very crucial. Also, because of modernisation, we want our people to drink clean water. So, there is a lot of work to be done. 

Now, what this paper says is that there has been equity of Government, that is, share capital. We need to raise this to greater levels in order to provide funds- (Interruption) –you have also been reading this and that is why you say capitalisation.  So, now what we are saying is that our share capital, which is this money which is supposed to be converted from loan to equity shares, raises the levels of Government share capital in National Water and Sewerage Corporation. That is what it means. Now, who pays the rest of the loan? The owner of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, and that is Government. And when this loan is being paid by Government, the collections by National Water and Sewerage Corporation are then used for expansion so that you get more water in your towns sooner than later. And this is what we really want. 

So other than running to the World Bank, we are saying that we just change this phenomenon because repayments continue. Whether we recapitalise this corporation or not, we shall pay this loan. Whether it is National Water and Sewerage Corporation paying, it is us paying as Government. But they have come with a wise idea that we raise the levels of capitalisation and convert this very money into our equity share. And this is what really we need to do. All these rigorous things about auditing- those things are ever there. We do not mind about the auditing. Every year- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank my brother from Karamoja. You see, the loans to National Water and Sewerage Corporation are called on-lent loans. They come to Government and Government passes them on to National Water and Sewerage Corporation. That is why they are appearing here as IDA loans. What is happening now is that currently we are paying the loans but National Water and Sewerage Corporation is not paying Government the money. So, that is what they are saying. We are not saying that we are not paying the loans. We are paying but National Water and Sewerage Corporation is not paying Government. 

THE SPEAKER: But haven’t we really debated this issue sufficiently? 

MR LOKERIS: Surely, I welcome your remarks. But the fact is that this should not go anywhere; we want water. We have explained that we are increasing our share capital since Mbale needs water now, so that you remain alive as an MP. This is the time we need water. So, Mr Speaker, we can decide to vote so that we get water.

MR MUKITALE: I am seeking your guidance. It is abundantly clear that National Water and Sewerage Corporation needs financing and that water is a public utility. As Parliament, we are not about to consider it as a purely commercial enterprise. I have also listened to the accounting semantics of conversion of the long-term debt into equity which some people are saying is a matter of the way you declare it. 

Rt Hon. Speaker and hon. colleagues, if you look at the objectives clearly, it is taking the direction of National Water and Sewerage Corporation seeking accessing market financing and building up a history of profitability and credit worthiness. 

The guidance I am seeking is that, having realised the need for financing water, would it not be better for us to discuss the viability of commercial financing of water services. So that we do not discuss the semantics or whatever we call it, and we do not go into other details of how they may have mismanaged their money because of increased administrative costs. So that we move in the direction of agreeing if it is still largely a state role, is it cheaper to use commercially accessed loans or other kind of loans? I seek your guidance, Rt Hon. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, what guidance can I give you?  (Laughter) Each side has got its opinion. It is not possible really. But my question is, haven’t we sufficiently submitted on this motion and made up our mind in one way or the other? 

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. We have had a very progressive debate on this issue. But, there are also concerns that have been raised by Members of Parliament and these are genuine concerns. The first one is the concern raised by hon. Anywar when she talked about accessing commercial funding which the corporation has proposed. 

I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General that when a national corporation, which is 100 percent owned by Government, wishes to access a commercial loan, isn’t it also subjected to approval of Parliament? So that discussing future commercial lending to the corporations should be discussed at every merit of every loan that is applied for. I wanted just a technical guidance to see whether this is constitutional. 

THE SPEAKER: What provision of the Constitution is giving you that and what constitutional provision are you relying on that we need to give sanction to a corporation to borrow? No, no, there may be a provision.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, that is why I sought the indulgence of the Attorney-General since he is here to enrich us on what the provisions of the law are. 

THE SPEAKER: Ok. Let the Attorney-General help us.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, my law professor at Makerere who introduced me to the law taught me one important thing. That a good lawyer is not necessarily the one who knows the law in his head but one who knows where to find it- (Laughter)- Mr Speaker, off the cuff, however a corporation of this nature - normally there are provisions for corporations being empowered to borrow money and it should be there. Section 26 of the PERD Act: “Funds of the corporation. The funds of the corporation shall consist of a) Money from time to time appropriated by Parliament for that purpose 
b) All monies received by the corporation for goods or services provided under this Act. 
C) Monies borrowed by the corporation and such other monies received by or made available to the corporation for purposes of performing its functions under this act.”  

I am not aware of any constitutional provision. Maybe, I may look at the Constitution at a later stage but I am not aware of any constitutional provision that would require that borrowing to come here for approval. But we can look at it at a later stage.

THE SPEAKER: So you are saying there is no constitutional requirement for corporations to seek authorisation from Parliament? That is my understanding of what you said.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I am not aware but I can look at the Constitution. But I am not aware of any constitutional provision that would require that borrowing to come here for approval at the moment.

THE SPEAKER: Is there any other person who has contrary information?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we have the PERD Act. It says the PERD can write-off a bad debt.  But they say any debt owed to Government of Uganda must be written-off by Parliament. So, if you go by that, it means that section is in conflict with the Constitution. I am bringing that to ask the Attorney-General to look at this further because we could look at this law when in the Constitution Government bodies are governed in borrowing.

THE SPEAKER: No! The provision, which we have here about loans is Article 159, which talks about Government. I think there is a difference between Government and a corporation.

5.17
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I could see that your feeling is that the debate on this matter has gone very far. I had no plans of participating in it, but when I heard hon. Odonga Otto say a few things, I thought it was also important for me to come and restate certain aspects of what this conversion will mean. 

Members will recall that prior to the present Managing Director being appointed, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation was headed by Eng. Hillary Onek who is now a Cabinet minister. A few years after that, we got very growing reports about the performance of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. Since then, we have heard repeated reports of profits being made by that corporation.  We have even heard situations where the National Water and Sewerage Corporation got recognised as one of the most successful enterprises in East Africa. I think this has been a very recent recognition.

THE SPEAKER: Last year.

PROF. LATIGO: Yes. Now looking at the statistics on the kind of loans that National Water and Sewerage Corporation received from Government and it has accumulated even in this glowing performance — I have a serious problem because in effect what we are trying to say is that we have a corporation that has not been telling us the truth. If it has been telling us the truth, it has a clear obligation to provide for its loans before it declares any profits. 

In this report, obviously not a cent was provided for the loans which they received and for which they have had the praise even of the President. Should we not get clarification on how much money they have been providing for the loans; how much loans they have received and, therefore, effectively understand how they have been performing? We would like –

THE SPEAKER: I thought the Minister gave a breakdown. Didn’t she?

PROF. LATIGO: The Minister gave a breakdown of the loans, Mr Speaker. I have been saying that the National Water and Sewerage Corporation has been having glowing tributes with reports of huge profits. Any business that operates will have its obligation and will declare profits after meeting those obligations. Otherwise, like Metha, you do not declare profits because all the money goes to meet those obligations. 

The clarification I would then want to have is over these last ten years that National Water and Sewerage Corporation has been declaring profits, I would want to see the profits; I would want to see the basis of the profits - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, thank you. I am sorry for interrupting our Leader of  the Opposition. The minister in 1996 borrowed Shs 3.72 billion - I am just making reference to what the Speaker has said that the minister had given us the details. But in August 1996, the current minister, hon. Hillary Onek, left Shs $12 billion on a Stanbic account. So, why would someone go to borrow Shs 3.72 billion in 1996 yet they have $12 billion cash on Stanbic account? So, there is something very unclear, which I thought the Leader of the Opposition should know that the fact that the minister read all the loans they got, she has not read to us all the earnings, which we can obtain a copy very easily from Stanbic Bank. 

PROF. LATIGO: I hear many Members talking about – and I heard the minister saying that you often come for water. Yes, because we want the water. But that must not be a reason for white washing things that the country needs clear explanations on. The implication of what you have asked us to do is more or less to just declare that the account of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, in respect of those loans has been closed–(Interruption) 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to seek clarification from Hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo. In Parliament of Uganda, we have got oversight committees and Parliament took a deliberate move to ensure that the opposition heads all the oversight committees. The oversight committee, which is responsible for the accountability and finance efficiency of the corporations in Uganda, is the Statutory Enterprises Committee, which is headed by the Opposition. I want to find out from the hon. Member holding the Floor and hon. Odonga Otto, whether as the Opposition, they have provided this information to the committee that they had to do a due diligence to the corporation as they are supposed to do under our Rules of Procedure.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Okay, thank - (Interruption)

MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, there has been a concern that some money was in National Water and Sewerage Corporation accounts, yet this company went a head to borrow. But Members will realise that Section 17 (1) of the Public Enterprises and Reform Divesture Act gives the Auditor-General powers to audit the books accounts of National Water and Sewerage Cooperation. The Auditor- General actually carried out this responsibility and reported to Parliament as under Section 163 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

The Parliamentary committee responsible for public accounts is PAC. I would like to inform the Leader of Opposition and all the others who are saying that we need an external audit, that, that was done and that your part is to go a head and examine the books of accounts of National Water and Sewerage Corporation. If you find there something, which is lacking then you report to us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, there is a going concern concept. This is an opinion, which seems to say that if this is not done there will be a problem. The going concern concept they are putting across is that, in summary, there are liabilities in long and short terms of Shs 83.8 billion and that if this is not addressed, there will be a problem; this is the going concern concept. This means that this company has big problems – (Interjections) – yes, it means that the company is not able to perform – (Interjections) – let me help you. It means that the company’s business is not performing well yet the accounts show that it is doing well. The retain earnings – 

THE SPEAKER: No, but isn’t it prematurely raised on the Floor before your committee invites the people concerned to answer queries and so forth? Is it your report or it is the Auditor-General’s report? If it is the Auditor-General’s report, you have to bear in mind that that report has to go through a process before we can debate it. As of now we cannot use it until the due process has been taken.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my two colleagues for attempting to inform me on – (Laughter) – what basically is my job is to make sure that the opposition undertakes its functions. But you see if the matter that came to you as the chairman of the committee, had come to my office, I would have addressed the very questions that I am raising now. That you as a Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee you act not on behalf of Government or the Opposition, but on behalf of Parliament. 

So, now that you have brought your report to Parliament and it does not help me to understand what was said of the corporation and what is being asked of us to help the corporation with, I have a national obligation to ask those questions for Parliament to make the right decision. I am saying this because if you get interest accumulation for over 10 years, that virtually doubles the original loan value; it means that you have not been dealing with loans at all. 

So, I would now demand that we defer resolution of this issue to even just three days until the corporation brings its audited accounts for the last five years for us to take a quick look at.  

I have a big problem and I was surprised that hon. Dombo, while explaining the green water, made reference to the fact that the level of the water intake has been compromised by the decline in the water levels of Lake Victoria. I know, for a fact, that the water level in Lake Victoria has not declined by anything more than two metres – (Interjections) – yes! It could not have declined by more than two metres. 

I also know, for a fact, that any good engineer designing water intake from Lake Victoria would consider data that shows over the last so many years when the water level was very low. I do not think that the engineers that put the water intake could have put it in such away that a decline of about a metre alone leads to you taking water from an area where light allows for green algae to grow. 

Sitting here and pondering these things; pondering the loan figures you have and pondering the huge claim of how National Water and Sewerage Corporation has been so profitable, makes me get very worried that Parliament is actually being taken for a ride. 

So, I think the committee should be asked to get answers to these queries before this matter is resolved. If you do not do that, it is fine because I can guarantee you that the truth will always come out. I have seen this happen with many corporations under Government. They will recapitalise and then sell. 

Also, if this money is converted to equity, it now means that to declare profits and dividends on a huge capital base will be very difficult. Therefore, every year National Water will make losses and that will be used to argue that, “This public thing cannot be managed, let us privatise”. I have spoken here and I am an “insect scientist”. Maybe I don’t know some of the things that I have said but the logic that I have grown with tells me that something is not right. Thank you.

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to respond to three issues. One arose from my colleague, hon. Otto whom I really want to sympathise with and wish a quick recovery. He told us that he met an Israeli who told him that we are planning to drill 2000 boreholes in Kampala. I want to put the record clear that we cannot do that and it is not true. Our policy is that where we have over 1500 people, we don’t encourage borehole drilling because of the contamination. Therefore, in Kampala, we cannot encourage borehole drilling, so your information is not true. That is also the reason why we are going into developing rural water in rural growth centres. 

Secondly, and in response to hon. Charles Angiro who asked when the loans were due for servicing. These loans were due for servicing in 1998 and at that time, National Water swapped with Government to a tune of Shs 673.5 million and that is what was paid so far. 

The last issue is that National Water has a five-year work plan that runs from 2006 to 2011 where we are planning to invest Shs 168 billion. The report, which has just been distributed, has the activities listed including what we intend to do. Therefore, I just want to request colleagues to consider this request so that we can go ahead. We have oversight committees in place to go and verify what they want to. Thank you.

5.36
MR DAVID EBONG (Independent, Maruzi County, Apac): Mr Speaker, we have heard the views in favour of capitalisation of National Water and Sewerage Corporation with the related concerns and I think that it is very critical that when we make decisions on such pertinent issues, we are appropriately aided with facts. It would do no disservice for us to put our position- 

THE SPEAKER: What is the motion? You stood to make a motion.

MR EBONG: I am giving the preamble to the motion- (Laughter)- Mr Speaker it would do no disservice-

THE SPEAKER: I think you should move your motion and justify it.

MR EBONG: Thank you very much for your guidance, Mr Speaker. In brief, I move a motion that this matter be referred back to the committee to address the related concerns on the aspect of sustainability; that is, if National Water and Sewerage Corporation is going to be capitalised on the aspect of social responsibility as well as addressing concerns of inefficiency that have been expressed by members. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion has been seconded. You have heard the motion. I put the question. Will voting be by show of hands? 

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance that given the kind of consensus that we were developing, knowing the grievous implications of voting on an issue that may not be at the bottom of our hearts- and given the concerns some of us have raised that we are not members of that committee, I was seeking your guidance if you could use your discretion so that we can stay the matter without subjecting it to a voting exercise.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think I will return the question to the minister who is the owner of the motion and the chairperson for them to advise me because I have to put the question.

MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, my committee has clearly stated in this report that we had a lengthy discussion with officials of National Water and Sewerage Corporation and we analysed all the documents, which we laid on Table. I know that maybe because some members have not had the opportunity to appear in the committee and to look at these documents, they might still have a problem. However, I think we have clearly addressed all the concerns and it is our considered opinion that we pass this request.

THE SPEAKER: You have exhausted whatever you have to? Then I put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question on the motion as tabled here.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this brings us to the end of today’s business. I see some people putting on red; I think they have a function. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)


 

