Tuesday, 19 February 2002

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let me take this opportunity to welcome you back from the Christmas recess, which I hope has been very fruitful for you and your constituents. In the same vein, I wish to congratulate those of you who have been able to overcome the nightmare of electoral repetitions. And for all those whose cases are yet to be disposed of by the courts of law, I wish you well. (Applause).  

I further congratulate you for having successfully gone through the recently concluded local council elections, which have brought to an end the chain of elections that the country has been witnessing for almost a year now.

I noted from The Monitor that the election monitors have praised the last elections. But I believe the success has been because you, members representing various constituencies, participated and supervised the elections in one way or another. (Applause).

Hon. Members, during the recess, the Parliamentary Commission continued to press for your transport facilitation in order to ease your mobility in your constituencies. I am glad to inform you that with the exception of the members who are facilitated by the state, that is ministers, the Speaker, and also members who were in the 6th Parliament, other members have received the Government contribution towards the purchase of motor vehicles. Most of us, therefore, should now be in position to carry out necessary mobilization in the constituencies.

Again, during the recess, Uganda had the honour to host the second meeting of the East African Legislative Assembly for a whole week, before the members embarked on a tour of the eastern region. 

I wish to thank those members who were actively involved in hosting the visitors. In this regard, the visitors and their Ugandan counterparts requested me to convey their sincere appreciation to the following Members of Parliament:

Hon. John Kazoora
Hon. Nasani Nabeta
Hon. Aggrey Awori
Hon. Yeri Ofwono Apollo
Hon. James Wapakabulo
Hon. Gertrude Kulany
Hon. Dr John Arapkissa Yekko
Hon. Mike Mukula 
Hon. Francis Babu

Finally, hon. Members, you will recall that before we broke off for the Christmas recess, the hon. Minister for Parliamentary Affairs informed the House that H.E. the President, who was then busy on state duties, had planned to address Parliament at the earliest convenient time after recess. I now wish to inform you that acting in accordance with clause (2) of article 101 of the Constitution, H.E the President will address Parliament on matters of national importance on Thursday, 7 March 2002.  I thank you for your kind attention.

MR AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for welcoming us back and for the good news you have delivered to us. However, I am seeking clarification on our programme here for this session. I do understand you had a meeting this morning to determine our programme, but when I look at today’s Order Paper, there is no mention at all as to how we are going to handle some of the items, which I consider extremely urgent and important.  

When we left for the Christmas recess, I was given the impression that these matters, which I consider important, such as the POB, Suppression of Terrorism Bill - which I consider ‘prevention’ - would be among the top items for consideration. But now I note with great concern that there is no mention of this, even on the first day.

I do understand that the committee responsible for the rules of procedure of this House have now finished their work. Do I understand from the Chair that we are going to amend these rules? And how soon that will be possible? I would be most grateful if you could help me in this matter. 

Although I express concern about the matter of the Electoral Commission having ‘successfully completed the exercise of elections for the past one year’, some of us have got serious reservations about the performance of the Electoral Commission.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, we have many bills to consider.  I do not know which is important and which is not! You have not mentioned the bills that you had in mind; you have only mentioned one. I want to inform you that the report on The Suppression of Terrorism Bill is ready, and it shall be allocated a day to be presented. But of course, it will not be presented today because first of all, you have to read the report and understand it before you can make your contribution.  

I want to assure you, and I did say so when we adjourned, that The Political Organizations Bill would be considered. As soon as the committee finalizes the report, this matter will be considered. You will note that we were in recess, and during recess we are not supposed to work.  But because we had to prepare some work for you when you came back, certain committees were called to prepare this work.

The committees that were allowed to come back are the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, which was working in collaboration with the Committee on Defence, and they have finished their report, and it will soon come out. Now they are going to embark on The Political Organizations Bill. I do not know how long it will take them. They are also going to embark on the leadership code. When we talk about the leadership code, we are talking about fighting corruption, and I hope it will get the support it deserves. There are so many others, so do not worry, these things are going to come.

As far as the rules are concerned, what are being proposed are amendments. As soon as we get a report on this, we shall allocate time for the House to consider these rules, pass them or amend them as the case may be. So, you should not be worried about that.  

As for the elections, as I have said, the monitors have said they went on well. As far as I am concerned, in my district the elections were okay. So that is why I was entitled to say the elections were okay, and I think your contribution made the exercise a success.

MR AWORI: Sorry, Mr Speaker, on the last one, some of my colleagues were manhandled by security officers. So, when you talk about ‘successful’ when our people were – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You cannot secure 100 per cent, and I am not saying manhandling is good; I condemn it! But overall, that is the assessment. If somebody gets 75 percent, he may have failed by 25 percent, but you say they have done well.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification, especially bearing in mind that you have congratulated us for having successfully participated in the recently concluded elections. When we participated in monitoring the LC III elections, we did witness direct involvement and participation of Government through its agents. This participation actually sowed seeds of hatred and disunity among the population. 

I do very well recall - although I was not in the Sixth Parliament - that the Prime Minister did write a circular to ministries and to this House to the effect that if there is to be any programme of whatever nature to be implemented in a particular constituency, the area Member of Parliament must be involved. 

To my surprise, in the wee hours of the day of elections of LC III chairmen, we did experience colossal sums of money being distributed; that is on the nights of 3rd and 4th. This money was ostensibly for the facilitation of certain members who were in the race, and they even went further to say that the people who were supposed to benefit from this ‘facilitation’ were those who favoured the movement system. Surely, is that not a contradiction of the Constitution?  

If Article 269 says that we are all in the Movement, I thought it would have been fair that such an amount of money should have been given to whoever was contesting! Furthermore, even if that was a reason, may we know the criterion that was used for identifying certain candidates as being Movement candidates when we know we are all in the Movement? (Laughter) The Constitution says so! It says that we are all in the Movement, therefore, we are part of it. 

May we also know the source of that money? Where did it come from and why were the area MPs not part of that system to be able to advise appropriately? We need this clarification from the Minister in charge of the Presidency.  Thank you very much.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification, especially with regard to the recent events, whereby examination results of some primary school have been cancelled. During the recess, results of the primary schools were released with some schools having their results withheld, and others cancelled. The people in our various constituencies are so far very disturbed by this matter. It is so contentious that they challenged the Ministry of Education and Government at large to explain what criteria they used to cancel examination results.  

If examination malpractice is taking place in a situation where they say that question papers leaked to the students, and yet the custodian of the examination papers are the people in UNEB, then the leakage must have come out of UNEB! They wonder why the victims are the pupils and not the people from UNEB, who obviously are the custodians of the examination papers and they led to such a leakage!  

Secondly, they wonder why and how UNEB has reached the decision to cancel these results when they know very well that the question of malpractice in examination is an individual affair. Why has UNEB failed to get the culprits as individuals and has just given a blanket punishment? 

Mr Speaker, I rise to ask if we shall be given an opportunity to discuss this matter and arrive at a proper conclusion?  I thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification arising from your communication that His Excellency the President will address Members of Parliament on 7th. Most of us who are women members of Parliament represent the women’s voice. We realise that 8th March is the global Women’s day, and on 7th or 6th all of us will travel to our constituencies to organise for the event of 8th March. So, I think it would not be fair for us, the women MPs, to sit here on 7th. Even the men in this Parliament will go to their constituencies to celebrate with their mothers and wives.  

I would like clarification as to whether it can be pushed back or brought forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think this point has merit and I will communicate to the appropriate authority about it. But I must say that actually, the President wanted to address Parliament this coming Thursday, but then it transpired that Thursday would be a public holiday because of Idd Aduha, that is why it was shifted to 7th, without actually addressing our minds to the factor of 8th March.  But now that it has been raised, I will liase with those concerned in making arrangements so that this date can be altered.  

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In one of today’s dailies, the Monitor, it was reported that a minister in the Government by the names of Zoe Bakoko was caught with more than 18 already ticked voting papers. I would like to get an explanation about this, and I ask the person concerned to tell us where she got these boxes and where she was taking them.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you must have picked this from the newspapers, and if the matter is being investigated, do you think it is proper to now prejudice the investigation?  Why don’t we wait for the investigations to be carried out before we get on it? If we start on it, then we will see other issues come up. Why don’t you wait?  

MR EMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  It is common knowledge that when a slave sees a fellow slave being buried in a shallow grave, he should know that he will undergo the same fate when his turn comes.  

It has been reported in the press that a Member of Parliament was arrested and manhandled on the eve of the mayoral elections in Kampala.  Mr Speaker, the concern is not the arrest, but what was reported in the press as to have emanated from the voice of the Inspector General of Police, when he wondered what the Member of Parliament was doing at that time of the hour.  

I know that a number of times we have held parties at this venue over which you have presided, and at times we have stayed here at the premises of Parliament up to the wee hours.  I want to get clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs as to what the Inspector General of Police - since he is directly under the Minister of Internal Affairs - meant when he asked what the Member of Parliament was doing at that time, so that we take precautionary measures not to fall under similar circumstances when such a time comes.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JACOB OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise on a question, which has actually baffled me in terms of procedure in this Parliament.  I submitted a question for oral answer for the Minister of Foreign Affairs on the 19th of November of last year. Parliament went on until the middle of December, but that question was never put to the Minister.  We have started today, but I have not seen it on the Order Paper.  

I have raised this matter with everybody concerned but nobody seems to be giving me any particular attention.  The question relates to the creation of the international criminal court. It is a matter of international urgency, and a matter which the Executive should actually take seriously.  I wonder, what is happening to my question?  I beg to find out, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The matter will be followed and you will get the response.  I cannot readily do so, but I am going to follow up this issue.

MR FRANCIS MUKAMA: I thank you, Mr speaker, for welcoming us back to this august House. During the recess period, we witnessed the elections as it was in your communication.  In fact some of us in Iganga district are very happy about that election because we managed to throw away a tyrant by the name of Bageya. (Laughter).  

The point I want to raise and seek clarification on, Mr Speaker is that earlier on, we had LC III elections for chairmen and for councilors. In my constituency, I have two sub-counties which did not conclude those elections.  The Electoral Commission has kept quiet and our people do not know what is going on.  Can we be advised as to when those elections will be concluded, so that the rightful people can take their positions in steering the administration and governance of our area?  

THE SPEAKER: Can you tell us the names of the sub-counties?

MR MUKAMA: One is Namungalwe sub-county in a parish called Namunkanaga.  There are about two polling stations that did not get their results.  Another one in the same sub-county is in the place called Bufutuula.  There are also two polling stations that did not get their results.  Even in a sub-county called Nabitende, there are around four polling stations. Probably, I will add Iganga town among those that did not get their results.  So, we need to be advised, because this is torturing the electorate and the candidates; they do not know what to do.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the election results have not been declared?

MR MUKAMA: The results have not been declared, although we know what was counted.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Thank you very, Mr Speaker.  I rise here on the issue of the 29th of December. The National Political Commissar, hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, called a meeting in Soroti Flying School.  We had a meeting the whole night from 9.00 p.m. up to 5.00 a.m. but I was embarrassed and humiliated by hon. Kiyonga, when he threw me out of the meeting and threatened to arrest me, when I was seeking a point of clarification.  Where does the National Political Commissar get such powers? 

Two, the issue of the money that was given during the LC III campaigns; the Movement people of Kasilo never received a penny.  Can the National Political Commissar clarify whether all the people of Kasilo belong to the other side, or there are some that belong to the Movement?  Thank you.

DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I am giving you time; just to be relaxed.  

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, thank you for welcoming us back. Before we broke off for Christmas recess, you had promised us that when we come back for the second meeting, you would give us ample time to debate policies of Ministries because when we were debating the budget we had very little time.  I am only hoping that the Business Committee took interest in what you promised, and sooner or later we shall be debating policies of various ministries. Possibly some of the issues which are being raised now could be exhaustively debated.  I thank you.  

MR  PATRICK MUSISI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise to express concern about the growing violence in all elections in this country.  I did mention when we were still young in this seventh Parliament, the type of violence that was meted to our people.  

In my constituency, a minister went out on a shooting spree.  I know hon. Bernard here, a minister chased him, and he hid at a Police Station.  Hon. Mutuluuza was chased and was nearly killed, and this is growing day by day, and now in the last local council elections, we have had Members of Parliament locked up! (Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much for giving way.  I would like to inform the speaker on the floor that it is not only ministers chasing, but we read that a minister was also boxed! (Laughter)

MR MUSISI: Hon. Members, this is now jumping from the frying pan into the fire. If I may quote verbatim what I read in the papers, I think what was said of the minister was that “Ekisadha kino nakisuna omunwa” –(Laughter). What it actually means is that he was pinched. Now, you can see the type of violence! How can you pinch the mouth that eats the national cake and Government fruits? (Laughter) 

You have also read in the papers that hon. Nankabirwa is being called by Police on matters where she is supposed to explain the killing of people in her own constituency.  Hon. Bakoko Bakoru is also another culprit, and I have just heard of hon. Kiyonga, I do not know what he did - (Laughter) So, today it might be me, tomorrow someone else. 

From the presidential elections to date, we are witnessing violence growing by the day, being meted out by security organs and by members of the executive. And for sure, we have had some time, at least, to laugh but I am sorry I feel bad and bitter. 

Mr Speaker, I beg that we form a Select Committee in this Parliament so that we come up with some remedy for these unfortunate incidents - (Applause). I pray and hope that - Bernard here was another person who was chased, but I think let him continue from there and he has some concrete –(Mr Mulengani rose_)

MR BENARD MULENGANI: Thank you for giving way.  I would like to give information since these things go into the records. It is not correct that I was the one chased, but it is my own brother that I follow by the names of David Lwanga Mulengani. He was chased and he ran to the police for custody -(Interjection). Yes! It was the minister then, Fred Mukisa. Thank you.

PROF. MORRIS OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Earlier on, I had wanted to rise on a point of information regarding the missed elections.  You said, and the Electoral Commission also declared that the LC III elections were generally well done. I would like to report to this House that Pader district where I come from has not held a single LC III election.  The whole district has not had a single LC III election, and as we stand now, the people who were candidates for the LC III elections have lost on average more than 7 kilos - (Laughter). I am just being modest about the weight loss, but they are really in a very difficult situation –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: That is a very serious problem of losing 7 kilos because, for your information, these elections are going to be repeated in less than three and half years. Yes! I think Members should be told that local council elections will be repeated in the middle of 2005. This appears not known by many. The reason why these elections will have to come again in three and half years and not four is because of Article 181 of the Constitution.  

In article 181, if you read it, you will find that the term of the local councils is four years, and then they say elections of local councils should be held at least 60 days before the expiry of the term of office. But then at the same time, election of local councils should not be held together with presidential or parliamentary elections. We shall have presidential elections in March 2006, and the process of election of a President will start about four months or five months before that date. Therefore, the local council elections must be held in mid 2005. So, I pity somebody who is losing 7 kilos, when is he going to regain it? (Laughter)

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of clarification on a matter regarding what all of us do know, and this has happened on three occasions now. We find a crowd of people seated under trees at the entrance to Parliament, and we have come to understand that these people come from Luwero.  Three times now they have spent nights under these trees to try to seek redress from Government.  

My understanding is that these people contributed towards the protracted struggle that started in Luwero several years ago.  Well, I understand and history has it, and I think hon. Kategaya can be able to testify on the Floor of the House, that this happened. What hurts me most is that we have women and old people suffering under very difficult conditions, seeking Government attention. Yesterday those of you who watched television saw an elderly man being handcuffed. And I am sure he must be languishing somewhere in some prison in this country.  

I would like to know from the relevant minister in this Government, what is being done to address the plight of these people? I do not come from Luwero, but I know this could happen to the people of Teso some day because - by the way, they are on the way to claim what they lost during the insurgency in Teso - (Laughter). That is what I had to submit.  Thank you. (An hon. minister rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you will answer you will be given opportunity. 

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, Article 210 of the Constitution mandates Parliament to make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces.  Since 1995, we have been waiting for a comprehensive law to regulate the UPDF; the 6th Parliament ended, and we are now in the 7th Parliament; there is nothing coming up.  

Our concern is that recently people were retired forcefully and some of them had to come to our constituency for us to subsidise their travel home. They were given Shs 20,000 to go home after serving in the UPDF for a number of years! Everybody in the UPDF, both senior and junior, is worried whether they will not go tomorrow, having been given their three-month’s salary, or nothing - or transport to go. So, can the Leader of Government business tell this House when this comprehensive law regulating the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces is coming?  This is now some years gone!

Number two, the Electricity Bill. We were debating the electricity bill and they say Government has subsidised, but the issue of concern is that I think the bills will not come down. On the issue of materials, we want the minister to explain to this House; there are various people with forests, but the poles being used to extend electricity to various areas are imported from South Africa. Can the Minister explain why our own people here cannot supply those?  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the Floor. I want to add my voice to those of my colleagues, to say how much I am disturbed at the degeneration of the electoral process. I had a very unique experience where I was an agent for a very successful candidate - I am talking about Mayor Ssebaana Kizito - whose votes were massively rigged at the stations where I was monitoring in Mbuya. 

My experience is already documented in the press, and I will not use this time to take the Members through that. But it really woke me up to how important it is for us to set up a select committee to look at many aspects of the electoral process, including the role of the Army in this process.

I am not saying this because I have anything against soldiers, but I am angry at the fact that the institution, which we all like, is being abused in this process. I, as an agent for six stations in Mbuya -(Laughter)- I was the agent, and moreover, not for one candidate but for three candidates - Mayor Ssebaana Kizito, for a candidate called Ntare and for another called Nabwuma. Why, Mr. Speaker? The agents for all these candidates were chased away at 7.00 a.m. and other people with no appointment letters were sitting there pretending to be their agents. So, I went there with the Irish Ambassador, with a South African international observer, and what we witnessed is documented; thousands of votes cast at a station where there were not more than 700 people in the register! What happened there was witnessed by foreigners, not just myself, and it is documented. It is in our interest as the 7th Parliament to make sure that in future no one can ever use the institution of the Army to rig in that naked, fraudulent, arrogant manner. I would like our Army to serve its purpose and not to be abused.

Apart from that, I was also very gratified to see that across the country, most of the people who have been violent, arrogant and who had abused previous electoral processes were also massively defeated. It is a sign that Ugandans want to cherish their rights despite the fact that there are a few former democrats who are now turning round to abuse the hard-won rights of Ugandans. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is time to end this exercise, and I will end with this side. First, hon. Sebuliba, then hon. Gagawala.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am also seeking clarification on the point you raised regarding the recently concluded LC elections. I almost became a victim of this electoral process, and if I may remind you, Mr Speaker, during the presidential elections, I was incarcerated because of my choice of candidate. This time, when they were looking for me, I escaped because of my agility and being a bit cleverer than them. But my colleague never escaped their wrath. 

What perturbs me is when one Byaruhanga attached to the Office of the President says in the papers that the hon. Member of Parliament for Kawempe North faked the arrest when actually the hon. Member was picked from his office. I do not know whether there was a curfew, that at 4.00 a.m. you are not supposed to be in your office. He was taken to DMI, to Kabaka’s lake and then dumped in a safe house, and later taken to Wandegeya Police Station. And Mr Byaruhanga says it was faked! Even other people from his constituency were badly beaten and some of us thought they were going to die at the police station.

Mr. Speaker, even the level of arming lumpens to look for peaceful people of this country; people like Kalyango, a football fan of Express handling a pistol, and Abel Nviri! These are ordinary folks who were being armed and whenever they came to our offices, they said they were sent from Kalangala Action Plan. 

I want the Minister of Internal Affairs to look into these issues instead of laughing them away. One time they are going to assassinate the President of this country, or any prominent member. They can even try to assassinate our honourable Speaker, because you are laughing at these matters and you think it is a joke! These people - where do they get the guts? Some were barefooted, taking crude waragi; they were beating people at random! One time when they stormed my office, they came for the Mayor. He had come to check on matters with his agents. They manhandled him and wanted to dump him on a pick-up! 

I appeal to Government; we should reign in these people. Let us look at these matters collectively. I am telling you, what happened to Sadat? It is his people who assassinated him! One time they are going to assassinate a prominent member of this society. Therefore, let the Minister of Internal Affairs take stock, and the Electoral Commission, otherwise we have got a problem in our hands. There are so many guns out there in wrong hands. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SITENDA-SEBALU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of public concern. I raised this point last time when we were leaving in December. There is a public outcry. I am not happy with the diplomatic missions accredited to Uganda; the way they treat our people when they are getting the visas.  The Ugandan passport is a document for Uganda government and the owner of that very passport, but what these people do in the foreign missions, they fix their stamp, which is okay, but they go on to cancel our stamp with a pen, making the passport of Uganda useless. This, some of us cannot know because we get our visas through the Public Relations Office. But our people are suffering; their passports are being cancelled!  I did raise this matter and I thought the Minister of Foreign Affairs would take it up, but it is still continuing and it is a problem for our people.  Thank you very much.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and allow me to welcome you and the whole House back to business.   I am certainly saddened because the way people –(Interjection)- of course we are looking forward to getting Kaliro district, and this issue is going to be on the floor, but we are still Kamuli district as usual.

Mr Speaker, I am saddened because the majority of the people in Kamuli were not happy about the way we voted for the LC V chairman.  It is a pity that your office was involved in making sure somebody is not voted there in Kamuli, using the office of the Deputy Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. member, there are rules concerning the position of Speaker and Deputy Speaker.  If you want to censure the conduct of Speaker and Deputy Speaker, there is a different procedure to take.  It is not the usual way you know - no, it is not.  If you talk about elections of the district chairman, I do not know whether this is a subject of a petition, because if it is a subject of a petition, I believe there is still time to take this matter to court to challenge whatever action was taken. And I would rather advise that maybe you leave it or if you are aggrieved, you take a petition as a voter. I think the law allows it.

MR WAMBUZI:  Thank you for the correction. I will take the advice, but I think I was trying to build up a background that somebody being disenfranchised is a very serious issue, which should be taken seriously if our democracy is to grow.  

I was building up a case, Mr Speaker, that it is very important for us to form a committee of inquiry into the whole election process, because we have now come to the end of the electoral process.  Since we started with the President, Members of Parliament, we have gone through the LC I, II, III to V. We have now completed the process of elections and we need to take stock and audit by appointing a parliamentary committee to examine the good and the bad of what has happened in this recent season of electioneering.  I think this was the point which made me stand up, but of course, I could not hide the feelings -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But is the problem with the law or it is with the enforcement?  For example, if somebody uses a gun to threaten people with, do you need to investigate that, or it is because the law is not there?  Proceed!

MR WAMBUZI: When the situation is so rampant and it is all over the country, it appears our democracy is slowly getting into trouble, and we need to examine and know whether it is the laws which are weak or it is the moral fibre of our people which is decaying or some other thing.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I wish to inform the honourable Member of Parliament, first and foremost that he was a member of the Sixth Parliament which made the election laws that we are proceeding on today, and I think there have been adequate provisions through which petitions and such matters related to elections can be handled.  But the other thing I want also to inform him is that, many honourable members of this House, including former ministers, have been disqualified because they do not have qualifications.  The only thing I would encourage our honourable members to do is to tell our people to go to school and get papers.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JOHN ODIT: Talking about the just concluded election, first of all, I must be very grateful to the minister responsible for constitutional affairs because she took our advice of respecting certain holidays, including Sunday; we are very happy about that.

Secondly, the House will recall that the minister rushed a bill to adjust dates and the days for displaying the register from 21 to 10, and many members were very skeptical about the success of the exercise; and indeed when I want back home, I discovered that people who had participated in the previous elections discovered that their names were missing in the register and they were frustrated. It is my prayer that the minister concerned will be taking keen interest to make sure that these lost names are restored to the register.  This has been a very serious issue because even in my presence, a voter who was so frustrated just decided to tear a card, which is very disturbing to us because we believe -(Interruption)

PROF. MORRIS OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, hon. Odit. The problem that you are alluding to is probably best illustrated by my case.  I went home and got my photograph taken, and the display of the registers happened when we were still in Parliament.  I went home to vote and I was not on the register for the main market, Kalongo town notice board.

MR ODIT:  Thank you very much for that information. Actually that is a testimony. Mr Speaker, as a way of emphasis, we are worried that if this kind of mess continues, yet the Electoral Commission is introducing high technology in the exercise and still we complain of inefficiency, we are worried of what is there to come ahead of us.  I think the minister should really stand firm and give a very clear explanation on how the names of such voters keep on disappearing, and yet they are using computers.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: So, we end with hon. Nyombi.

MRS SARAH NYOMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  You said that we will be having local council elections three and a half years from now, but my worry is, what will happen when we start from top to bottom. For example, when you lose the presidential election, do you go for parliamentary elections? (Interjection) No, just give me a chance.  When you lose parliamentary, you will get involved in local council elections. So how can we accommodate that, Mr Speaker?  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Now I think I can answer that, because as far as these elections are concerned they are arranged in such a way by the Constitution. I told you that these elections have to be repeated in three and half years, and this is because of what I read in the Constitution.  There is no way you can change the order, unless you engage in the exercise of amending the Constitution.  I made that point thinking that the Constitution would continue as it is, but if it is amended subsequently, well, that will be good. 

Hon. Members, I think you have been able to relax. Now I would like to ask the ministers to whom questions were directed to give some replies if they can. If they cannot, it is okay.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I heard the question from hon. Dombo. I know I am not in charge of the proceedings in this House, but I think ambushing a minister is not proper procedure.  

There are two ways of raising questions, which I think can be formally recorded, namely, oral questions or written questions. And with them, you can come here well armed so that you can tell the country and members exactly what is available on our record.

MR AWORI: On procedure, Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the hon. Minister – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, I think you are entitled to say that you are not ready.

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, if we come here and start speculating in newspapers - I would like to come to the House and tell them what I have on my file. That is why I would like to beg the members who have questions on anything concerning Internal Affairs to bring them to me and I will come with all the answers they want to get.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will make brief comments on two issues: first, I will comment on the one raised by hon. Okupa Elijah, Member of Parliament for Kasilo in Soroti. I had hoped that we would settle this with Elijah out of Parliament – (Laughter)- but since he has raised the issue here, I think I owe an explanation.  

It is true that I went to Soroti and we held a night-long meeting with hon. Members of Parliament and other citizens in that part of the country. This visit was initiated by the chairperson of Soroti district, and later on endorsed by some honourable Members of Parliament from Soroti. There was concern that if we did not take appropriate measures, the elections in Soroti could have problems. This was the reading by the chairperson of the district. 

Subsequent to this contact, I had a meeting with other honourable Members of Parliament and we decided that we should travel to Soroti to hold a meeting. I appointed myself the chair of that meeting, and apart from my contribution, I had the duty to keep order in the house – (Laughter). 

In the course of the meeting, hon. Mike Mukula was on the floor, and because of the issues that had been raised on the floor, he took longer than he would otherwise have taken on the floor. He was trying to explain questions that had been raised.  

It was at that point that hon. Okupa raised a point of procedure. He said, “if one person is going to take so long, then when shall we finish?” Using my position of chairman, I said that the matters that hon. Mukula was explaining were critical to the very basis that had taken us to Soroti, and it was to the benefit of the members in the meeting that we pay attention to the explanation of hon. Mukula. 

My brother, hon. Okupa, did not want to take my ruling. He kept on speaking, and I had to raise my voice to keep order in the house – (Laughter). And when hon. Elijah did not concede, I did say that I had the authority to throw him out of the meeting so that we could proceed in good order. 

That is really what took place in that meeting. And as I said, despite this explanation, I would like to have further contact with my brother, Elijah, so that we finish that business very well – (Laughter).

The next point is on the facilitation. I also want to assure hon. Okupa and other members that the Movement does not discriminate against any part of this country, any parish, any county or any district. In the course of trying to assist and give some logistical support to chairpersons who stood for the sub-counties, it is possible that in the implementation, there have been errors and omissions, but not as a matter of policy. 

An honourable Member of Parliament may have been given some little money to convey, and perhaps he arrived late or decided otherwise when he reached the field, but this was not a matter of policy – (Ms. Byanyima rose)- I would prefer to finish the statement and then you can come up.  

The other point I want to comment on is the complaint by hon. Members about the perceived increased violence during elections. First, I think all of us should note that what we have gone through from LC III to the district has been a massive exercise. For example, at the sub-county elections, we had about one thousand sub-counties, those are three elections in one, and we were able to go through that and start the district elections. I think we should commend ourselves as a country that we went through the whole exercise. (Applause). 

It is true, and it should be expected, that as we learn democracy, there will be pains and there will be mistakes. And to support what hon. Kategaya has just said, the best way for us to cause correction is to act in a way that will inform us better. We ask questions either through a committee or through writing, and are able to analyse the situation scientifically, see where there are errors and take active steps to correct them so that our democracy gets strengthened.  

These are the brief comments that I wanted to make, Mr Speaker.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I am glad that members have raised some issues that probably may not have been captured in my statement that I will make tomorrow. I am going to look into those matters and include them in my ministerial statement. But, without any fear of contradicting myself, I want to state here clearly that because the Electoral Commission was aware of Ugandans like my colleague, hon. Winnie Byanyima, who would be over zealous about these elections, we took extreme care in the Kampala elections and we did involve the candidates.  

First of all, we called the candidates to show them how duplicate analysis works and how people will be removed from the register using technology. Mayor Ssebaana was there and Ziritwawula was there, together with their agents. Unfortunately, Mayor Sebaana did not consider hon. Byanyima as a district committee agent, that is why she was not brought.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, this that I am holding here is an appointment letter as a polling agent for mayoral candidate Kampala City, John Sebaana Kizito, signed by himself, which I can read to this House. (Laughter) Indeed, I will take the opportunity to lay it on the Table when I finish raising my point of order. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister to mislead this august House that his worship the Mayor, Sebaana Kizito, did not appoint me as his polling agent, and further mislead this House that I am over zealous in my action to go and protect his interests at six polling stations where other agents had been thrown out, and I had to take a whole ambassador to accompany me to be able to take my place there to defend the interest of my candidate?  Is she now in order to cover up for this blatant rigging and insult me and call me overzealous and even claim that I am not a proper agent of candidate Sebaana Kizito?

Mr Speaker, is it also in order for hon. Mondo Kagonyera to claim from his seat that it was written this morning, when the letter -(Laughter)- is typed clearly “12 February 2002,” and addressed properly to the presiding officer, and the presiding officer at Mbuya refused even to accept it and allow me to sign my forms and take them to my candidate?  Is he in order?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think in the first place over your being appointed agent, I think the minister did not know this fact because you presented a fact of your appointment after she had made a statement.  Now that you have made the fact known, the letter is here, there is no doubt you were properly appointed an agent. (Laughter)  As for being overzealous, for me I see nothing wrong for you to be overzealous to protect a democratic process.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. I said that the candidates, all of them were called and they chose amongst their agents to come to the Electoral Commission to witness duplicate analysis.  So, that is why even Mayor Sebaana Kizito has not complained – (Interruptions) - I interacted with him.

The second issue that must be on record is that, Mayor Sebaana Kizito as a candidate was concerned that the army personnel who came for the parade should vote.  I assured him that we were going to do a physical count of those people because the army personnel that came for the parade went back.  We did the physical count of the army at Summit View and in all the barracks within Kampala, and in my statement tomorrow, I am going to show the statistics of those people who were on the army barracks registers.  

Some army officers and staff were denied to vote because they had been transferred a week earlier to go to Kakiri and they never came back to vote.  So, that one I will lay it on the Table. That is why, when I read in the papers that some statement of that nature was made, I called Mayor Sebaana Kizito and asked him “Mayor, what do you have to say on those allegations?” Because our system has been transparent, the Mayor was at the Electoral Commission! 

So, Mr Speaker, I promise this House that tomorrow, in my Ministerial Statement, I am going to expound and give you how we physically counted these soldiers, even bring the Army register here and lay it on the Table. But, I want also to mention that it is illegal to be an agent at more than one polling station. So, I would request hon. Kategaya’s machinery to investigate that. These were six polling stations; I expected more than 12 people because these were two candidates. So, six polling stations times four, actually they should have been more. So, really hon. Winnie Byanyima, it was illegal for you to go and supervise more than one polling station.  But I will submit my statement tomorrow.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing here to respond to the question raised by hon. Byaruhanga of Kibaale County, Kamwenge District.  I want to express my disappointment at that statement because the question of procurement of electric poles from South Africa has been talked about since 1998, and I want to say it here that no single pole of the type available in Uganda has been imported from outside Uganda. 

Under the Urban Power Rehabilitation, which is funded by the African Development Bank, tenders had been awarded to South African companies in accordance with the procurement regulations of the African Development Bank because procurement under the ADB is permitted from all member countries.

Knowing that we have got some poles in this country - though they are not sufficient, and they will not be sufficient for the programme of rural electrification which I am about to embark on seriously - we protested to ADB’s choice of company to supply electric poles of the eucalyptus type, which is available in this country. It took us a year and half to convince ADB to drop the South African company from supplying the poles. We even went further to propose to ADB that we shall forfeit that part of the loan which they were going to use to finance the poles from South Africa until they listened to us and accepted to drop the South African company. That process caused us a delay of one and a half years. 

I wish to challenge my good friend, hon. Byaruhanga, to produce evidence to the contrary to what I have said. I thank you, Mr. Speaker . (Applause).

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LUWERO (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is Luwero Triangle again, and in this particular case, the debts. I remember before we went into recess, questions were raised about Luwero Triangle, and I believe the honourable member who has asked the questions about the people outside must have been present. 

I laboured to explain what was going on then. I do not think I should labour again to explain what has been going on. I believe that being Members of Parliament, they are the most informed in our society. So, I expect that they are well informed.  

The report on the debts is ready, as I promised that it would be ready on the 16th of February. Copies of the lists of those who are going to be paid their debts, those whose claims were found to be fraudulent by the verification committee and also those who have been paid before are being sent to the sub-counties. This is because it is at the sub-counties where everybody is known and the citizens of this country who qualify as debtors for Luwero Triangle will have the opportunity to check those lists. Thereafter, we will be letting everybody know Government’s programme on how to clear those debts. Mr Speaker, beyond that, I have nothing to say. Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I asked a question about the legal status of the Luwero Triangle compensation and the hon. Minister then said he was going to find the information and report to the House. Is he in a position to tell us now? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you in position, or aren’t you?

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I consulted the Attorney General who said that as long as Government accepts responsibility for a debt, the debt is payable. 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, a few minutes ago, the First Deputy Prime Minister literally objected to the debate going on, on the Floor. I would like to inform him that I was the one who opened this debate as a matter of seeking clarification regarding the Communication from the Chair, and I am sure the ensuing debate has been based on that clarification from the chair. So, we do not need to give any notice to the First Deputy Prime Minister on such matters at all.

THE SPEAKER: I think the First Deputy Prime Minister did not want to stop the debate because he could not stop it. I think his point was that he was not in position to answer some of the queries raised, and that he would prefer if formal questions were brought to him so that he gives a well-informed answer. 

Actually, before I invited the Ministers, I was asking them whether or not they were able to respond. So, I think what he did was already decided on by me. And the reason why I allowed you to go on was because I realised you had been away for two months, and I did not want you to be fixed in a position when you have things on your minds. But now that you have been able to relax, I think business will go on very well.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr Abel Rwendeire): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. Certainly, I do not think AGOA is the main issue here, but from what has been given, the dramatic situation with Christmas and then the elections, plus the children going back to school, and the senior one selection now, I found that the pockets were getting thinner. Perhaps I would have been more interested to know what it is that could help us on that situation but you have already communicated on that. 

The second point is that a situation has also been created, that only certain parts of the country were affected in terms of non-voting. I want to say that in Kabale district, there were also certain sub counties such as Bubale sub-county where no voting actually took place and a date is yet to be fixed. 

But all this shows the enormity of the job that the Electoral Commission had - over 1,000 sub-counties! If one had about three candidates, that is 3,000 candidates to be dealt with, and only chairpersons without looking at the councillors! So, we feel that the Electoral Commission did a good job. There are certain failures, of course, but given the fact that this has been the largest we have had in the history of this country, I appeal that more understanding be given to the Electoral Commission. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Brig. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say clearly that I am talking as MP for Rujumbura – (Interjection) - yes! I would like to contribute as the MP for Rujumbura and I would like to congratulate everyone for going through the elections in the districts. I would like also to congratulate the Movement for winning another point –(Applause)- because, Mr. Speaker, there were problems everywhere, and as you may know, in Rukungiri district we lost an LC V – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: When you won, who lost?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, the point I am making is that, the problems were not one-sided. Our Movement candidate in the person of Lt Ngabirano was murdered, and as a result Rukungiri up to today has not had the elections for LC V Chairman.  

Secondly, I congratulate the Movement because of the freedom that is going on, because during the campaigns, the Government even took sides on candidates. Their candidate lost but they had the courage to accept the loss, and I think that in democracy this is a big achievement by the Movement Government and the Movement political system.  We should accept that we are learning, and we have been saying this time and again -(Interruption)
 
MR  OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, my good old friend, Brig. Jim Muhwezi, said the Government had the courage to accept the results. I would like him to clarify; supposing the Government had the courage to refuse the results, would you have had the courage to refuse the result?

BRIG. MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, let me correct my statement.  If I said the Government, I meant people - individuals in Government.  It was a slip of the tongue –(Laughter)- like hon. Aggrey Awori is in the habit of doing.  But, Mr Speaker, I wanted to say that we should accept that we are really learning as a country.  It is a learning process and a lot of things may not be right in elections, even in other sectors.  All we need to do is to get united in looking for solutions genuinely, not taking advantage of a weakness in one arm of Government and making political capital out of it.  Thereby, we will be taking back our country.  But I wanted to say that in spite of all those problems, including those in Rukungiri, I think this is a big development. 

There were questions whether the Movement political system is a fully-fledged democracy. It is because there is pluralism without multi-party politics; people are competing; others are losing and others are celebrating.  I think we have won as a Movement.  Thank you very much.  

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  There was a very important question regarding Article 210, and when I look around, the Minister of Defence and the Minister of State for Defence are not here to answer, and therefore, I have to take charge.

Under Article 210, Parliament is enjoined to make laws regulating the UPDF, and in particular to deal with concrete issues such as deployment of troops outside Uganda, to deal with terms and conditions of service and so on and so forth.  Now, those who were in the Sixth Parliament will recall that we brought this bill, but the relevant sessional committee was of the view that it was not comprehensive enough, and hence Government was asked to basically review the proposals and to make them more comprehensive. If the Minister of Defence were here, he would have been in a position to indicate when he shall bring it.  Since he is not here, I shall cause him to indicate the date when it shall be here.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Eresu asked a question; it was directed to the Minister of Education.  Unfortunately then, the Minister of Education was not here.  So, it will not be fair for me to ask the Minister of Education who is here to answer a question she did not hear.  So, I think she will be briefed about it, and he will get an answer rather than me pressing her to give an answer she will not be able to give.  That ends this exercise.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MICRO DEPOSIT-TAKING INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled “The Micro Deposit-Taking Institutions Bill, 2002” be read the first time.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The bill is committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
FIRST READING
THE UGANDA INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Dr Abel Rwendeire): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled “The Uganda Industrial Research Institute Bill, 2001” be read the first time.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The bill is committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PATENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled “The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MRS MUKWAYA: This is a very small amendment to localize a treaty that the Ugandan Government did sign in Washington on 19 June 1970. 

The purpose of the bill is essentially to provide for the Uganda Patents Registry, which will be charged with processing international applications in accordance with an international system under the treaty, whereby a single application made and filed in a country that is a part of the treaty will have effect as an application in any other country. And I go further to say that the details of operationalizing this amendment and the provisions will be given in the regulations by the minister.  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

REPORT FROM THE CHAIRPERSON OF 
THE LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 2001. 

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 2001 in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of this House. 

The bill seeks to amend the Patents Statute, 1991(Statute No. 10 of 1991) by the insertion of a new part, IV (a), which will enable effect to be given in Uganda to the provisions of the Patent Co-operation Treaty. The treaty was signed in Washington on 19 June 1970 and amended on 28 September 1979, and it was modified on 3 February 1984.  

The Committee discussed the bill with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The Committee appreciates the efforts of all those who participated in considering the bill while it was before the Committee.  

Mr Speaker, the Committee observed that Uganda acceded to the Patent Co-operation Treaty in 1994, thus becoming a party to the treaty.  Article 1 of the treaty provides that: 

“The states party to this Treaty (hereinafter called “the Contracting States”) constitute an examination of applications for the protection of inventions, and for rendering special technical services…”  

The bill provides for international applications and connected matters by giving effect in Uganda to the provisions of the treaty.

It is envisaged that other details relating to the implementation of the treaty and supplementary to the main provisions in the statute will be provided for by regulations that will be made under section 47 of the Patents Statute, 1991.

Section 47 provides: 
“The Minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations prescribing anything which, under this Statute, is to be prescribed by the regulations, and generally for the better carrying out of the objects and purposes of this Statute, or to give force or effect to its provision, or for its better administration.”

The Committee recommends that since the bill lifts the provisions of the treaty which Uganda committed itself to, the bill be passed into law. Uganda is already a party to the treaty. The Committee, therefore, will make no major amendments to the Bill save for the correction of a few typographical errors. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have got a very elementary question to the hon. Minister, and also to the chairman of the Committee. First and foremost, I assume we are just trying to make a municipal law out of this treaty. I hope I am not wrong.

Number two, given the situation of WTO and this globalisation situation, how are we going to protect our patents when we are a party or a signatory to the WTO treaty? WTO essentially means things shall float all over the world without restriction. 

If I have got a patent here on how to change maize seed to multiply, what stops other people from using the same and going via the WTO treaty? I just want to know the status of the WTO treaty and the Patent treaty. How are we going to relate them?

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am interested in getting clarification on the issue of patents as far as a genetic bank for our plants, animals and insects is concerned. Is our heritage, as far as patents for special plants and special methods of Africans, going to be catered for in this particular bill?

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Committee for a very brief report. My questions will be clarifications and seeking guidance. 

My concern is that this deals with just patents, but in actual fact I would like to know when the bill on intellectual property rights is coming. This is just one aspect. In fact, when you look at it, we are really starting from 1970, but things have changed since that time. 

There is a case, for instance, where the musicians and drama people in Uganda here would make a lot of money if whatever they created was protected. People think that it is only kadongo kamu, but in actual fact that kadongo kamu has come as a result of creativity. Somebody has spent a lot of nights thinking about it. In other countries, law protects that kadongo kamu, and therefore you can market that product and make money.  

Somebody did a study of Kampala theatre groups and he found out that there are about 2000 theatre groups. This was a German researcher and he said, “you are sitting on a lot of treasure here. In Africa you are very rich culturally, but you are not commercialising this, you are not packaging it to add value”. That same goes for the musicians and so on. 

I would like the Minister concerned to really move very quickly to bring in a law to protect those people so that we begin commercialising our culture, and therefore, making money. 

This is not a dream. It is happening in Jamaica. In Jamaica they are using information technology to package their reggae music, and then sell it on the North American market, and they make a lot of money out of that. We could do the same for this music here. 

The lady you saw called Saida Kaloli came from Tanzania. I took interest to find out what was happening and I went to the manager. If you saw Saida Kaloli, she is a typical village woman, but behind her is a real good packager working for FM studios. And they were using the latest technology to package that woman; that illiterate primary four woman, and you saw what she could produce. The same could happen to our groups. 

When you ask the people here at the National Theatre, they are really crying. They say they produce music and everybody copies it, but nothing is done. In Tanzania, they have a very progressive law; in Kenya, they are trying to bring up a law so that people are protected, but in Uganda we have nothing, and yet in terms of cultural heritage, cultural richness we are way ahead!  I would like that kind of law, to protect to commercialise our culture and to give it value. 

Then of course when it goes to other areas of science and technology, like the genetic material for crops and animals and so on –(Interruption)

MAJ. TOM BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to inform the hon. Member that culture cannot be commercialised. It is works of art of a certain culture that can be commercialised.  Thank you.

LT. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to rise up in a suit, which is a culture of other people, and say culture cannot be commercialised, and mislead this House? Is he in order, when he is wearing a suit and a tie, which is the commercialisation of some people’s culture, where they must tie their necks and cover their inner wear;  is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: First of all, since this is a point of order, I do not know which Rule of Procedure has been offended. But what I gather between you and him is a question of opinion. He has an opinion; you have an opinion. He is not buying your opinion; you are not buying his. Well, I think it is okay.

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, it was a point of information to me, but I would like to inform the Member who was saying you cannot commercialise culture - maybe we are misunderstanding each other. For me, culture means the songs, the dance, the music, the dress, the way you live in your society. Hence, certain aspects of that can be packaged in a special way and marketed. That is what I mean by commercialisation of culture. It may mean different things to different people, but that is what I mean. So, if you make special African dresses and then you sell them, that is commercialisation. If you make drums, if you make music, if you write poems, package them and sell them, that is commercialisation.

Finally, I have a document here talking about some of these laws. For example, freedom of information, data protection, computer crime, intellectual property and all those things that are happening. Therefore, you do not just have something on patents, but the whole package goes in, and then we have a law out of something we already have, especially culture. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

LT. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want, first of all, to get clarification from the Minister and the Chairman of the Committee on the question of international applications. It is referring to international applications for patents to be recognised in Uganda. I want a clarification whether local applications are covered in the original law.  

Secondly, I have just come from London where I attended a SMART-Partnership meeting in which a very senior scientist from India called me aside. After we had had many discussions, he advised that, ‘can you go home and inform your people in Uganda to patent every biological material, every vegetation, every animal, every bird, every insect, everything natural to your country? Can you go quickly and patent it so that it is protected? If you do not do that, you are going to lose a lot of money.’ I want to find out how far we have gone with that process.  Thank you.

MR RWENDEIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I have is that in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade & Industry, we are preparing a comprehensive law for the implementation of the WTO treaty, and this is going to have as many aspects as hon. Lt Gen. Tumwine has said. Right now, the Uganda Law Reform Commission is reviewing some of these proposals so that they come to this Parliament for enactment. Thank you.

MR MULENGANI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is just a clarification. Now that it is only at this time that something is coming up on this so seriously, what problem might Uganda face in future as a result of lack of these particular rights? Is there anything the Committee has looked into that might have happened between that period of time and today that may affect the country in future as a lack of these particular rights for the categories of items that are being talked about? 

THE SPEAKER: The question is, why have you brought this law at this time, what are you trying to achieve? Now, can we wind up?

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I will start with the necessity of this law. As indicated by the Minister and in our report, there is the International Patents Treaty, which was ratified by Uganda, and we have to apply this treaty in our law. Therefore, the purpose of this bill is to apply that treaty to our Patent Statute, which we already have on our books. That is the sole purpose. 

There is no conflict between the WTO Treaty and the Patent’s Treaty at all.  As the Minister has said, a comprehensive law in the World Trade Organisation Treaty will come and patents are part of the World Trade Organisation transactions. They are part of the World Trade and, therefore, I do not see any conflict between the two. They will have to co-exist.  But this bill is particularly on patents alone.

About heritage and special plans, my understanding of the Patents Statute of 1991 under the treaty are that natural resources like plants cannot be patented in their natural form. You can only patent inventions from those natural resources. You cannot protect a plant which is growing naturally in the forest. You can only patent a product, which has been invented -(Interruption) 

LT. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, I wanted clarification from the Chairman on that specific issue of saying that a natural plant cannot be patented because I would like to know which law he is quoting. Otherwise, from the information I got, all other materials - natural, biological, created - have now been patented to their specific ownership. It could be patented as owned by Uganda and unique to Uganda. I want clarification on that.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not 100 per cent sure whether I am going to help hon. Tumwine, and maybe so much has happened in the world since I was in the world of scientific research. But what I know is that you can, as hon. Mwesige has said, patent a product or a method of producing that product. Therefore, what that person might have meant is, for example, if there is a plant growing in Uganda and it has some important product in it, you can actually go out there, extract that product and patent it. Then you will patent the method of producing that product and nobody will be allowed to use your method without your permission and without paying royalties for it. But as for the natural ones, we need to do more research to find out. But certainly, Sir, it is unlikely. Otherwise the world will be held - because we have billions of plants and animals in this world. I do not know how may patents we would have if they were all to be patented. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Dr Fabius Byaruhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  While I agree with Prof. Kagonyera, I wish to add that what we think is natural is not natural; it has come out of breeding like the potatoes we see and eat everyday; like the maize we eat everyday is not natural because it has been produced along the way through breeding, and you can patent this.  You can patent an animal breed which you have produced, you patent a plant breed which you have produced, but you need to do gene-mapping, and it is a gene map that will go into the books of the patent. Unfortunately, in Uganda we seem not to have that capacity of producing gene maps for our plants and animals -(Interruption)

MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wish to get clarification from the chairman of the Committee responsible, on the implications of the law that he wants us to pass regarding HIV drugs. 

I know very well that a number of drugs were discovered and the manufacturers patent those drugs.  You cannot use those drugs in the country without having to pay a lot of money for those drugs. Recently, South Africa and other countries were taken to court for having used drugs to treat HIV patients manufactured by other companies who did not pay or did not get permission from the original manufacturers of the drugs.  

So, by passing this law, would it not prevent thousands of HIV patients in Uganda from accessing cheaper drugs which can help them, but are sold at exorbitant prices by the original manufacturers or the inventors of those drugs, as you call them?  That is what I wanted to get clarified on.  Otherwise, we may be taken for a ride and we get people dying of diseases that they should not be dying of when there are cheaper drugs.

THE SPEAKER: You are suggesting that if this law is not enacted, so what?

DR TUMWESIGYE: What I am saying is that we may not need to hurry to enact this law.  We should study the few implications of this law, because it has had a lot of implication in other countries.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but if we do not pass it and somebody had utilized the agreement and the law, will he not insist on his rights against you, because it seems you are suggesting that if we pass this law we shall be prejudicing ourselves.  Is it not what you are suggesting?

DR TUMWESIGYE: No, I was just seeking clarification, Mr Speaker, as to what the implications of passing this law would be, specifically on these drugs which are cheaper if not patented.  Would it mean that by passing this law, for example, we would not be able to access these drugs in Uganda?

MR JACOB OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  My understanding of patents is that it protects what one has invented or discovered.  It is not so much about how much of that product will be sold and in which market.  

In that respect, I did not see the major concern raised by my colleague, because whoever has discovered this method of making this particular drug is protected by the patent from that country and internationally.  You are not allowed to market it without paying royalty to those people who invented it. Besides that, the person who invents the method of making this drug may not be the actual manufacturer of that drug; he might sell the right to somebody else who will now use it to manufacture the drug for other people. So, I do not think that is problem.

There was an issue which was raised about local application. I am a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, and that is why I give this information.  Part of the existing situation is under the African Region International Property Organization. There are some problems; I am a patent agent myself.  The application we have made was sent to Harare, they have taken three years and it has never been registered. So, that is part of the problem, and it is the reason why this law now must be passed to ease the process.  

There was an invention in this country from Unilever, which I was supposed to register.  We made this application through the Minister of Justice here; we forwarded it. It has been three years now, it has never been registered!  This particular law when amended will improve on this; it will speed up the process of registration.   

About intellectual property and WTO, I think the two are not necessarily the same, although they fall under this globalization process.  The WTO has its own rules, but the rule on intellectual property is to protect the inventor of a particular design or a particular method of producing something.  

This brings me to the question raised by hon. Dr Nkuuhe - the copyright. This is completely a different aspect of the law of intellectual property.  Copyright in this country has a separate law dealing with it, but the Legal And Parliamentary Committee in this particular respect was only concerned with this aspect.  We raised it in a general debate in the Committee, but in the plenary we were restricted to the terms provided in this proposed amendment.  Thank you. 

DR TUMWESIGYE:  Mr. Speaker, I am still not convinced by what he has just said.  We make laws in a way that takes care of the interests of the nationals in the country.  This treaty was made in 1994, which means from that time we have not passed laws commensurate with that.  So, as we hurry to make this law, we need to see what implications it has.  Right now we have about two million people having HIV in Uganda!  By passing this law, we want to be sure that it will not prohibit us from getting access to these cheaper drugs, which are now on the market. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean cheaper drugs are produced differently or are they produced with the same formula of the expensive drug? 

DR TUMWESIGYE:  You know, I would give an example. You may, for example, produce aspirin and it is made the same way as somebody who is also going to produce another drug of the same chemical.  For example, you may produce paracetamol and somebody produces panadol, the same drug!  Somebody is going to patent that drug and say, if you are to use panadol then you must pay a lot of money to access that drug.  But you will not be allowed to produce a similar drug unless you have paid this amount of money.  Somebody sits somewhere in India or Europe and makes the same drug and sells it at a very low price.  

By passing a law of this nature, it would mean that - for example, there are many drugs, which are much more cheaper and produced by Brazil and India which cater for HIV patients, but people in USA or other countries invented the same drugs.  So, by passing a right it may prevent you from getting these drugs that are made from Brazil, which are cheaper and can help our people.  So, I wanted to get clarification on that - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But how will you be prevented, because, if you are buying drugs in Brazil, maybe the people who are producing it in Brazil must have made arrangements with the owner of the patent; so that does not concern you.  It is when you try to manufacture using its formula in violation of the patent; but what is wrong with that?

MR J.W.WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am surprised that the question is being raised at all, because the honourable doctor has given an example of Panadol and Paracetamol. The fact that there are brand drugs does not stop the importation of generic drugs. This will continue even after passing this law.  Besides that, patents have a life span, which is intended to protect the interests of researchers and of inventors.  After that period, what was protected technology is made available to the general community and they can apply it, just as the people who, for example, made Panadol allowed you to know other manufacturers of Paracetamol without using the brand name. 

So, I would like to assure my honourable colleague that the law is protecting inventors, scientists, researchers, and the beauty of it will be that since we are member parties to the treaty, we can benefit from reciprocity of other member states in ensuring the protection of the interests of our own scientists and inventors.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  I want to put a question to the motion that the bill entitled, “The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE PATENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

Clause 1:

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause (1) stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2:

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause (2) the word ‘by’ be inserted between the words ‘amended’ and ‘substituting’ appearing in the main heading, and the word ‘not’ be inserted between the words ‘had’ and ‘been’ appearing in paragraph (c).  The justification for this is to correct the drafting errors, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the bill entitled, “The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 2001” and passed it with a few amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PATENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the bill entitled, “The Patents (Amendment) Bill, 2001” be read a third time and do pass.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE PATENTS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2001.”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations! I think you have been very efficient in that, on the first day you have been able to pass this bill.  Thank you very much!  

Now, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister has more statements to make.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I just wanted to thank all Members of Parliament who were very supportive during the difficult time I went through.  People of all political persuasions now acquire the consensus and I would request that this consensus persist; but I was most grateful!  I have written to all of you, but as you know, sometimes it is easier for a letter to be received in London than in Kampala.  So, I am most grateful to all of you. I thank you once again.

THE SPEAKER: Before we end, I have received a request from hon. Sitenda-Ssebalu that there are some Members of Parliament who are planning to make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem and Israel during Easter time, and that you have a meeting at Lubaga, at the Cardinal’s residence at 5.00p.m.  I think you know about this project.  So, you are advised to go and attend that meeting in preparation for your pilgrimage to Jerusalem.  

With this, we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 4.37p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 February at 2.00p.m.)

