Wednesday, 18 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my communication is in form of a reminder to those of you who have been invited to an Agricultural Sensitisation Workshop, which is a residential one taking place in Jinja. I understand transport will be available, you will leave at around 5.00 p.m. That means our business today will end at about that time so that those who are travelling can do so. 

You are advised to attend this workshop because as I said yesterday agriculture is very important to our constituents, being their main activity. Therefore, if you are equipped then you are in a better position to lead and advise your constituents in carrying out their activities.

STATEMENT 

2.37
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I beg you to permit me to make a statement of public concern. On Saturday morning, 14 February 2004, the day most people refer to as Valentine’s day, at about 4.00 a.m., the Police under the command of one Rashid Doka ASP/OC Station, Katwe Police Station, in connivance with one George Mitala; assisted by a local security organisation called the Falcon Guards invaded one of the areas I represent in Parliament. This is the timber trading area in Kasumba zone in the centre of Ndeeba, where the main seat of the constituency is also located. 

Vehicles with the 999 Police number plate were on site, with the Police firing bullets in the air with no explanation.

THE SPEAKER: But why did you not include this in your written statement?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, they beat up innocent people on the site and one of them now has a broken limb. They arrested several people, destroyed the buildings, dismantled property, robbed timber, robbed furniture, motor generators, destroyed documents and even took away cash. On a sad note, over 200 people who were working there are now displaced.

Mr Speaker, occupants of the said plot No. 1028, predominantly Bakiga, are bona fide occupants of that land and have a land dispute case before the High Court. The case has not been disposed of yet.  

There was no court order whatsoever to back up the brutal move. It surprises me, therefore, that in the presence of an organized Government, Police in its own wisdom could baselessly support wrongdoers as well as participate in the looting and destruction of my peoples’ property. I am hurt, Mr Speaker. I wish to strongly condemn that cruel and brutal act. 

In light of what I have stated, Mr Speaker, I demand with humility that the Minister of Internal Affairs explains why the Police should interfere in a matter which is before courts of law.  

Finally, the Minister of Local Government should also explain the role of KCC in that saga. The Police claim that they were executing an eviction order from KCC’s Chief Town Planner. Is the chief planner the rightful person to authorize such an eviction? And did the eviction order have to be executed at night and without notice to the affected persons? Above all, don’t the Police know the contents of the Land Act, 1998? The people I represent, in a very serious manner, need a comprehensive explanation concerning that tragedy, and they need it now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As you have heard the statement, it is seeking information. I do not think it will attract any debate. The Minister will study it and at an appropriate time come and explain it. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON SPECIFIC SECTORS OF THE MINISTRY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was presented yesterday and now it is open for debate.

2.46
REV. KEFA SSEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee for this comprehensive report. On page 4 the report talks about the vision of agriculture and PEAP. It is very difficult for us representing rural areas to keep on telling our people about policies, visions, plans and frameworks, which they do not see. There is no physical indication of these things. 

The farmers in my constituency really wonder whether this is their vision or it is the vision of the Ministry; 2017 is a bit far. I do not know when this vision started but if it could be measured in terms of progress, our people would get to know it. And when we are sharing with our voters they surely would get to know what this vision is about, where it is leading them and whether it can be realized in concrete terms. 

I appreciate the work of the committee and the chairman for pointing out a number of things, but I do not know how seriously these matters are taken. There is a lot of jargon, which really does not mean a lot of sense to our voters. They are being told of things that they cannot visualize. 

I appreciate remarks made by the chairman of the committee on page 5 that they are actually demanding for actual progress in the activities of MAAIF as a programme. But as a framework or a vision, what is there on the ground?

Mr Speaker, the people I represent comprise two sub-counties, Nazigo and Kangulumira. These are farmers who grow pineapples and passion fruits. They have not seen an extension worker in that place. They are also told to grow a number of crops like okra and moringa, which they have done but there is no market for them. There are areas where you find two or five acres of moringa. They are now overgrown and there is no market for these products. So, I do not know how far we can really waste the efforts of our farmers, if we are to be taken seriously.

On page 6, he talks about this modernization. It is not really feasible to talk about modernization to people who are using hoes. I do not know how far agriculture has been modernized especially in the rural areas. A number of people have grown maize when they are expecting to fetch about Shs 300 per kilo, but there are only able to sell it at Shs 180 per kilo. So, when will the farmers really ever come up? They are growing all these things that I have pointed out, without a feasible market. 

When this NAADS was put in place it promised heaven on earth. They said they were going to find a market for the products. Now they are saying this is a liberalized economy and they cannot ascertain the prices for the produce of our farmers. So, where does one go to find out whether we have a stable market for our produce? 

I appreciate the points raised by the committee and the chairman about the process of providing mechanized irrigation. I have already pointed out that my constituency borders the River Nile but we cannot touch that water to irrigate our products.

Then on page 7, this is about extension workers. In the first place, extension workers are not available. I do not know whether they should not be scrapped off. But if they are available and these are university graduates, who is going to monitor them? The authorities in place are perhaps primary 7 graduates. How are they going to monitor and give commands to university graduates? So, I support the proposal by the committee that we should go back to where we started and have people with lower qualifications; those who can actually do some work to help our farmers.

Finally, Mr Speaker, it is about commercial banks for the farmers. I wish the Government could put in place village banks or co-operatives, which can help our farmers. There is no way any bank can give you a loan - because they start charging interest the day you take out this money, and of course the banks are not aware - they may not have as much faith as some of us Christians. We have faith that it will rain. These bankers are not assured that you will have rain. They think you may plant and tomorrow there is no rain. So, there is no guarantee for them to give us these facilities.  

I wish that Government could be serious enough to create village banks or co-operatives to really support our farmers. Otherwise, I support this report and the recommendations made by the committee especially on the creation of village banks that could be of assistance to our farmers. I beg to support. Thank you.

2.51
MS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to add my voice to my colleagues’ and thank the committee for the good work done. 

I want to address myself to the issue of modernization, mechanization and irrigation, on page 7, where the committee says that; “Members of Parliament strongly felt that mechanization and irrigation were essential for modernization of agriculture, but the PMA was not paying enough attention to them.”  This is a serious matter. 

Uganda has a lot of water, including rains, but which water has not been properly harvested for us to be able to have food security in the country. We have the River Nile whose source is here in Uganda. The experience that I have from the visits that I have made to Egypt is that I have seen the people who are in the desert utilizing the River Nile optimally through irrigation. They get very good yields; they can even export some of their food. 

But it is very awkward to find that some districts here starve sometimes during the year just because the rains have not come at the right time. I want to call upon the Ministry of Agriculture to make sure that if we are to realize modernized agriculture in the country, let us try to put in place proper mechanization towards irrigation to avoid this kind of problem that is being faced by some of our people in the various districts.

My other issue is on the GMO foods. From the little experience that I have, I know that these GMO foods are very dangerous to human beings. Uganda has fertile soils and very good climate; I do not see why Government is accepting the introduction of GMOs into this country. The after effects of these foods are so gradual, yet they result into very dangerous diseases. I wonder whether we cannot continue with modernization of agriculture in a different way other than accepting these kinds of foods into our communities. 

It is also mentioned here that; “His Excellency okayed the importation GMOs as long as they are processed and ready for consumption.” I wonder whether the Government has put in place proper mechanisms to see to it that the food that is being imported here is properly scrutinized to see whether it ready for human consumption? I have seen people in South Africa denying or refusing to consume this kind of food. If you travel to European countries foods that have been produced under this kind of method are very cheap and those that are naturally produced are very expensive. I think Uganda is capable of producing natural food other than applying this kind of method, which might be dangerous to the human beings and to the nation.

2.55
MR PETER WANANZOFU (Bulambuli County, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend the work done by the committee. Under the coffee sector, the Arabica coffee seeds are got from Buginyanya Research Station and it is the only research station in Uganda that supplies Arabica seeds. I want to ask the Minister of Agriculture whether he is aware that the research station has turned into a bush. How are we going to get the Arabica seeds in the future? 

As I talk now there are only two civil servants at Buginyanya Coffee Research Station, that is, the manager and the driver. I have reported the case to NARO headquarters and little has been done. How are we going to get the coffee seeds for UCDA to buy? Are we going to get the wild seedlings from the local farmers –(Interruption)

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you honourable member for giving way. It appears, from the report, that the committee was not interested in Arabica coffee so whatever you are saying is right. Even here when they say they visited Mbale to assess the Arabica growing areas, they went to Bungokho sub-county and all of us from Mbale know that Bungokho does not grow Arabica coffee.

MRS WONEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable member for giving way. I am on the Committee of Agriculture and I would rather resign than sit on that committee and not see any work being done concerning Arabica coffee. The committee did go to Buginyanya Research Station. Indeed, what we saw was not encouraging because the gardens are in shambles and there are only two workers at the research station. 

The last time I went there, which is only four days ago, we found when a little part of the gardens had started being cleared up. We were not able to find the research scientist at the station for him to tell us whether there is any research going on at all. I think it must have been a typing error or so, but the chairman knows that we did go to that research station.

MR WANANZOFU: Mr Speaker, regions like West Nile, Kapchorwa, Mbale and Sironko, I do not know where they are going to get the Arabica seeds from. It is my humble request that maybe the committee visits Buginyanya Research Station because these are two different establishments. They are not calling it Buginyanya now, but they call it Bulegeni ARDC. Bulegeni is a farm institute, which is too far away from the research station. 

Last year when the legislators were going to Mbale they went together with NARO members who diverted the intentions of the legislators and took them to Serere where they know there is clean work. They even went to Kachwekanu in Southern Uganda; they went to Abi in northern Uganda, because they knew there is nothing good in Buginyanya. Whenever they go to Sironko they stop at a place called Bulegeni. They have never seen the research station. It is far up in the mountains and there are no roads leading to it. This is a very big institution that started long ago. It has enough infrastructure yet a lot of things are rotting up there. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.59
MR FRED OMACH (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I wish to support this statement, which has been very ably articulated by the committee. 

On page 4 of the report the committee states that; “Government’s Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) articulates a national vision for poverty eradication by the year 2017.” I believe this is being derived from the millennium goal, which says that by the year 2015 people living under abject poverty should have been reduced to below 10 percent of the population. To do this in a country like Uganda, the issues pertaining to agriculture where most of our people are employed should be addressed very seriously. Therefore, I take this report with all the seriousness it deserves.  

I will talk on one, two or three things. The first one is on the crops that can help this country to get out of this poverty trap. Permit me to start with the crop, moringa. Mr Speaker, moringa started taking prominence in this country around the year 1997. The first seeds to be distributed in this country came from the National Tree Seed Centre, which is seated at Namanve; and they have since continued to distribute seeds to this nation.  

In October of last year we were all very happy that the Minister responsible for Agriculture did come out and organized a workshop to try to articulate issues pertaining to this very important crop, which is now gaining international recognition for the importance it has on nutrition, on purification of water, its medicinal value, its pharmaceutical value and its cosmetic value. I believe at this juncture it is important that we get a statement from Government, in particular from the Ministry of Agriculture, which controls NAADS, so that the nation is given the best way forward concerning this crop. 

The type of material that is used in this country, which is not authenticated, should be removed and the people should be given the right direction on this crop. The type of bacteria going around in this country, which are not authenticated, should be removed and the people should be given the right direction concerning this crop. 

I am also happy to say that the area responsible for export promotion is also coming on board -(Interruption)- I will take the information.

DR NKUUHE: I thank you very much honourable member for giving way. The information I would like to give is that we attended the seminar on how to address the moringa issue: to look at the science, the agriculture - all those aspects. But what we heard at that conference, at which you were present, was that there was no policy, the science was not known, we did not know how many varieties for moringa were being grown; that a lot of the enthusiasm was from farmers and that there was no market. So, as far as we are concerned really moringa people are groping in the dark and there are very many farmers, including mine. So, I would like to inform you that we need to do something otherwise we are in trouble.  

MR OMACH: I thank the member for that information. There is a lot of market for moringa, what is required is quality control. For instance, recently we had a mzungu from Australia who wanted 40 tonnes of the moringa seeds and as a country we could not immediately meet that. 

You also remember that there was a market in America, which the districts of Kasese had to supply but they failed to meet the demand. There is also a market in Korea. So, there are various segmented markets, but the issue of quality control and the issue of getting the right quantity are important. There is need for us to have a well-documented report on this so that we can, as a country, know the way forward.

Mr Speaker, the second thing that I would like to talk about –(Interruption)

MR KASIGWA: Thank you very much Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. When we talk of markets I think we ought to be very careful. That is why we are running into several problems with our people in the villages. We go and tell them that there are markets, but have we bothered defining the markets we are talking about? The clarification I want from my colleague here is: what does he mean by markets for the moringa products because I have also got a similar problem in Jinja Municipality? 

When you talk about markets, people have failed to locate where the markets are! The same goes for our maize and coffee and everything else because automatically there exists the global market but how we get into that market is a vital issue that we should actually consider. Thank you very much.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the member for the clarification he is seeking. That is why I said there is need for us to bring here a well-researched paper on this particular item.  There are various parts, which have got various markets. If you are talking about the market, the first market is the individual; the second market is the Government. 

If you take, for instance, the Government of Malawi, they are now utilizing the seed powder for water purification. This is currently done by the use of chlorine, which has got some side effects. If you talk about nutrition, there is the issue of the moringa leaf powder, which is being used in other countries as a nutritional value replacing Vitamin A supplements and this country is importing a lot of Vitamin A, as a supplement.

The second thing I would like to talk about is the issue of coffee. There are a number of places in this country where coffee does not naturally grow and yet where it grows Government is giving out seedlings free of charge. In this report it is clearly indicated that for each homestead, up to 200 seedlings are being given. Mr Speaker, when you convert this into Uganda currency at the rate of Shs 200 per seedling, that is Shs 40,000 per homestead. This is being given gratis by the Government to support the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture and to try to bring the people out of the trap of poverty.  

My appeal, Mr Speaker, is concern for areas like Jonam where I come from. We cannot grow this coffee and Government is denying us, yet there are other crops that are being emphasized for intervention. One of these is Aloe Vera. Recently the Uganda Aloe Vera Association got the right variety of commercial Aloe Vera, which they are importing in this country and each seedling is being sold at Shs 1,500. The market for the commercial variety of Aloe Vera is sought after both for its food value and for its medicinal value.  

Mr Speaker, could the people of Jonam, where Aloe Vera right now grows wild, be given part of this money to encourage its production? And with Aloe Vera, within four to five months it would generate its own sucker so that whatever is given by Government will just be given once. After that they will be able to get the sucker from within and expand the production of this Aloe Vera to the end. 

The type that is being brought into this country is called Aloe Vera Babadensis while the one we have here, which is not commercial, is the Aloe Ferox. I would appreciate it if this was extended to my people and all other areas, which have got sandy soil where Aloe Vera can grow very well.  

The third issue, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you. My honourable colleague is talking about Aloe Vera as if it was not indigenous in this country. Aloe Vera was actually taken from here and developed abroad. Now they are bringing it back here at a cost. What we should have done actually, Mr Speaker, is to establish the DNA map of Aloe Vera so that we can have the patents. The same problem has happened in Namibia. 

There is a similar plant among the Hotentots, the local people in Namibia, which they use for hunger suppression. Once you take it in the morning you do not need food for the rest of the day. United States pharmaceutical companies have taken this up. They have developed a pill for the ladies who might need to reduce weight. They are making money and Namibia is now pursuing the matter in the International Court so that they can get their patent back. 

Mr Speaker, I am glad my good friend, the Minister of State for Agriculture, who is an expert in DNA genetics, can tell us whether we have now established in this country a laboratory for DNA mapping. We could have the patents so that these things cannot be taken out of here and then brought back to us at a cost. 

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I have been listening attentively to hon. Omach and one of the things he has emphasised is the issue of markets. I would like to know what he actually means. Is the distribution of coffee seedlings alone, or the re-introduction of Aloe Vera he been talking about, by themselves or as part of the PMA, also a way by which the market situation is being resolved? Because, while we think of extending production levels by increasing the quantity of product we produce, I am not very much convinced by the argument he is putting across that the market exists without giving us the procedures, structures and the demands and conditionalities of the market he is talking about. Could he clarify?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Awori for the information he has given and I hope the concerned ministry has taken note. 

The clarification from my friend from Kaberamaido - I started my speech by talking about getting people out of poverty, and we are targeting the year 2017. I am saying that most people in Uganda are employed in agriculture and if we can diversify into crops that could give us effective income, so be it. I am also saying that Aloe Vera is one of the crops that have been identified by this Government for strategic intervention. 

There is a variety in this country, which is called Aloe Ferox, which does not have some of the qualities. Yes, the Aloe Vera that we are now importing could have originated from here but if we have not developed ours to the extent that we can have maximum commercial value from it, we need to go where the commercial value is. 

There are people responsible for marketing and I have said that the Export Promotions Board is on board as far as getting external markets is concerned. I also said that within this country, there is market so long as we can sit down and agree on how to proceed.  

Mr Speaker, my final point is on fishing. Recently a group of persons were sent round the country to destroy under-size fishnets. I hasten to add that the manner in which they did it was a bit brutal and many people were not happy about it. After these fishnets were destroyed, my people who do their fishing on Lake Albert and River Nile bought the correct fishing gear. But when the head of state of this country pronounced that we could use any size of fishnets, my people, religious as they are, took it seriously and went and bought fishnets of two inches, three inches up to three and half inches. 

Barely a month later, there was another statement that these were not wanted and were to be destroyed - and they were destroyed too. Now the people are asking, “What is the truth, where is the Government?” They want to be refunded for the destroyed fishnets because they take the President of this country very seriously and that statement came from him. When it was reverted, they now need their money refunded. This is something very serious and I hope that the Leader of Government Business takes it up accordingly because we need these people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.18
MR PHILIP NTACYOTUGIRA (Bufumbira County West, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want us to look at page 6 of this report, paragraph 3.1.5. The last sentence states that; “Endless and expensive workshops and sensitisation activities disappointed participants”. 

I would like to talk about the effect of these workshops and sensitisation activities. I find that they are conduits of fraudulence and embezzlement to a certain extent. Capacity building in this sense is good. Workshops are quite good, they are very useful, but when you look at our budget, year in and year out, you find that a lot of money is being spent on workshops and seminars. 

I will just demonstrate this with two examples, to show how our money is lost through workshops. You take 200 officers who have been invited for a workshop -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I hope this is not in respect of the workshop I told you would take place tomorrow in Jinja. Proceed.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Speaker, I am demonstrating how these workshops and sensitisation seminars are conduits of fraudulence and we get these examples in our PAC meetings. A certain officer gets a lot of money for a workshop of say, 200 officers and he calls for the seminar. He goes and pays a hotel for their accommodation for, say five days but after that he calls off the meeting. 

When he goes to reclaim this money from the hotel, the hoteliers will say, “My friend, you booked our hotel for five days, so you cannot get the money back.” So, hundreds of millions of money is lost -(Interruption)

MR KAYONGO: Mr Speaker, let me inform the honourable member on the Floor that money meant for capacity building is also another conduit for those who receive money to hoodwink the public that there is any capacity building in the districts. For example in my division, Lubaga, this financial year in the Budget we have Shs 933 million for capacity building, and the Permanent Secretary has given us a breakdown of how he has been releasing this money religiously. 

But if you go to our division, there is nothing like capacity building, no workshop - nothing. You find that the money for example for the month of August, Shs 133 million, was released for capacity building but nothing took place. So, capacity building plus workshop funds are being misused. 

And you know our road. I wish that money were spent on repairing a road like the one you use, Mr Speaker, which is impassable. So, I want to inform you that capacity building is part of the money, which is misappropriated.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you, honourable member, for supplementing my speech. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you have heard him, but I would also give another example of how this money is being fraudulently utilised through such seminars and workshops. What is happening is that an officer invites about 200 other officers to attend a workshop. But in the real sense only about 100 of them turn up. But he has already got money for the 200 Officers –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it then the workshops or the administration of these workshops? Should we do away with the workshops?

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: No, that is not what I am not saying, Mr Speaker. I started by saying workshops and seminars are quite good, but to a certain extent –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I have listened to the honourable member carefully but the impression he gives me is that he is advancing a hypothetical issue. Parliament will benefit from specific examples. He should tell this House that on such and such a day, officer X got so much money, he went to hotel Y, booked rooms for five days, and so many days after there was no seminar; rather than engaging this House in a hypothetical issues. That is the procedural question I am asking.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Speaker, I am not really -(Interruption)

MR MUSISI: We have got some facts to back up what he is saying. We know very well that in this House, before we went for recess there was a loan of US $4.6 million that we obtained and we definitely raised concern about the way that money was apportioned. It was supposed to be for Lake Victoria Environmental Project, but on looking at the analysis, we had only US $200,000 that had been earmarked for something tangible. The rest was in capacity building of sorts.

You can imagine taking a loan of US $4.6 million and ending up with US $4.4 million spent on seminars! This House must have expressed concern; I did on that day. That is what we are saying. A lot of money is being wasted.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you, honourable member. The hon. Minister Kagonyera said that I was being hypothetical. No, I am only being polite -(Laughter)- because I could easily give some examples here, but I am being polite. I do not want to mention names. However, I refer you to the Public Accounts Committee report; you will find there such good examples. 

We are not actually saying seminars and workshops are bad. They are good but they are being overdone; and they are conduits through which some officers embezzle and misuse Government funds. That is what I am saying. Otherwise, seminars and workshops are good. (Applause).

I already said that you find an officer inviting 200 others to come for a workshop or a seminar but only 100 of them turn up. But he has received all the monies for hotel accommodation, per diem, food and the like. So, where does the money for those who do not turn up, go? It is a lot of money lost! Of course, this money will be accounted for; it is easy to account for it fraudulently.  

In view of the fact that these seminars are good and we need them, I do propose that they should be curtailed. They should be reduced so that we can save some money to put in other sectors like the roads and infrastructure -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But curtailing them! I gather from you that “workshop” or “seminar” is a nametag that is used to get money and curtailing does not solve the problem. All we need is to administer and check that when you have a seminar, it is actually a seminar. Curtailing means that if you had ten of them before, you now have five but will that stop somebody who wants to use the nametag “seminar” to take away the money?

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: What I am saying Mr Speaker, is that, yes, money scheduled for these seminars and workshops to such an extent should be reduced and at the same time these workshops and seminars should be monitored by the relevant organs responsible for checking embezzlement. 

I am also saying that if this money can be reduced, it could be invested in other sectors like road infrastructure. For example, you can build a road. Recently I travelled up to Kyankwanzi but the road is in a poor state. Actually some of us fell sick because of the bad road -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but remember that a few days ago somebody said that even in road construction they share the inches; one takes an inch and - (Laughter)

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that information. Anyway, we should work hard to ensure that Government funds are properly utilised and invested in areas, which we need like roads. When you construct a road, you will increase the income of people and there will be development along that road.  

I also want us also to look at page 6, paragraph 3.1.7. It states that; “Participants noted with reservations the focus of PMA on working with the poor as a way of achieving modernization. They wanted PMA to ensure that while a focus is maintained on the rural poor, the interests of the others, that is, progressive and peri-urban farmers, should not be ignored.”  

What I want to discuss is that a poor man is a hungry man, and someone who is hungry, that is, someone who is poor, may not learn or may learn poorly because learning goes with some behavioural changes. That is the way we can define learning. Listening only, seeing without behavioural change; there is no learning in that. 

My suggestion is that instead of concentrating on the rural poor, why can we not concentrate on the progressive farmers and industrialists? What I mean is that –(Interjection)- there is what we call the growth pole model; I think Prof. Mwaka would explain better –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the member holding the Floor has raised a very interesting subject by saying we should concentrate on the progressive farmers and industrialists. My contention and the clarification I seek is, for the industrialists to sell what they produce, they need a market, and a large market is found amongst the low-income people who are generally the poor. The same would apply for the progressive farmers. 

If we concentrate on these progressive farmers you are talking about, and industrialists, if they exist; to whom are they going to sell their products? The poor people should also be helped to improve but have not been helped - according to your way of looking at it. Therefore, they will not have the level of effective demand enough to support these industries. Where will you sell those products?

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is introducing another concept, of marketing. I was still talking about production, but we can come to marketing later on.  

I was still articulating what we call the growth pole model and I had stated that let us concentrate on progressive farmers and industrialists. Why do I say this? You get a progressive farmer in a village or district, you capitalize him or her and you expand his business or industry. This progressive person is going to employ so many poor people and they will earn a living and support their families. This is better than throwing away your resources to that hungry man, who eats the money, uses the money anyhow, and nothing comes out of it. 

I have an example where I used my Shs 15 million to lend to the poor and they have refused to pay back. They have produced nothing; they have put me in a dilemma and will never pay, definitely, because I cannot put them in prison. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the big farmers should produce food for the small people who are not productive? Should they just sit in their homes and wait food from big farmers? Do you not really think that food security –(Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Would the honourable member like to inform the House by way of mentioning, for example, the progressive farmers in his constituency whom he would like to benefit from such money? All the other people who could not pay his money can be left out.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Speaker, what I said earlier on was that this progressive farmer, who is expanding his farm, would employ these others. I said that he would employ them and then they would support their families –(Interruption)

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Somebody asked for an example of a successful farmer who can be used as a growth pole and I have somebody in mind: the late Mr Kiiza of Masaka. That man acted as a growth pole because people of all walks of life – small farmers would moving from their districts to go and see what Kiiza was doing. After that they would go back home and replicate in their areas what they had seen. 

At least I took my women; they were there for a week and when they came back, definitely, they were different people. The type of growth pole he is talking about is not saying that pole will stop farming and what have you, but they are exemplary. They can employ, they can demonstrate, they can market, and at the end of it all, you have the spread and multiplier effect taking on.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Kiiza you are talking about was from my constituency and he died recently. We buried him ten days ago. He was not a large-scale farmer because he had just three acres where he was demonstrating and producing from. So, is it size or what? That is the question.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Speaker, it can be size as well as quality. 

Another example is Mr Batuma of Kabale; he has a dairy farm. He started as an individual but what happened is that many people could go to work on his farm. When you go there and look around that farm, you will find that people are doing very well. They have put up houses with corrugated iron sheets, and their children go to school. But at the same time they have also started some dairy farms around him because they have emulated that example of Mr Batuma. That is an example of a growth pole model.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I want to talk about coffee. It is very gratifying that UCDA has introduced coffee villages and districts, and that they are paying Shs 100 per coffee seedling to the farmers. But there is information, which is lacking in this report. I wish this information were given to us. How much money has been spent since 1999 - the time when this concept was introduced? In that way we can get to know how many seedlings have been planted because it is a question of dividing them by Shs 100. 

Researchers should tell us how many plants have been destroyed by coffee wilt. I wish to know, what is the total harvest? How many kilograms? Then we would get to know whether we are taking the right direction. Is the coffee sector doing very well? This information is lacking in that report. 

How about corruption? There are some boys at the district level who are corrupt. Actually they pay some so-called farmers who have got coffee nursery beds, yet they do not have them. They just collude, write reports, draw money and share it. In Kisoro we have noted that, but I do imagine that it could also be happening in other districts, you never know. Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  

3.46
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start from where hon. Ntacyotugira has stopped with the coffee, and thank UCDA for the efforts they have put into trying to promote coffee. But much as the committee is calling upon us as leaders to support this effort, I tell you I have been associated with this programme since it started and I must say I am a little bit frustrated and I am now pulling out.  

First of all, I went into planting coffee but I met a lot of problems - maybe I am not one of the models of successful farmers. The problems ranged from bad seasons, the coffee wilt, everything. Then I promoted farmers and mobilised them. They prepared their gardens, the holes, everything. But what disappointed me most was that for almost all seasons, the seedlings would not come in time. They would come in two months off-season. 

I would like to inform honourable members that, yes, you are being told that a lot of coffee was planted, but if you go to the field - I just hope you find time to come to Masindi because when you say you visited the West and then there is only Bushenyi, Bushenyi is a model district as far as coffee production is concerned. I wish you really find time and come to Masindi. They will give you the figures of how many seedlings have been dispatched there, but how many of those have survived? I will tell you not even 60 percent! So, we have to change approach.

I am happy that the committee is realising and recommending that seedlings should be dispatched in a timely manner. I even had time to talk to the Minister of State in charge of Planning who is here, that they should be releasing this money on time so that the farmers can plant in time.

MRS ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, for giving way.  Mr Speaker, I want to give my information at this point. Although the committee did not travel to Arua, it is one of the districts producing coffee. It has some of the best Arabica coffee produced in this country. 

I would like to inform this House now, on behalf of the committee, that the most frustrating department in Arua District is the production office. As I am talking now, there is about Shs 47 million to be paid to farmers who had raised coffee seedlings and since that money has been lacking, the extension officers do not go to farmers to explain to them the whereabouts of that fund. As a result the coffee farmers in Arua do not want to continue producing it. That is one discouraging factor in the Ministry of Agriculture in my district.

Secondly, the seedlings that were produced by those other farmers, they went ahead issuing orders, were not picked by the production office and they abandoned the seedlings. Currently the coffee trees are as tall as I am and they are convincing farmers that they do not have land. The situation is very terrible! I also request the Minister to explain to why they issue orders to farmers to have nursery beds and they do not pay them.

Thirdly, I want to know from the Minister whether the plan to promote coffee was a planned activity or it was just miscellaneous. I thank you very much for giving way.

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. There is a general problem about seedlings and plantlets. For us in Kabarole you know that we are tea growers and last year the farmers, those commercial nursery operators, supplied 1.5 million plantlets and they were paid only for 200,000 plantlets. So, there is a very big problem. 

Now they are saying that they are not going to plant more nursery beds because they have not been paid. I would like to know from the Minister: when are you going to pay these commercial nursery operators of Kabarole and in other places of Uganda? This is going to discourage agriculture especially of the key plants like tea and coffee.  Thank you very much.

MRS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, honourable members for that contribution because I was coming to it; it is on page 12. Many nursery operators are stuck with the seedlings and of course they also have a lifetime. Once they pass a certain stage they become irrelevant and there is information, which was given to some Member of Parliament that soon Government will be pulling out of this effort of buying seedlings from nursery operators. 

I would like Government to come out in the open and inform these nursery operators about the plans, otherwise we are going to get stuck and look uncoordinated. 

Mr Speaker, I want to talk about marketing, because in this paper there is somewhere the Ministry of Agriculture is saying it is no longer its responsibility. I know that in the PMA framework marketing is the responsibility of the Ministry of Trade and Industry. I do not know how the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry is linking up with the Ministry of Agriculture to try and promote our farmers and market their produce? Because, the little we try to produce on our own, we end up stuck with that stock. 

How is the Ministry helping us to develop? I know you are doing something about developing the market policy, but how far have you reached, can we have the market chain, the commodity exchange so that our farmers have the information and they produce for the market? 

You remember this one was of the prominent talk, produce for the market. How are we going to link up under the PMA arrangement?  Agro-processing, it is the same. When we were at Kyankwanzi we were told the industrial research centre is dead, is there an equivalent? How are you going to research on the processing of our produce? I would like to know. I know this is not the mandate of the Ministry of Agriculture, but it concerns them because we want to add value to our produce.  

Rural financing, still under PMA. I am happy the Minister of State for Planning is here and we recently passed a loan to support the micro-finance outreach programme. How are you linking this to our rural farmers? It has been mentioned that farmers do not access funds. Even when the funds are available, there they are very expensive. How are you going to help our farmers under PMA? I know I even have my disappointments with it. 

Somewhere you say war-ravaged areas should be focused on, but members from those areas, do not feel cheated. Even we who are from stable districts have not seen this PMA at work, not even NAADS. So, we should call upon the Government to try and roll out the good plans called PMA and NAADS so that all of us Ugandans move at the same pace. 

Lastly, transfer of technologies. It is on page 6. The committee is concerned. I am also equally concerned. This has been left to the private sector but I think the private sector also needs support. We know there are efforts and collaborations between the private and public sector. Government tries to market or buy off especially grain in terms of maize, but is it not possible for this Government to also support private entrepreneurs in some way? They could give them subsidised loans, credit or whatever, so that these inputs and implements can reach our people down there. If you are going to completely leave it to the private sector, I can assure you a person in Bujenje County, Ntoma village will not be able to afford this kind of technology and implements you are talking about.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.57
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for an elaborate report –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, be brief because it seems there are many who are interested in contributing.

CAPT. MATOVU: Mr Speaker, agriculture is indeed a sector on which over 90 percent of our people are surviving directly or indirectly. So, we need to give it a lot of support.  

First of all, I want to thank officials in the coffee sector. I was shocked on the eve of this year when I saw officials from NARO deep down in my county, tracing the coffee wilt disease. I got interested so we went together, but I could not believe it. We are in trouble! All these trees are dying away, as you saw, 40 percent of them are affected. We had better move fast. Government should assist people to replace all these trees and the Minister of Finance must also move faster to support this sector. 

I also want to thank UCDA for the support they are giving our people, despite a few hiccups. Of course, as Parliament we know that there is under- funding and I think it is not their problem. We need to keep pushing for more from our meagre resources. 

However, I have been made happy again by the report, on page 12 there is this lowland Arabica coffee. I do not know whether the Minister has cleared it as resistant to coffee wilt; I would like to get more assurance. Is it true this lowland Arabica coffee is resistant to coffee wilt so that we can now go out and tell our people to go in for this type?

I also want to inform the Government that Uganda has been surviving on coffee as its No.2 foreign exchange earner after kyeyo, but most of this coffee - almost half of it - has been coming from some of our neighbours. I can name Congo, Rwanda and Tanzania. So we need to move fast and put our House in order, and support the planting of more coffee because we may chase away our market. 

I want to commend the UCDA boss, Mr Ngabirano. I have heard he is in China looking for market. But very soon, unless Government comes up with serious interventions for the coffee wilt disease or gives more support to farmers, we may really lack a market because indeed we may not have much to sell.

To the Minister of Agriculture: I am a beneficiary of a project under PMA. We were going to get an horticulture fruit processing plant in my constituency, but the plant building is now stuck at the ring beam, nothing is going on. I do not know what the problem is. Maybe the Ministry of Finance is not coming in to help, but we need to be helped. That group of women who had been supported are on the run now because people gave in bricks and materials and they cannot be paid. I urge the Ministry to come to their rescue.

Let me say something about commercial farming because we are being told to move away from subsistence farming. I want to be assisted by the Minister: let him tell us about zero tillage. People in my home area were being told to spray chemicals; “You spray the bush, it dries and then you plant”. It looks easier and good on the surface of it, but we do not know the long-term effects. Are these chemicals going to leave our soil good and safe enough for our future sons and daughters to use? I want to be assured because now in my constituency people are going into zero tillage in high gear.  

We could also look at mechanization. In Sango Bay in Kakuuto, there are some Indians there growing maize on a large scale; they have tractors and combine harvesters. But they tell you that by the time of harvest the farm gains about Shs 75 because the labour cost is so high. By the time you are out of production you cannot compete on the market. We should really revisit mechanization. We want to see whether this could also help us to enhance commercial farming.

Then the other one is, of course, marketing. I want to appreciate Government’s efforts in Uganda Grain Trailers (UGT). That intervention, which shock absorbed the maize and beans has really done us good. Our people used to suffer but now there is something for them. We should really look at more intervention or input. Why do you tax fertilizers if you really want to have our people producing more?

I have another issue, on an enabling law to enhance investment. Some time back I saw a letter from the Minister of State for Investment to some people in my place, Binunula, the company with madam Oliver Zizinga. These people have been pushing for economic processing and free trade zones. Rakai would actually be the Dubai of Africa but we have been let down by this law. The Minister has promised that this law is coming. Comrade Ruhindi worked on this law too. I saw the draft. I wish this law could come to Parliament and we really look at it because once it is out we have got people who want to invest in horticulture and many other things in Rakai.  

On the 20th of this month we will launch the District Investment Profile. I do not know what I am going to tell. At one time we considered demonstrating but we said, “No, why should we get dispersed by the Police? Let us bargain with friendly forces.” But the absence of this law is disappointing; I do not know when Cabinet will bring it here.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I saw a desperate recommendation by the committee about an agricultural bank. The other day we sold off UCB and now why should we have this agricultural bank? The issue is about policies because now we have been besieged by these policies of ours: micro economic, liberalization and whatever. So even if you brought in this bank, it is the same story. You may again lose. So, why do we not look at the policies, which can help our people access finances? 

There is a case in Centenary Bank - in fact Centenary Bank should be hailed. There is a facility called PL4-80 loan for beans and maize production in my constituency. You access this money - I think it is funding from USAID - you get a nine-months grace period; they do not disturb you. People are now a bit happy because there is low interest and a reasonable repayment period. You can plant for the first and second season then you take back the money. If a loan bank can do this, why not the Government with all the muscle we have? 

Lastly, to the Minister in charge of the fishing industry, I have two lakes in my place. One is called Kakyera and the other one is called Kigyanibarora. There is a type of fish called engege enkooki; they are very small but they have got eggs. So, there is a haggle between the people. People say, “They are mature, you catch them. If they have eggs, what are you waiting for?” Then the fisheries’ people are saying, “No, wait –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, their local name is amaka ngasobola, because you can buy many and -(Laughter)

CAPT. MATOVU: The Minister could come and look at this type of fish so that he helps us to either remove them or replace them with some other types. Otherwise, my people want to fish but we are being told, “No do not fish, this one is still young,” yet it has eggs. I want to get assistance from the Minister. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee in its report has a whole paragraph 3.4 on palm oil development. In their report they also specifically mentioned the endeavors that are being made in Kalangala islands both by Government and by the private entrepreneurs to introduce the palm oil project. 

As a consequence of this paragraph a number of hon. Members of Parliament, including hon. Lukyamuzi, made some statements here yesterday. But this matter is before the Committee of Finance and Economic Planning to which we have been summoned to appear and clarify a number of things. Since the matter is before this committee, I did not think that it was wise nor did I think that it was prudent for us as Government to come here and make statements in the House at this point in time. 

However, –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter related to the conception of palm oil planting did not simply come about. It came to us through the newspapers especially when it was reported that on the 4th of April last year an agreement between a company, BIDCO, and the Uganda Government was signed. In so far as matters related to finance are concerned, with reference to Article 159 of the Constitution –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I want to raise a point of order.

THE SPEAKER: If it is a point of order, raise it.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Noting that our Constitution in Article 159 is very elaborate on how public finance must be dealt with, in that particular Article the Uganda Government cannot borrow money without the sanctioning of Parliament –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order for our purpose today?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Is it in order for the honourable minister to question elected Members of Parliament when they query an issue, which impacts on the Constitution, namely the Article I have just quoted? I was doing my job as a legislator and a Parliamentarian of substance –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I wish you had waited for the Minister to complete because I have not heard him querying any Member of Parliament. He only said this matter came here and we should have left him to develop his point and then listened to what he was saying. 

Nobody can query Members of Parliament as they carry out their work. But if this is the issue, which was raised yesterday, you remember very well I adjourned the House because you were starting a debate and I did not know what you were debating. I had said that this matter is with the Finance Committee. We should not start debating things we have seen in newspapers. Let us wait for a report from the committee then we shall discuss it. This is what I said and that is how we ended it. If we have to discuss this issue of palm oil as the case may be, we would only discuss it in as far as agriculture is concerned rather than other issues related to constitutionality and so forth. That was my ruling.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, let me just make a clarification on our concern as the Agricultural Committee. We studied the policy document and this project is under agriculture – it is AG 49(b) as a project. 

One of our concerns was how 10,000 pre-germinated seedlings are going to be imported. We were told that the plantation is going to be established in Kalangala and our concern was basically on the agricultural component. We were not bothered with the financing because the seedlings are landing for the farmers. Therefore, our concern was how the farmers were going to access these seedlings. Is the ground fertile for them? Are they prepared enough? Is there infrastructure for them to be prepared to start receiving these planting materials? 

In addition these planting materials are flying in from Malaysia so we wanted to see the level of preparation and update Parliament with the agricultural component of the vegetable oil seed project. That is how this report captured this VODP as a project, and this was a result of our monitoring visit to Kalangala. I thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your very wise guidance. Consequent to your guidance I am saying that I will not delve into the details of this matter because the matter is appropriately before a committee. A report will be made by that committee to this House at an appropriate time. 

However, as I was saying there are matters that have come to the attention of Government. A continuing process of misrepresentation is affecting the image and credibility of the investor, Government and the investment, which requires international financing. Sir, I want to state to this House three things, which we will at an appropriate time come back to but at this point they must be taken note of: 

One; the palm oil project is not a scam. It is a reality and it is one of the best things that have happened to this country. 

Two; any borrowing that was done, was never done for –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: With due respect to the Minister, Mr Speaker, you have ably ruled on this matter. It is now before an appropriate committee of Parliament. The members concerned will appropriately address the basics of that project at an appropriate time. Is it in order, now that we are discussing a general matter related to agriculture in Uganda, for the honourable minister to continue pursuing the same line over which you have already administered judgment?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have been labouring this point since yesterday. There is a time I went to the Kremlin in Moscow where you have to go through various stages of screening. One person would just look at your shoes; another would look at your head and another one at another thing. All of them were soldiers but doing different activities to allow people to enter the Kremlin. We are dealing with the Committee on Agriculture. 

That issue may have a head but we are dealing with the shoes now, so do not inspect the head. Therefore, let us leave this matter as we are dealing with this report on the agricultural aspect of the project. Any comment on it should not drag us into looking at the head when we are supposed to look at the shoes. Proceed. 

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am still on the shoes –(Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: When you bring in the question of borrowing then you are treading on another area. Please say how this is going to help agriculture. Whether the company, which has come has come in properly, that will be a different matter. That is what I think will help us when we are handling this particular report. Concentrate on agriculture. Whether the manager is a villain or something, do not worry. Let us stick to agriculture.

MR MUSUMBA: Okay, Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance. I am going to concentrate on the shoes of this matter. I am only clarifying that matters for the Committee of Finance we will leave them to that committee. But for someone to say that there was never parliamentary approval is wrong because there was Parliamentary approval given on 23 April 1998.  

THE SPEAKER: We shall handle that, honourable member -(Interjection) No, please, I think the Minister has said what he wanted to say. Let us now proceed with the debate. I have been on this side; it is high time I came back. It should be Luwero, Jinja, then Masaka and we will see how to proceed.  

PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for at least coming up with this report, which we can –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, a member of the committee – oh, it is hon. Victoria Sebagereka –(Laughter)- I am sorry.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the honourable member on the Floor is Prof. Mwaka. 

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I have said, I want to thank the committee. Perhaps the member, hon. Mutuluuza, is right. I was on the Committee of Agriculture but I moved to Finance.  

I want to focus on the conceptualisation and design of PMA. I think the problem of the implementation of PMA has been its misconception. The way it is implemented, it is as if they are implementing PEAP. My question is: what is the core activity of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA)? When you look at page 4, we are given all the line ministries involved in PMA: Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Works, Ministry of Water, Lands and Minerals, whatever have you. This line up will help in the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) because that is where you get a conglomerate of all stakeholders aiming at solving the poverty problem. 

But when you come to PMA, it becomes dwarfed; it becomes belittled. Let me give an example here. On the same page 4 at the bottom they say; “Furthermore, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in an effort to increase awareness on Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture has embarked on implementing a PMA dissemination and sensitisation programme…” Are there no experts in the Ministry of Finance to disseminate their own information such that this is taken over by the Ministry of Finance rather than being done by the Ministry of Agriculture? 

Some people will not even listen because they know the Ministry of Agriculture is the one, which is supposed to disseminate agricultural information before they listen. But when the Ministry of Finance starts being the core activator of PMA, definitely you run into problems. There is a misconception problem. 

Even on page 5 the committee asked; “If MAAIF is not the primary driver of PMA then which ministry has the overall responsibility for accounting to Parliament?” Where should the home of the PMA be? Honestly, should that question be asked when it is the “Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture”? Up to now we do not know where PMA should be just because there is a mix up of activities and so forth?

Because of that even accountability has become a problem. Some activities have remained in no man’s land because PMA has become a jack-of-all-trades and a master of none. So, I welcome the proposal by the committee that definitely there should be a revisit of this whole concept. Let us expand PEAP as it was designed, as it is reviewed, and let agriculture retain its meat because now it has been stripped naked. They are only remaining with planning -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Mwaka. You will understand that advertising is of course expensive. You know finance is in charge of money and they are saying they are going to produce bi-monthly and that is at a cost. Is it to advise Parliament and other stakeholders or the peasants who are supposed to produce?  

Secondly, we are hearing over the radio, every minute they talk of PMA. There is man called Mafabi talking about a landing site as if there is landing site in Bugisu. So you can imagine! As much as we are talking about PMA, this is something they have created to eat money between the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Agriculture. Thank you.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much for your concern.  I was saying that the Ministry of Agriculture has stripped itself naked and no wonder it is being given very little money - about 1.7 percent of the national budget - yet it contributes about 50 percent of the GDP. It is because there are no planned activities to be done.  

When it comes to production, the Ministry of Agriculture is no longer supporting production because the farmers are doing it themselves. That is why there is degeneration because the peasants are no longer being helped as they used to be. One could say NAADS could do it but their role is to advise not to assist the farmers in their production endeavours. You can advise somebody who has a hoe, but if I have no hoe even if you advise me the advice would fall on deaf ears. 

I would not even fear to say, “After all that information is irrelevant as far as the small farmers are concerned”. So I beg Cabinet: let us all go back to the drawing board and let PMA belong to agriculture. Let education remain to education, if there is need to co-ordinate, co-ordination can be done. We have the Ministry of Gender, Youths and the Disabled - definitely we know there are women everywhere but they are not going to take a big chunk of the national budget, which should have been for agriculture, to other ministries.  

Mr Speaker, I said earlier that accountability has become a problem. For example when a road is constructed, how would you know that this money was from PMA or from the Ministry of Works’ budget? Each one will claim and in between definitely a big chunk will not be seen somehow. 

The same goes for health and all these other participants. That is why the Ministry of Finance is taking over the role of disseminating agriculture information.  

Mr Speaker, when you go to page 5, there is the slow pace of moving from conceptualisation to implementation because the initial conceptualisation was secured. That is why even implementation is sluggish and the committee is saying in 3.12 that; “Concern and frustration were expressed at the apparent slow pace at which PMA was being implemented. There was expectation that the Ministers would this year dwell on actual progress of activities on the ground rather than on policies, strategies and plans that have always been stated ever before.” Why should the committee wonder? 

If there is no investment plan for agriculture then what activities, do you expect, will be carried out? So, we do not have activities for agriculture up to now. As far as PMA is concerned we are still experimenting. I do not know whether NAADS has moved from experimentation - that is piloting - to actual rolling out. As I talk now there may be about - is it 24 districts? Within those 24 districts only two sub-counties, within those two sub-counties about two parishes and we are very proud NAADS is everywhere! Honestly, with due respect let people not be taken for a ride. 

Definitely, the Ministry needs to be assertive.  Why should you be pushed against the wall? Why should other people who have their own budgets hijack your activities? If the Minister of Agriculture were assertive enough, definitely they would have their plan; they would have their activities; they would be in production. But this business of “we are only planning”, when actually there is no real activity - the activities are there but each individual is doing things their own way. That is why you find that this anomalous area of marketing belongs to nobody. We will say it belongs to the Trade and Industry Ministry, but who does it at grassroots level? Nobody!  

When it comes to water for production, you talk about urban water and what have you. Water for production is no man’s land because the Ministry of Water is not concerned with water for production but with water for consumption. Let us actually wrap up the whole thing and things will be better.  

I decided to dwell on conception alone because once you start wrongly you take the wrong direction. Instead of going to Masaka you go to Jinja, you find yourself in Malaba and you may not have a return ticket. You will have to walk back to the drawing board and see how can we revitalize our breadwinner the Ministry of Agriculture. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I want to welcome the voters from Kigulu village in Bunya East County, Kigandalo sub-county, Mayuge District. They are here to see how their Member of Parliament is transacting business. You are most welcome!

4.33
MR HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. I also join others in thanking the committee for having come out with this report, albeit I have a small axe to grind with the committee. 

There is what they call urban farming and this urban farming is part of the Urban Authority Association of Uganda Agenda, to ensure that there is sustainable food supply in the urban centres. Unfortunately, if you read through the document here the committee did not consider that there is potential in urban areas in disseminating the ideals of modern agriculture.  

Having said that, Mr Speaker, it is high time we got out of the semantics as to whether PMA is a plan or a framework. It is high time we pronounced ourselves on this one here. It is because we imagine it is a plan that it assumes an amorphous picture whereby you have got agriculture, you have got industry, you have got all other ministries involved, but much as they are involved are they ready for that integration? Can they manage that integration effectively? 

Then you find the super Ministry of Finance managing everything. The end result is that we shall keep moving in circles. We can never develop agriculture like that, Mr Speaker. If it is Finance to begin marketing the so-called PMA, then I wonder. It is high time we woke up and re-defined the boundaries of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because they have basically consumed everything. Without their say, you have not got much to do. They need a supplementary of Shs 10 billion while the Ministry of Agriculture has a supplementary of about Shs 800 million. What an unfortunate situation! 

The other issue is markets. Everybody is talking about markets. Marketing is a very broad concept. Much as we look at it locally, we should ask ourselves: how many Ugandans out of the 26 million are part of the propensity that can consume effectively? Mr Speaker, you will find that they are less than three million Ugandans that can consume. If you have got less than three million Ugandans that can consume, what next? You are going to have a huge surplus that will become a glut, which has to be exported.  

Mr Speaker, now there are talks about international marketing. I heard the President say, “Oh, the Japanese have given us market, the European Union has given us markets, AGOA is there too.” Let us internalise the concept of market development. In a competitive world you have to sink money into developing a market for your commodities. Likewise, you would spend money to develop a market locally. But it is very unfortunate, Mr Speaker, that if you looked at our budget for the Ministry of Trade and Industry, which is actually involved in marketing what we produce in this country, their budget is Shs 500 million. You can never sustainably market any commodity with Shs 500 million. We shall consistently talk about markets existing in the Middle East, in Europe, but how many producers in the world are competing for the same market? They are producing more quality products. So, that is an area that we should get back down to and address seriously.  

The other issue is in the report on page 9, under the agricultural sector. It reads; “An investment plan should be urgently produced, which reflects aspirations of the people of Uganda …”. Mr Speaker, it is about six or seven years down the road of the so-called Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA) and we are talking about developing an investment plan at this stage! I am left with one question; does this country have a vision? Does the Government have a vision? This should be incorporated in the vision, but it appears there is nothing of this nature in the vision! To talk about an investment plan at this stage, after spending billions of money - doing what? The Minister in charge of Agriculture owes us an explanation about this particular observation.

The committee talks about an agricultural development bank. Well, it is a good idea for as long as the institutional capacity exists. But here is a situation where all is lacking; it will end up UCB style. I would like to propose to the committee chairman that let us look at the sub-county as the basis of financing agricultural development. I will give you an example. 

In Uganda today, for every ten savers, there are nine borrowers. In other words, effectively, there is only one person that is saving out of ten, and such a situation is replicated throughout the country, where less than five percent of our GDP is savings. It is high time that the Ministry of Finance and that of Agriculture actually went down to the sub-county level, instead of creating an institution in Kampala, and created intermediation that would take advantage of what hon. Kagonyera is about to say; that, “Oh the other day we passed a law to expand the micro-finance outreach”. It is then that we shall have addressed the problem of finance because that is the way to hit the critical mass of savings. The cost of money will go down and become affordable, and with that arrangement, you can do many things.

Mr Speaker, development hinges on the mindset.  What is in the minds of the peasants? How do we relate to them? How has this plan related to the mindset? While we have been having seminars that my colleague, Ntacyotugira, is averse to, what have they achieved? I would like to inform this House that I took an opportunity to attend a NAADS-organised seminar on how to produce, and who was there? They were not the farmers, but just because there was an allowance to be earned - that is what hon. Ntacyotugira was talking about - the actual people are not being targeted. In other words, the mindset is not being changed at all.  

Having said that, we should design a programme - what kind of education? In the 1960s we produced a lot more than we are producing today. Why? Were there workshops? No. Were there consultations, because I see they are talking about consultations with all stakeholders? Who are the stakeholders in this one here? With that, Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and hope we get down to being a little bit more serious.

4.40
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the wonderful report. I call it wonderful because of what it is revealing as far as what is on the ground and what it is recommending for Government is concerned. 

I am glad that the Prime Minister and the National Political Commissar are here, at least the National Political Commissar has just walked in, but I hope they can take advantage of what this report is saying.

Mr Speaker, allow me to start with a procedural matter to find out how Government takes into consideration these recommendations that are presented here. Does it come back to report to Parliament what steps it has taken as far as our recommendations are concerned? Maybe some of them are just left on paper, on the shelves, and no action is taken. As a result we do not achieve much. I would like to appeal to Parliament to ensure that if a ministry is assisted with recommendations, it should come back and tell us what steps were taken. Otherwise, we need a lot of guidelines in implementing Government’s efforts.

Page 10 says the committee visited a number of districts. I feel sorry that the committee did not take into consideration the respective Members of Parliament of those districts that were visited. This would have been a very good chance for the members to receive the committee in the respective districts. It would have been a very good chance for us to reveal the problems prevailing in our districts. It would have been a good chance for us to get exposed to our constituencies, to show our people that actually we are working together as a group rather than being left behind.  

Allow me to also make a general observation regarding Government. In fact since I attended a Committee on Trade’s meeting last year, I have been telling Government that it has been inconsistent in its policies. That is why we have these problems. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to ask the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, to attend to my observation. What I am saying is that Government has been inconsistent in its policies and this is highlighted on page 9, where the committee is concerned that instead of Government looking at new ventures it should spend more time on the existing ventures. This is my appeal. 

Instead of PMA looking at new areas, why doesn’t it depend on the existing institutions like the Prisons Farm in Masaka District? The Prisons Farm had developed so well but it was hit during the war. Up to now the poultry and piggery farms have never been renovated. They just need a ceiling but the whole infrastructure is wasted yet in PMA agriculture is spending here and there. Let us be consistent and stick to the recommendation that is being given in the report. Instead of going to new areas, let us try to first concentrate on the existing ones.  

This is the example we are getting regarding the fisheries. I think page 16, is indicating that our traditional species are no longer in Lake Victoria but in small lakes. Masaka and other areas that depend on Lake Victoria are affected because we used to eat fish almost daily but now fish has become a delicacy for very few families. We no longer see fish because of the inconsistence of Government, lack of evaluation and lack of good plans. 

They introduced the Nile Perch, which has eaten a lot of our species. As a result we are suffering and even then the Nile Perch is no longer available because it was being allowed to be fished at any stage but fish is a very important type of food for us. I would like the Government to consider what has been done in the report and evaluate policies and help us. 

I will give you another example of the inconsistence. The moringa is a current example. Very many people are complaining that the moringa does not have a market. The market may be there but at the moment my people are complaining they have not seen it. But I tell my people that they should never go with the wind. I always tell people, “Do not go with the wind because this wind is strong; you go this side, and the other side”. 

I ask them about what happened to our traditional trees like cinnamon (Mudalasini). This has got a bigger market than the moringa they are talking about but it has disappeared. We know what it is, we know it has medicine; we know we eat it, we know it does a lot of all those things that are being talked about moringa but we have tested it. Why do we not stick to that? They are going with the wind; they are inconsistent.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to Government to take this report very seriously otherwise we will not move in agriculture. What is on the ground in agriculture is not what is promoted over the radio. The Ministry of Agriculture has got a lot of advertisements on PMA, but hon. Mwaka and the previous speaker also noted that we need refocusing. I hope Government can go back and refocus the efforts in agriculture that can really bring up the person’s suffering to light and we find a solution to that. Otherwise, it is a problem. 

I want to concentrate on inconsistence. I am giving examples so that they can learn from this. Palm oil - why do we go to palm oil? Mr Speaker, I have done research; I have had queries about simsim. Simsim gives the best oil and it is highly produced in Uganda, but there is no mention of it. Groundnuts produce very good vegetable oil; there is no mention of them. The attention is now on palm oil and a lot of questions are coming up. This is the inconsistence. 

Could the Government sit down and give us a long-term plan that can help us to utilize the resources, the knowledge and the things we have that are already tested here instead of going with the wind, instead of being inconsistent? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.50
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I have three points to make. 

The first is mentioned on page 19, and this is on the issue of hunger. The report makes a very important note when it states that the UN Universal Declaration on Human Rights declares right of access to food and freedom from hunger as a fundamental right. It also goes on to state that although we live in a world of unprecedented prosperity and technology called development, 850 million people are malnourished and more than 200 million of these are children many of whom will never reach their full intellectual and physical potential.

Mr Speaker, this is a very important statement, and when you look at our Constitution under the National Objectives it is stated under Objective 22 on Food Security and Nutrition that: 

“The state shall –

(a) Take appropriate steps to encourage people to grow and store adequate food.

(b) Establish national food reserves; and 

(c) Encourage and promote proper nutrition through mass education and other appropriate means in order to build a healthy state.”

I would like to focus on “The state shall establish national food reserves.” I would like to make this point very clear because when we quote these national objectives and directive principles of State policy, we forget that when you look at objective I, it says that, 

“(i) The following objectives and principles shall guide all organs and agencies of the State, all citizens, organisations and other bodies and persons in applying or interpreting the Constitution or any other law and in taking and implementing any policy decisions for the establishment and promotion of a just, free and democratic society.
(ii) The President shall report to Parliament and the nation at least once a year, all steps taken to ensure the realisation of these policy objectives and principles.”  

Mr Speaker, we have been asking for a food security policy for the last two years, but no mention was made of what progress the state has made on this. It is very sad when you see other agencies bringing food to Uganda whereas we know very well that Uganda is the food basket of the African region. I, therefore, urge the Executive and the Minister in particular to bring us this food security policy so that we can address issues of hunger as stated in this report.  

My second point is on the issue of credit. In the report the issue of credit is highlighted many times but I would like to focus on page 8, which states that, “The Indian case where Government has established the Rural Development Bank….” 

I also would like to highlight page 12, where again the recommendation is that there should be timely payment for coffee seedlings. Some of the people in Mwenge South and Kyenjojo at large, borrowed money and they established nurseries for coffee, but because they never got paid on time, they have gotten into problems with the people who lent them money. This is very serious. I had an opportunity to go to India and this Agricultural Bank is very effective. It has a long repayment period and it also gives interest rates, which are manageable, and which do hurt the populace.

The last time we had a law on Micro-Finance Institutions, the only law that was brought to this House was to assist those deposit-taking institutions, and I remember I rose and objected saying that the law we were going to enact was only going to assist seven institutions because the threshold for such institutions was supposed to be Shs 700,000,000, which most micro-finance institutions cannot raise. Mr Speaker, honourable members, I would like to call upon the Ministry of Finance to bring the long awaited and promised law to manage micro-finance institutions, which many of our rural people use in order to carry out agricultural activities.  

Mr Speaker, my last point is on page 9, on the issue of exploitation of emerging opportunities. The committee made a comment, which I find a little bit difficult to comprehend. It states in 3.3 that, “The Members of Parliament wondered about the rationale of engaging in AGOA with all that it entails at the expense of a focus on nurturing domestic and regional markets.” 

AGOA in full is African Growth Opportunities Act. If this Act was made with the rationale of enabling African economies to grow, how could the Members of Parliament wonder at how effective it would be? If AGOA as we know it is supposed to nurture more production especially in the area of cotton so that eventually what is used, as apparel, would be produced locally, then why do we have this kind of statement -(Interruption)

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way and thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The concern of the Members of Parliament is a very genuine one. When you talk about AGOA and you fail to build infrastructure internally to take advantage of it but instead go for auxiliary industries to move AGOA a step further, then you are mistaken. Basically that is the concern of the Members of Parliament.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you for that. But I still insist that what the committee could do is to go back and look at the memorandum of understanding so that we can see whether the activities, which are being implemented under AGOA, do actually promote African Growth Opportunities because this is what the name states, and I have had the opportunity to look at the memorandum of understanding.
 
Finally, I get concerned - when I went to my constituency and I asked what the most important issue to them is, they told me poverty. I am convinced that agriculture is the key to poverty eradication. So, as I speak here, and I do not see any substantive ministers for Agriculture and for Finance, it makes me very uncomfortable -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to directly say that there are no substantive ministers here, when in fact every minister is a substantive minister appointed by His Excellency, the President, and charged with carrying out the responsibilities of the ministries in which they are posted? Is she in order to make that allegation about ministers?

THE SPEAKER: Well, the fact is that there are ministers from the Ministry of Agriculture, maybe - I used to see her with my spectacles on, this time I do not see her, maybe it is because of that. But there are ministers there. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling but I still insist that I do not see the Minister for Finance. The point is taken; the Prime Minister may cover it up all right.

THE SPEAKER: You are right; the Minister of Finance is not here.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: That is not the point. Mr Speaker, these are my points. The first is on the food security policy. We need one.

The second is on our comprehensive law on micro-finance institutions, which most people need; and the last is the issue of AGOA. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Well, when we resume, we will start with hon. Nyeko and then our revolutionary leader. I said that we would stop at 5.00 p.m. so that some members can travel to Jinja. There is a workshop in Jinja and I do not want to receive reports that the workshop was organized, the hotel rooms booked for members, and they did not turn up. If that happens, it will be a subject of debate here. 

Many issues have been raised and many more are going to be – I do not want to cut this debate short at this juncture. We shall continue tomorrow in the afternoon to enable even the Ministers to answer some of the queries, and the chairperson too. We shall start as I have directed. Hon. Mutuluuza, you will get an opportunity; I will definitely give you a chance tomorrow. I want the members going to Jinja to travel during daytime rather than at night. So, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. I thank you.

(The House rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 February 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

