Tuesday, 13 February 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995

(Debate continued from 1st February 1996.)

MR ELYAU (Kalaki, Soroti):  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the bill.  But Mr Chairman, allow me to give a few remarks on the issue of the bill.  This country has had a lot of problems and we thank the government for having harmonised the situation so that everybody is almost here whether in which group or other groups; because this Parliament has not got two Houses, it is one House.  But I am getting disturbed especially when we are trying to plan ways to exclude RC.  There is a cry down in the village there about what we call ‘A’ Level and its equivalent.  This is our country.  We need to leave it in harmony and the people to decide who will come to this Parliament will be the voters.  But here there is some technology being put down by a few harders who want to exclude others in this Parliament.  Will this really bring peace in this country? I am asking, why should they fear the people who are not educated if they are going to sit together?  

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member on the Floor was a Member of the Constituent Assembly and he participated fully.  It is in my view out of place and without you pronouncing him.  Is he in order for him to belabour the point which is already foregone because me, myself, there are things which I did not like in the constitution like articles, 269, 272 but is he in order to go into those details?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Order, during the CA, the hon. Member I think raised this issue but when he raised the issue, his voice was that of the minority.  So he lost but he is in order to bring it here.  (Laughter)

MR ELYAU:  I thank you Mr Chairman.  I know my Friend from Budadiri does not want to resist things.  He has been walking out and that is why even he does not know what happened there.  So I forgive him for that.  Mr Chairman, I say this because this is our country, we should share it.  After all, we come to Parliament Mr Chairman, to air our grievances.  We do not come here to qualify for degrees.  We do we fear these people who are not educated?  I want to find out from somebody who wants this one because people who could be judging the Member of Parliament - for example, a man who does not have ‘A’ Level has been in Parliament for the last seven years and he was even elected to the CA.  Why do you deny him to eat the food he has cooked? (Laughter)  

I do not see the logic.  If this country is ours - because the word which says its equivalent has got a large vocabulary.  You cannot define it.  Of course we cannot only wait for knowledge only here but we should also experience; I can see even big nations with people who are leading; for example, in Britain, the President does not have a degree but he is a very capable man.  So what I thought would be very important is unity and harmony.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, while I appreciate what the hon. Member is saying, I wonder whether he is proposing an amendment to the constitution!

MR ELYAU:  I did not follow him properly.  Okay, the constitution does not mean that everything is okay.  There are people up to now in this House -(Interjections)- yes, I am not amending the constitution but I have a point and I have a right to raise this matter.  Like in this country, some people were not satisfied with some areas in the constitution.  What is wrong in doing that?  That is democracy.  When I am airing my views, I must make a point for this one.  If you are going to exclude these people, they will overthrow you.  I am telling honestly speaking. (Laughter)  After all, I saw the past governments trying to play with the young ones and so on.  That is why these young ones went to the bush and overthrew them.  You see, exclusion is a very bad method.  Let us allow the voter to be the judge.  So I am saying, although that law is there, it should not be taken as a very serious and important part.  

For example, Mr Chairman, in Teso now, there are some people who are floating to make sure that the NRC Members who had been here should not come back to this Parliament.  Is that a good agenda?  This is very serious.  We should protect the interests of the people.  

Let me go back to the bill now.  Clause 34 - appointment of presiding officers.  Mr Chairman, I saw a lot of problems in this during the CA election.  The presiding officer may have been voted in advance.  For example, in most of our areas, teachers are the elites and qualified.  Now, if a candidate is a teacher standing against a politician, these teachers gang against them and they will make sure that any possible trick is done to betray the votes.  So a presiding officer must be a very, very neutral person so that election is on track.  For example, they were the ones who were having the over all power to accompany the voter to the polling box, which was so dangerous. So these people should be given a lot of examination before they are put in.  Either they should be brought to another place so that they are not used to the so-called candidates.  Otherwise, if you pick people locally and they are sharing the same interest, there is going to be a lot of problems.  That is the only area where I see in my area; I saw a lot of problems when the presiding officers misguided the voters.  This must be taken very seriously.  I would suggest that people from other areas be taken to other areas so that they do not have the equal interest.  

Also clause 36; this secrecy.  A secret ballot paper becomes complicated when you find old men and women who do not know how to read.  Secrecy becomes totally interfered with.  I do not know how we shall make sure that the people who will give us civic education will make sure that people understand this clue properly.  I remember in the CA, these people were not given authority to say anything.  They were just kept there keeping quiet.  I think this needs a lot of improvement.  I want the Minister to make sure that an agent represents the candidate standing.  Therefore, he should have at least a say in seeing who is going to be elected; say in case of a person who does not write, somebody who will tick the vote must be the voter herself or himself or if not, the agent should be able to see for himself what is happening so that he can really be the person to represent the candidate.  I saw a lot of corruption being played there.  

The polling station.  If we have got a big polling station, it has been also an embarrassment.  You find people from another village crossing to another village.  So I think there should be enough guard so that people do not have to misdirect the voter.  Villagers come from one line or direction of the village, you find the people who have voted go and confuse others saying, go and vote number so and so.  Now I do not know how we shall ensure that this secrecy will be really protected.  That is why I have a lot of doubt about it.  

Otherwise, generally Mr Chairman, the bill is straightforward except it needs some ironing over because the election of the CA proved very well than most of the elections I saw myself and I think the candidates meeting could have been necessary for one thing.  The voter is given opportunity to see the candidate and hear the candidate himself for the first time; because if we shall rely on the single meetings, it is good but it supposing somebody who does not have opportunity to carry the villagers, where will he address and be heard and be seen?  So there is a need to allow these candidates meetings if possible so that these people have a chance.  Mr Chairman, I do not need to disturb this bill, otherwise those are my comments.  Thank you.

MR MARK TIVU:  I thank you very much Mr Chairman to allow me to air the views of the northern region youths in the very important bill which is a part of the democratisation process under the NRM government which we support.  Mr Chairman, I congratulate the Minister and support him because the bill is straight forward and in my opinion, it does not require to be referred to a committee.  To me each and every Member who will should be given chance to express his views, experiences and ideas in his particular constituency which will be an eye opener to the electoral commission to make steps for the coming elections.  Otherwise, if we will pass to a slower committee and then we may be lacking some of the ideas and experiences from the hon. Members pertaining to their peculiar constituencies.  

Mr Chairman, civic education in the electoral process is very important especially so in the forthcoming elections to differentiate between the CA elections and the forthcoming elections whether Presidential, Parliamentary or Local Councils.  I am of the view the commission better starts immediate civic education to educate the people so that they are ware, otherwise should we miss some of the very important points, it may be bad. 

The role of Parliament in development process is very crucial and very important and therefore, I am not going to labour myself talking about the articles of the bill but I will rather talk about first of all what we are to do as Members of Parliament so as to be an eye opener for the forthcoming Parliament.  I have been for the last two years in Parliament observing what we have been doing here and trying to see it with comparative analysis of what other Parliaments do in the world.

Mr Chairman, this House has done a commendable job I know but there are some few things here I want to highlight so that it be a corrective measure for the next Parliament so that we are on the trend of development democratically.  

It is of my view that the first thing a Parliament has to do when sitting is to endorse a development plan which government is going to pursue so that all the development process and projects must be known be known by the Members of Parliament.  I am not interested to see that projects are carried out or designed or you find a project being inaugurated without the knowledge of Members of Parliament.  That one is sneaking projects maybe for political reasons.  So I am of the view that the first thing our Parliament must do when it sits is to make sure that the development plan of the government for the next five years must be known by the Parliament so that we know what we are really working for. 

I am of the view Mr Chairman Sir, that it is very important that all plans of development must be done in this House.  At times I get discouraged to see people going to negotiate developments and projects either in State House or in other places.  That one to me first of all compromises or brings political pathology.  All development must be done in this House.  No Member of Parliament should go to ask for development from State House or where the President comes and also it creates an empire on the part of the President.  So to me, all developments must be planned in the pursuit in this House and also it undermines the authority of Parliament because opportunists in the district go to see the President in his House under the guise that the Members of Parliament are not doing what.  So, Mr Chairman, we must make sure that this House must know its role of first of all pursuing development programmes and development plans and also following it in the background to the budget.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that it is true that planning for development of the whole nation is cardinal role of all Parliaments in this world and indeed in their monitoring, they continue to play a very big role.  But I also wanted to tell him that in some Parliaments, there is what is called constituency development fund which could be introduced in this country in the future.  It was there in the early 1960s.  So we should begin to think about that because it goes down to the grassroots in mobilising the people for development.

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, that view is very important but I believe in macro-economic policies which must be in line with the constitution.  Therefore, whether his proposal fits within the constitutional provisions, that one will be the role of Parliament to consider when they are sitting.  The role of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning in development is very important.  Like times when we sit and debate the budget here, I feel that we have saboteurs in the Ministry of Planning; because even the officers including some of the Ministers whom I had to tell, unless they want to sabotage NRM, some of the items cannot be excluded; because my belief is that when government has an ideology, that ideology is to be put in monetary and fiscal policies but the Ministry of Finance was trying to reflect this one budgetary terms.  

So, I am of the view that when Parliament is sitting next time, we must have Ministry of Finance staff and Ministers who must be able to work in the ideology of the government.  If the Minister is saying something, the President is saying another and the Secretary to Finance is saying another.  Which shall we take as Members and representatives of the people?  So this is very important. 

Now let me leave the issues of development and come to the candidature for the forthcoming elections.  Mr Chairman, there are some public officers wishing to stand in the forthcoming elections.  I welcome all of them because some of them have experiences in government and other sectors.  They are all welcome to share in the democracy.  But the CA experience has shown to us that because Parliament gave only leave, they misused that opportunity.  So I am of the view that any public officer wishing to stand should resign his position as a public officer; because I saw some people were coming with cheques for their organisations, they were coming with keys and therefore they incapacitated the organisations they were leaving.  

Therefore, I think if you are wishing to stand as a Member of Parliament, maybe you are a permanent secretary or any government officer, it will be advisable for you to resign so that the office is managed capably by somebody who is independent.  We do not want you to come and patronise the office when you are in your candidates meeting and using government facilities.

We have been talking about the fee for the candidates.  I think the issue of raising the amount for the President is genuine because the President can be supported by institutions and organisations but it may be difficult for Members of Parliament especially those coming from rural districts to be supported by organisations.  Therefore, it will be very difficult and it may be a way of restricting very vibrant but very poor candidates.  I have some students who have just finished from Makerere but I know they are very politically active and capable and they would like to stand.  But they may not have that money.  Therefore in support of them, I am of the view that the money must remain as it is.  It should not be increased.  

Other qualifications for the candidature; I share my view with the previous speaker that any Member who had served before should qualify because Mr Chairman, that is the wide conventional rule that when you have ever served in Parliament, you now qualify.  So if the conventional view, why can we not accept it in Uganda?   Mr Chairman, I think it is very important.  One must have been a resident as it was put in the CA for at least for some months.  I have seen some people now panicking to go and establish a hut within six or three months. But the rest of the time when they were educated by the peasants’ money, they were not in the village.  I think this is cheating theft of the highest order.  (Laughter)  You were educated by the peasants’ coffee; peasants’ tobacco and you run away and stayed in Geneva and so on for the rest of your time.  When you are about to retire today, now you say these are my people.  I think generally speaking, you should leave the electorate alone. 

It is unfortunate I am an economist, but we economists believe that when you have reached a certain age, your marginal productivity tends to reduce.  Therefore I think this is in line with the constitutional provision that when you are above 75, you should not stand.  I am also of the view that when you have been retired from government because of age, you should also help us not to stand because your marginal productivity is now low.  (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, let me now argue the issue of youth representation. I have been listening very carefully to the Members here speaking before me on this bill.  It appears our fathers and mothers are abandoning us because they were all along talking about women as if the youth case is not a special one.  I think I take this chance Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member now holding the Floor for giving way.  I want to inform him that it has been proved scientifically that wisdom grows with age and secondly that it is the youths who should be very productive.  Therefore, the youths should stay in the field producing while the old should come into Parliament and give wisdom.  (Laughter)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the youth currently holding the Floor that for a very long time, British Parliament has been known as the old Members’ Club and they are doing a good job.

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, I am grateful to have my lecturer and senior economist Dr Bachou who has just been here.  When we talk of production in economics, we also mean service and Parliamentary work is service and therefore, if the youths are very productive, they can be very productive also in Parliament. (Applause)  Therefore, the professor’s idea is very narrow.  When you take the social conditions in developing world, you do not compare it with the under developed world.  Therefore when you see the old men in Europe performing well you should not consider that with ours because our conditions are not as objective as theirs.  

Mr Chairman, let me go to the case for youth representation in our country.  As a youth representative, one’s role as you all know - you can stand to argue here but it is obligatory and necessary for you to meet with all the district youth councils, you must reach all the counties of the district, you must reach all the higher institutions of learning, you must reach all the secondary schools and you must reach their highest institutions of learning like Makerere, Mbarara, ITEK, Nakawa and so on to get the views of the youths who are in those institutions and you must have access to secondary schools to address them in their convenient places and it is very necessary that when the Minister or the President goes to those places, you must also have the courtesy of being with them so as to show that you are working as a team in government.  

Now Mr Chairman, let me give you a scientific analysis of the case in northern region.  We have over 100 secondary schools in northern region, we have over 50 counties in northern region and the population I represent is one 1000600 people as compared to 70,000 people which some of the Members are representing and therefore Mr Chairman, you find that the youth representatives are in very unique position and yet they have been given the same treatment and the same level.  I am not arguing that I should be given a helicopter like my Colleague Bigombe.  But I am saying my area is too large.  You can see I operate from Lake Albert up to Kenya and from Sudan to Karuma and how effective Am I?  If one has to ask it logically and generally, how effective Am I to reach all these districts?  I think I am cheating my representatives because the law put the area too large.

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that being a youth representative does not mean that you represent the youths.  It is that the representative must be a youth but in any constituency, a Member of Parliament represents everybody including the youths, the women and the men.  (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, since the Member is giving a scientific analysis, I want to give him a scientific technique of doing his work.  Since he represents a very huge area, he does not have to go to each every place.  He can have a sample of each community and the message will still reach.  (Laughter)

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, when I am speaking, I speak out of experience.  I was in Kangole Senior Secondary School and Moroto High School in Moroto District.  I went to Gulu and collected all the secondary schools and I talked to them.  I went to Lira and talked to the secondary schools in Lango College and I invited all the secondary school leaders in Muvara secondary school in Arua.  Now my experience is that when I talked these views, the students down there also still have the feeling that they want to see their youth representative because this representative whom I call may not put effectively what I put to them as I would put.  And also I have experience that when I went to some of the secondary schools, some of the students do not know their constituency Members of Parliament.  This is a fact.  Some of us are here, they do not reach secondary schools and, therefore, those young men and women are very enthusiastic to see their Member of Parliament because the constituency representatives, some of them even fear to reach the secondary schools because they have opponents who are aspiring to stand, maybe teachers and so on. Therefore for me who does not have an aspirations, I am free to go there but I am telling you I find it very difficult and therefore -(Interruption)

An HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.

MR TIVU:  Not accepted now.  (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like the hon. youth representative to clarify.  Many Members of this House have developed many of these secondary schools, holding fund raising, etc.  I have rarely seen any of these youths doing such activities.  Can he clarify why he thinks that the hon. Members do not go to these schools yet we are the ones who are developing them more than himself?

MR MARK TIVU:  Mr Chairman, the clarification answers him and when I started, I said, some of the Members.  I did not say all of them.  That is one and two, if you want to develop a school, you can involve me.  I have even gone to Kisoro, I have even gone to Bushenyi and the other day, I was in Bundibugyo.  Mr Chairman, because of this scientific analysis, the youths of northern region are proposing that to be effective, their representation should consist of the following: Karamoja region should be different.  We should have the central north which consists of Gulu and Kitgum, Apac and Lira and then we should have West Nile region consisting of Moyo, Nebbi and Arua so as to have effective representation in the constituency.

Mr Chairman, let now leave that issue of representation of the youths.  I now want to talk about rigging of elections.  People have been talking about rigging of elections here in favour of government.  But my experience and my own view is that it appears there are some people even in government who are rigging the elections against government.  Because this government did not take it keen enough to building - okay it did not take it on partition but I think it was for the good of the people of Uganda that we work on broadbasedness.  But I have discovered that as I mentioned earlier, we have saboteurs who deliberately delay government projects, who deliberately take corruption so as to tarnish the name of government so that when it comes to the time of elections, they say this is a corrupt government.  Therefore, when you are talking of rigging elections - you know rigging of elections does not start only during the campaigns or after the elections.  It is a long-term process. Therefore I am advising permanent secretaries to be on the watch because there are some people who are deliberately refusing to implement government projects so that the present government cannot be voted into power.

MR HARUNA IMAGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that there are some people in government, NRM Secretariat and even Front Benchers who go to other constituencies and tell people that their Members are doing nothing when there is a lot of development.  Are these people not sabotaging the government?  This is a very crucial issue.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR TIVU:  In fact this reminds me of a case a Member was reporting that the Central Government Representative in his constituency said all the Members of Parliament from that district are useless and therefore they must be voted out.  But I thought this RDC should know that government consists of implementers and executives and if NRM has made any achievements, the present Members are part and parcel of that development.  Therefore it is exclusively wrong for such kind of Members or government officers to go and talk on that kind of line.  I know you can have your supporters, but I think a government officer according to Standing Orders is supposed to be impartial and therefore, it is unlawful to behave in the office like that.  The youths also are of late becoming apprehensive with their attachment to the Ministry of Gender and Community Development and they are of the view that it may be a necessity to have a separate Ministry of Youth and Sports.  

Mr Chairman, why we are arguing this is, on many occasions, when we were brought together with our mothers, we found that the officers have more response to the mothers, to the children.  This is one. Two, we find that the youth activities have no budgetary provisions anywhere.  Even our chairman of the National Youth Council was to be incorporated to become the administrative secretary which is against the law we passed in this House and we feel that -

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE:  Point of information.

MR MARK TIVU:  Accepted from my mother. (Laughter)

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE:  The information I would like to give to my hon. Son over there is that depending on how mobilised the youths are and how organised they are in their areas through the positions they acquired like secretary for youths and the youth councils within the district, the districts budget for the youth programmes and activities depending on how organised and well working you are.  I want to tell you that Mbarara District, in its budgetary item has got the programmes for women, they are budgeted for, the youth are budgeted for and these are budgetary items which are there.  The money may not be much just as it is not much in all these programmes but our money is there and we are doing very well in our district.  I can challenge you those who are saying it is embezzled.  Mbarara is doing very well and it has to budget for all these marginalised groups and they are doing well.  So if the hon. Youth speaking can use those structures which are existing in the districts and you collaborate very properly with your mothers in those areas - because ours, we collaborate properly and we advise each other -you can get funds although they may not be sufficient like any other item.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please, wind up.

MR MARK TIVU:  To wind Mr Chairman, what the hon. Member is saying is theoretically true but practically when you go on the ground as Members have been murmuring up here, the chief administrative officers do not want to release this money.  But what I was saying was that the National Youth Council - because this is supposed to be the coordinating body of all youth councils including the NGO activities.  Therefore I am of the view that if the Ministry of Gender and Community Development thinks it does not have the capacity to handle the youth affairs, let it hand it to a separate Ministry.  Mr Chairman, we have a proverb in my language which says that if you want to look for trouble, you go to play about with the tastes of hungry lion.  (Laughter)  

What I am saying is, for the proper consistent and stable development of the country, the issues concerned with youths must be taken very seriously and consistently.  Otherwise any dissatisfaction from that large portion of the population can bring political instability.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, according to our rules of procedure, each Member is entitled to ten minutes of contribution and as you are aware, this debate has attracted almost each and everyone of us to contribute and I implore you to be precise.  Otherwise other Members will not have time to contribute.  If you stick on the Floor for 30 minutes.  So I am asking everybody to contribute within ten minutes.  Order.  

MRS BAHEMUKA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the motion.  Referring to the functions of the commission Mr Chairman, sub-section (f) says, the commission will hear and determine the election complaints arising before and during polling.  Here I am just wondering whether this will be effectively done as most of the polling stations are far away from Kampala where the commission is based.  And if these complaints are not attended to, then that will be a disadvantage to the person concerned.  So I draw the attention of the Minister to that point.  Sub-section (g) talks about civic education.  The last experience Mr Chairman is that the people who did know the vernacular languages used by the indigenous people were given that assignment and it was difficult for these people to follow very well.  In this regard, I am proposing that this work be given to the people who can speak the language of the people they are supposed to educate rather than depending on interpreters and using some simple words in English; not everybody knows English Mr Chairman.  Then we come to clause 15 sub-section 3.  It says, “The Commission may issue guidelines to observers and monitors and may impose operational restrictions.”  Here we are giving an option to the Commission to give guidelines.  In this case, we are likely to have people who will doing all sorts of funny things, therefore rigging the elections.  

I would propose the Minister makes it clear that it is imperative for the commission to give these guidelines to whoever is acting as an observer and as a monitor and to give restrictions to guide them so that we do not end up with people rigging the elections.  Then we come to clause 22 sub-section 3.  Again there is the word; the Commission may appoint a Foreign Service officer stationed at any Embassy of Uganda in any country to register or update the voters’ register.  I thought last time experience showed or at least there were some observations that if registration is to be done outside Uganda, nobody is very, very sure that whoever is registering or whoever is coming to ask for registration will be qualifying to vote in Uganda here.  Why do these people, maybe send their last voters cards to Uganda so that the work can be done here?  But as for proper voting, they should come to Uganda. The bill does not say anything where these people are going to vote from.  I do not know if they are going to vote by proxy but last time we discarded it Mr Chairman.  

We come to clause 26 sub-section one.  Again it says, “The Commission may design, print and issue voters cards to voters.”  How about if he does not print them?  Because you have given him the option.  In this case, we are likely to have fewer numbers of voting cards and yet many people have been encouraged to register for voting and in fact it is their constitutional right to vote.  Therefore, the word ‘may’ here should not apply.  Rather we should say, the Commission ‘shall’ design and print these voters cards because that is its work.  Then we come to clause 27 where somebody loses his voting card or damages it or destroys it.  The clause says the voter concerned shall notify the returning officer in writing.  

Mr Chairman, not everybody knows how to write especially if this person is right at the grassroots; writing to the returning officer, whom he does not know and whom he has never seen will be discouraging.  We shall end up having people not reporting and therefore we shall miss their votes.  I would suggest this person should report to the nearest officer.  He has a chairman RC 1, RC 2 and so on.  I will be easy for him to report to that person responsible and then that person in return reports to the returning officer for immediate action.  

We come to clause 36 - privacy while marking the voters cards.  Mr Chairman, experience of CA shows that even when somebody bent on to the desk to mark somebody could estimate and say that person has voted for candidate X.  I would propose that we have maybe a raised desk with some top on it and then we can mark without anybody looking at us and the distance from the first person on to the queue should be quite long so that nobody can see and estimate somebody’s vote.  Then we come to clause 40; the number of people signing the nomination paper.  There have been talk of a minimum of ten and somewhere it says where people are more than ten.  It would be better for the bill to state a definite number so that when the candidates go looking for people to nominate them, they get the exact number and the question of saying in case ten have signed or not, that is not clear to us because in that way, some candidates may be disqualified whereas it is the bill which has not made it clear.  Let us have a definite number of people.  

Then I come to the first schedule Mr Chairman; the election of women.  The bill suggests an electoral college.  The people proposed in this schedule are the people who were voted in power between 1992 and 1996.  Many people have graduated from teenage to adulthood.  So they are not a party to these people who are going to elect and therefore those people do not represent the interests of these people who have graduated.  And again the second point Mr Chairman, the people who were voted, in other words, there were some people who did not take the elections seriously and they did not vote.  Therefore the Electoral College does not represent their interests.  Of course we can say it is not their fault; and again, some of these members of the Electoral College have grown out of favour of many people because of so many reasons.  When we have a small district with a small number of people composing the Electoral College, it is easy to manipulate these people as it happened sometime before.  (Applause)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  During CA elections in Kalangala District, in one gombolola, they opened the box, they removed the votes and then they called the people who voted and said, so and so, do not vote.  That was in Goye Gombolola.  In Bujumba, they rejected some of the people who were supposed to vote to vote.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Whom did they stop?

AN HON. MEMBER:  The Electoral College.  I am not going to name but they were many.  They cut off the Electoral College for no good reason.  They said that those people were not elected properly yet it was the DA and the cadres who supervised the filling of those electoral colleges.  Thank you very Much Mr Chairman.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE:  Point of information.  The information I wish to give to the hon. Member rises from the argument she is putting forward about some people not being represented because they were young or some have changed their views by now.  I want to inform her that when she came to this House, she contested with a colleague who lost.  So those people who voted for that colleague from that district, she is here representing them.  Is she not therefore representing the interests of everybody who is there like I would be representing the interests of everybody in the district if I came through Electoral College?  I am informing her that she is representing everybody including those who never voted her and those who never voted at all.  Therefore, her argument does not hold any water Mr Chairman.  I thank you.

MRS BAHEMUKA:  I thank you Mr Chairman and I thank all those who have given their contributions.  However, as far as representation is concerned, definitely those people at least whom I represent have expressed the desire to be give the chance to exercise their constitutional right in choosing this woman. (Applause)  Mr Chairman, I am proposing and my people support universal adult suffrage for this woman.  That is their feeling. (Applause)  Mr Chairman, we come to clause 56 sub-section (a). It says, “within 48 hours before the polling day, returning officers…” –(Interruption)

MRS OKEE:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman and the Member for giving way.  I would like to give information to all the hon. Members here that in 1989, all of us who were here including men and women were elected by Electoral College.  As we are now maturing, let us say we go for universal adult suffrage.  (Applause)

MRS RHODA KALEMA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. informer of the Member holding the Floor that although it is correct that during 1989 all of us who are here came through electoral college, what happened, for the county Member of NRC who are here, the electoral college was wider than the electoral college of the women.  Now if the women were to be elected under adult suffrage, the district adult suffrage seems to be merely very, very difficult.  So that is what I wanted to inform her.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please hon. Member, do not turn it into an argument.  You wanted to give information.  Could you wind up hon. Mrs Bahemuka?

MRS BAHEMUKA:  Mr Chairman, on clause 56 sub-section (a), it says that the returning officers will receive voters likely to be enough.  Here the word likely is going to imply that some stations will get less number of voting cards.  Therefore we shall have the problem of people running about looking for the voting cards.  I am suggesting that each polling station gets the exact number of cards or more for the number of people who registered to avoid running about and people not voting on time or postponing the voting exercise.  I thank you Mr Chairman. 

MR KABUGO:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the bill.  But before I do so, permit me to make some observations on the bill.  Mr Chairman, when I go to Clause 23, sub-clause (i) and (ii), I find that duties of the Registrars and their Assistants are - page 21, sub-clause (i) District Registrar shall have charge and custody of a vote register and when you come down to sub-clause (ii), the voter’s register, shall be kept in such a form as may be prescribed by Commission, by Statutory Instrument. I wonder, does the Commissioner himself got powers to issue Statutory Instrument than the Minister himself.  I take that this is wrong, I think it should be the Minister to issue such Statutory instrument and Mr Chairman, on page 24, Clause 28, I find that Clause 2, it says, the Commission may with draw the voters card from any person who ceases to be a voter, I do not know under what circumstances, can somebody who has already been registered and confirmed as a voter of a specific area, can cease to be a voter and get his card with drawn.  I need some clarification from the Minister.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, if I could be allowed to inform the speaker now on the Floor, there are many ways within the shortest possible time when a voter could be disqualified.  First of all, he might cease to be a Ugandan citizen by choosing to be a citizen of another country; there are many other disqualifications which are in the Bill, which would catch.  So, it is very, very easy, for somebody who has been registered to be disqualified from being a voter.

MR KABUGO:  Thank you very much, for that information, Mr Chairman.  Permit me to take you back to Clause 19 where a person is qualified to register as a citizen.  He should be a citizen of Uganda of 18 years of age and originates, resides or works in a gainful employment in that area, but when it comes to the qualification of the candidate who wish to stand as a Member of Parliament, the issue of original residence is silence.  It follows that we might end by getting people from different areas coming to represent our respective constituencies as the case used during the political parties.  

Mr Chairman, during 1962 when the elections were being conducted through the Kabaka Yeka’s card, we got late Lameka Lubowa who comes from Namataba in Mukono to represent Luwero and we got the late hon. Elidadi Mulira, was sent to represent Katikamu. These people come from different places - Mulira came from Kooki, this place must be -(Interruption) 

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that the House, that the question of qualifications and disqualifications of Members of Parliament is a constitutional matter.  The Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs did not deem it appropriate to propose legislation that would appear to be amending the Constitution in this House, which powers we do not have; the Member may cease to labour the point any further I hope.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I think as a country develops, and as we become mature, we should cease looking at a situation where candidates sponsor voters.  Voters should sponsor candidates and if the voters in an area feel there will be effectively represented by somebody whom they know, there is no reason in the world why they should not even vote for him, if they think he can effectively represent them, even if he was not born there, or he does not stay, but if they think he can take their interests.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you for that information. Mr Chairman, when it comes to the deposits that is payable by aspiring candidates, I remember hon. George Kasajja here the other day, on Tuesday, he made a proposal, that since this very House had already accepted to review the deposits payable by candidates aspiring for Presidential elections from UShs 2 million to UShs 8 million, I do not see why there is a justification for ourselves to refuse to review this amount.  Mr Chairman, we need for a serious candidate to pay something tangible to the treasury, because, the treasury is going to incur a lot of money during this election.  So, in this case I am proposing to review this amount scrapping it from UShs 200,000 to UShs 500,000; I hope Mr Chairman, the Members will support my proposal. (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, when we come to the candidates meetings; it is a healthy arrangement for all members to go and meet and address the gathering at the same time; this has succeeded and proved very useful during the previous CA elections.  For these individual campaigns, there will not be any time left, especially when there is time limit, where the Returning officer of the District, nominates some people to -(Interruption) 

MR BAKKABULINDI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The information I wanted to give the hon. Member holding the Floor is that, in the constituency, we represent the people; we do not come here to show who is the richest in the constituency.  For instance, it would be unfair, Mr Chairman, if the hon. Member who is holding the Floor, who has spent some good years here, he goes back to the constituency and because he has given such a big amount, that means he will be the only person qualified to come back and he will deny the chance to others who do not have that money.

MR KABUGO:  Mr Chairman, I think the hon. Member who has just given information has misunderstood me.  If at all this very House was able to stand on its feet to increase the candidates fees from UShs 2 million, what is holding you to cough out half a million and this is justifiable and it is a sign indicating that you are a very serious candidate, let you pay UShs 500,000 non-refundable and go ahead to campaign and to stand, get candidates votes, rather than to go in for UShs 200,000.  By saying UShs 200,000 it does not necessarily follow that I am a rich person and if I am a rich person, I have derived my richness this very House, because, even as I stand now, I have not earned a single penny since the beginning of this year, my allowances are in arrears and this applies to every Member in this august body, but what we need is to be transparent and serious.

Mr Chairman, Clause 58 talks of closing time and opening time of the voting time; from 7.o’clock to 5.00 p.m.  This time limit will not be workable in my own constituency especially, we do not have roads and reaching the various polling stations may take these people delivering ballot boxes and ballot papers for more than two hours. In this case, I take it that the opening time, let it be at 7.00 a.m. and closing time, be increased by half an hour to 6.00 p.m.  This is a time when everybody will be in a position to vote and exercise his constitutional right; otherwise, if the Presiding Officers are strict and they say that the law says that from 7.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. definitely, you will find that quite a number of would-be voters are left out, because of the difficulty in reaching their respective voting place and in most cases, delay might have been caused by lack of transport and lack of - poor roads and it may be raining to say, expect people carrying ballot boxes from Nakaseke via Kyamutakasa to Kasaga, they will not be there, because they will get stuck and those people carrying ballot boxes from -(Interruption) 

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman if the practice and the laws that guided the CA are to go by, it was decided and I think this law is not different that polling stations shall be as near to the population as possible and therefore, where in an area which the hon. Member is talking about, I am sure that the electoral Commission will ensure that polling booths are stationed as near to the population as possible and also there is nothing in the law to prohibit voters starting early to the places where they are voting; they could start walking at 5.00 and 6.00 O’clock instead of waiting later on so that it becomes very dark.  I wish that this information could guide the hon. Member now holding the Floor. 

MR KABUGO: I thank the hon. Member’s contribution, but Mr Chairman, what I am saying is that the delay may not be as a result of the voters reaching the polling station, but these delays might be created or arising from the people who are assigned to deliver the ballot boxes and the ballot papers to the polling stations and these people may be delayed not through the fault of their own making, but because of the conditions of the roads.  In Nakaseke, I am telling you, we have areas where for the last 15 years, we have not had a Grader passing through those roads, whereas during the Kabaka’s Government these roads were using -(Laughter)- we used to have these roads maintained by the Provincial Road Inspector, a man who used to be known as a pillar and he was exclusively responsible for the repair of these roads which are now left to the district Councils.  The District Councils have no capacity to attend to these roads at the moment, because their resources are limited and very little and when it comes to page 46, Clause 59, sub-clause (v) (d), it touches somebody who has voted DP in his finger into an indelible ink, Mr Chairman, past experience with CA had shown that what they call indelible ink, it was just nothing, but either it was a little deep purple something to make sure that this is an indelible ink while somebody could go there, wash his fingers without even soap and come back with clean hands.  In fact, Mr Chairman, I take it that this time, this mistake will not be repeated and I take it, when this Commissioner procures what is called indelible, it must be indelible, not water.

Mr Chairman, -(Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member is raising a very serious point which I observed last time as having been one of the major flaws in the elections during the CA.  Early in the morning of that day of election, my helper at home went to vote, came back and washed his hands with soap before he could bring breakfast and he told me that I have finished voting, I said,come, I want to see your finger, he said, no, I just washed. I said, what do you mean?  He said, I just washed.  Did you use soap?  He said, I do not remember, but I just washed quickly and the ink was off, then, I found out that people had been going round voting in various place.  When I came to the Commission, I came to the Commission and asked why the ink was like that and I was informed that a certain friendly country had donated ink and they had a problem of refusing a free gift, which was in fact, useless.  If you are going to get any gift from friendly countries, for ink which is not ink, for elections, that gift should be rejected.

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Members of this House, that problem was identified during the last elections, steps have been taken this time, the Commission has collected samples of ink from different sources and these ones, this time they have been submitted to the Government Chemists who are analysing them and the Commission is bent on coming out with the best quality, it will not be a gift this time, it is going to be purchased by the tax payers money.  So, there is no more worry about that, Mr Chairman and dear Members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kabugo, could you wind up please?

MR KABUGO:  Thank you, I am trying to wind up.  Mr Chairman, coming to Clause 61 on page 48, the Bill says, a candidate may be present in person or through his or her representative at the Polling station.   During the last CA election, I had appointed my agents who were over 84 because, we had 84 polling stations; in some of these polling stations, some people were barred from coming anywhere near the Presiding officer’s table, because, they say, we can always handle whatever I wanted, there was no need for them to come very close and in this case, I lost some of these votes, because, some voters were misguided and voted for somebody else.  So, in this case, if I had no strong support in the constituency, I would have lost.

Mr Chairman, when it comes to Clause 67, it says, the Commission may make special provision for the taking of votes of patients in hospitals. This I feel concerned about the word ‘may’ because if the patient is already registered voter and wants to exercise his or her constitutional right to vote for the candidate, he or she wants, I think the word may should be dropped and substituted by ‘shall’, because, this is a must and a constitutional right to make sure that ballot boxes and ballot papers are taken even nearer to military barracks.  I say this because, I have a very big barracks in Kapeka where soldiers who are registered voters have to exercise their constitutional rights and if the Commission is left with this ‘may’ make special provision, we might loose a chance of getting votes from these institutions.  With that observation, Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.

MR OPIO GABRIEL  (Samia Bugwe County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to start by saying, I support the Bill.  However, there are some areas in the Bill which require Amendments.  We members of NRC are lucky because, just a few years ago, we sat here and passed a Bill which we had - a CA Statute and we also went and stood and saw what we had passed and how well or how badly we had made the Bill. With this knowledge, we must now make a Bill which is going to be very useful for these people who are going to stand. 

For instance, when you look at the Article which hon. Kabugo has been talking about, Article 67, which says, that patients in hospitals may be allowed to vote.  I differ with the hon. Member when he says that it is must.  We know that when you are a patient, you have come from a different registration centre and when you go to vote, you are asked a registration card and the officer there will have to cross check your registration card against your number of registration. How will it be possible for a patient who has come for instance, from Busia, referred to Mulago and we are saying that he or she must vote, how will the person or the polling officer in Mulago find out whether that person registered in that area and where will the votes be taken?  Will they be taken to Busia or will they be counted around Kampala Central?   

If we open that Pandora’s box where you can now say that you have carried the votes of people who are in a hospital in Mulago or in Nsyambya and that these people are from a certain area and that you are taking those votes there, it will be very difficult to cross check.  That is why I am saying, that if it is possible for the barracks, it is understandable, the officer should recognise where such barracks are and how a Polling station at that place but not to say that a patient who is in a certain place will be entitled as a must to vote; it will be very difficult to reconcile that one.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to support the clarification given by the hon. Member on the Floor, to the effect that, the provision in Clause 67 is very clear.  It says, the Commission may make special provision, which means, first of all, the Commission will examine the situation if he deems possible, then it can make arrangements, but if it deems it not possible, not necessary, especially on the advice of a doctor, a medical officer for that matter, then such arrangements cannot be made.  Therefore, it is not correct to say, it should be compulsory, because, the provision is very clear, it is situational.  

MR OPIO GABRIEL:  Mr Chairman, also when we look at Article 66, which says that, while a voter is by reason of blindness, illiteracy, and so forth, here, the Clause is describing voter disability.  I would like to remove illiteracy as a disability.  The reason why I am saying that, Mr Chairman, if you look at the 1991 Census, you find that the illiteracy level in this country was very low, for instance, Central region which is most literate, was 67.1, Eastern region 50 per cent, Western region 51 per cent, Northern region 43 per cent.  If you say that we say that a person who is illiterate is going to vote, he or she should be accompanied by somebody.  From a statistical point of view, it may be not possible in the Northern region where illiteracy is 43 per cent, you will find that you will not have somebody to accompany you who is illiterate.  When you go to Northern region and look at Kotido; Mr Chairman in Kotido district, according to the statistics, the illiteracy is 12.1 per cent, Moroto is 11.4 per cent, now, where will you get people to accompany these people to go and vote?  (Laughter) 

I am saying therefore this - speaking of illiteracy being a disability may not be very helpful practically.  I would like to say that there are two schools of thought, that either we allow the low, the average to solve problems where everybody who comes is given, except of course, blindness and others, but for illiteracy, someone is given a ballot paper, let him or her go and vote, that is one school of thought. A second one, would be that a table I, there should be the Returning officer and seated next to a returning officer, there should the candidates agent.  Since the person says that he is disabled because he cannot read, the secrecy element may not be very serious, we would therefore, another school of thought will say, let this person declare that he or she cannot read loudly and let her or him declare the candidate, so that they all know what is happening and he is assisted that way, that is one, a second school of thought, but to declare it a disability and therefore, have someone to accompany that person, is not going to be possible.  I am told that in certain places like Western region, people declare themselves illiterate because they wanted more money so as to vote.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  One way to avoid that kind of illiteracy crisis is the Commissioner to print a sample of voter’s card, list all the candidates who have been nominated in that area, have that card with the photographs displayed in advance, so that even illiterates know that NO. 1 is elect, No. 2 is Y, and it can be seen; because there is nothing secret about the names on a card which will be the same type of card or voter’s card at the end and the illiterates will have seen that and will understand it.

MR OPIO GABRIEL:  Mr Chairman, this point, we should not leave it, by the time we pass this Bill, we should have ironed out this problem, because, it caused a lot of problems during the last elections and passing it without taking serious consideration will not be helping us to have a free and fair election, Mr Chairman.  

MrChairman, another area which I feel we should have addressed and which I think the Minister should have addressed to, is the population quarter.  Mr Chairman, the Constitution is very clear on this one; it is says, that Parliament must decide on a number of constituencies.  Therefore, we cannot leave this responsibility to the Commission, it is a right which must exercise by the time we have a Bill passed, we must know the number of constituencies which we are going to have in this country for the next coming election.  (Applause) 

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Sir, I want to inform the hon. Member and the hon. House, that when I was presenting this Bill, I did say, and I repeat that although that matter is not the subject of our provision now in this Bill, Parliament will prescribe the number of constituencies by way of a resolution before elections start.  Mr Chairman, this was intended to allow the Commission to have time to consult, to find out what plans they have, as you all know, these people have just assumed duty, so that they come with a proposal which the Minister responsible, will have to bring to this House, by way of a resolution; so that Parliament will fulfill that obligation.  It is not abdication of responsibility as many members have been understanding it and I correctly see the attitude they take, because, they do not see a provision to that; although I had stated it, in my presentation notes.  I want to assure the House, Sir, that the Minister responsible will have to come back here and seek the approval of the number of constituencies by way of resolution by this hon. House and it may not be in the far future.

MR OPIO GABRIEL:  One of the major reasons which is holding people from starting what they should call consultation is this one.  Mr Chairman, we want to know how many constituencies we are going to have and we want to know, the boundaries for our constituencies; some of us would like to go and stand.  It is this Bill we are waiting for and it is a crucial one in this Bill; why leave this House after the Bill for electoral Bill when we do not know the number of constituencies?  One problem in this country is when we have problems, we tend to post pone them, hoping that time would help us to solve them; we must be very specific and make a number of constituencies before we pass this Bill. (Interruption)


MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member through you that, when the Belgians were making laws in the then Congo, they postponed problems; for instance, they put in the law, that if somebody does something wrong, he is caned in the street there and then and that was carried out.  When Zaire became independent under Patrick Lumumba, some of the Belgians who had passed the same law, faced justice by being caned in the streets.

MR OPIO GABRIEL:  Thank you very much, for the information. Mr Chairman, you can see the seriousness of this point.  Another point I would like to comment on, is the displaying of registers. Mr Chairman, one of the functions of the election Commission is to - are many but they forgot to include the displaying of registers. If you look at Article 10 (e), they do not talk about displaying of registers.  Even the President of this country after elections, he mentioned one of the flaws of our CA elections, failure to display registers and we would have expected when drafting this law, to include that as a function of the Electoral Commission, it was left out and Members, we must make sure that when we are passing this Bill, we include the displaying of registers as one of the major functions of the Electoral Commission; because, we know, if you read today’s newspapers, although we do not go along most of the time with what goes with the newspapers, you wonder whether some of our people in the Electoral Commission are serious.  How do you begin to give parcels of registrars to people who are politicians to take to their own constituencies?  

We sat here, Mr Chairman, and we passed an interim law which was help us to update and also to find some money to make sure that the Electoral Commission to do some work. At the moment when you go up country, even if you have been here, extending dates, they have not been very useful because, there were no people being paid, to make sure that this work is being done. I think this country now, without providing money, you do not expect RC to go on sitting from morning to evening to wait for people while they are not being paid.  So, these days have been extended Mr Chairman, they have not been helpful, because there was no machinery to make sure that work was being done. (Interruption)


AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Member is really contributing something very, very important. Mr Chairman, if I may recall what happened during the CA exercise, the Registers were not displayed in time, it was during that particular day when the voting was taking place, that even people could not identify some of their names.  What happened is that, they just got annoyed and some ended by not voting.  So, what the hon. Member is saying, I think is that we need these registers in time, cross check them, so that we can even the particular polling stations where it is going to be unlike what happened in some areas in the CA exercise. (Interruption)

MR KAVUMA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I thank you for the opportunity. I once again want to assure Members and in fact if Members had read the Bill and still remember all the Clauses, there is a requirement for the display of the voters register, there is even a minimum period fixed.  So, all these matters are being attended to.  As I said, there were mistakes, which were committed during the CA elections, that experience has been used greatly to improve on what has been proposed here.  So, I think as we get to those areas, you will see that there is even a minimum number of days, we did not fix maximum, but a minimum number of days within which registers must be displayed and at the polling station.  There is also a requirement in the law that all these polling stations are going to be published and gazetted well in advance, so that the voters know in advance where they are supposed to be going to cast their votes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, wind up.

MR OPIO GABRIEL:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Apart from those Clauses where this appears, it is very important the Electoral Commission has that as function; this is what I am appealing to the House.  The last point, as you said, I should wind up, is that one on the role of the agents.  In the deal, which we passed for the CA, we left the role of agent hanging.  Mr Chairman, this time, we must make sure that we include it in this Bill the exact role of an agent.  Agents were treated as if they were wrong people at the wrong place; they would be chased and there were this system of tying ropes to exclude everybody, the agents were also tied outside, so that they were there, not even knowing what was happening to watch their candidates.  

So, we must specify the role of the agents.  I would suggest that the first table where the Returning officer is going to sit, unless there are too many candidates sitting, we should have the agents there; so that they become part and parcel of the system and when it comes to the counting, the agents not to be locked out, we must specify here, that the agent shall be in the room where the counting will take place and they will have to make sure that they are seeing what is happening.  Then, the agents will have the strength to know that they are protecting the interests of their candidates.  Otherwise, it was as if there were people unwanted, who must stand very far and then see what is happening from a distance.  Mr Chairman, with these few words, I would like to say I support the Bill.

MR SSERUNJOGI  (Kawempe Division, Kampala): Mr Chairman, thank you for having given me this chance to contribute.  MrChairman, I will begin by reminding Members of this very House, through you Mr Chairman, that we are here today, tomorrow, we shall be in the streets as ordinary citizens.  So, we have to act laws, which have to take the interests of Ugandans irrespective of where they are.  Once you pay into practice bad laws, we shall be cursed in future.  I will give an example, Mr Chairman.  

We were asked last fortnight, that whoever is contesting the Presidency, should declare his assets, but I want to remind the House and the country at large, that Leadership Code was debated here in 1992 and because the Government never thought that this Parliament will have the wisdom to include Members of the Cabinet to declare the assets, this law has never been put into us.  As we are going away this very year, from this very House, we are now asking our friends who are likely to come in, that they should declare, why did we act a law which we are not able to practice before we leave this Parliament.

Mr Chairman, I was here, in this very House in 1980 and we were tortured a lot here, but the people who went to the bush, think that they did a lot.  Of course, they did, but we, the people who were here, we also contributed to the bush war. So, we should as well be respected as Ugandans who actually participated in bush fighting.  So, our contribution should not be taken lightly. 

I go now to the actual Bill.  Mr Chairman, it is very absurd that right as we speak, Ugandans who are likely to stand do not know the constituencies; although the Minister has stood here again and again and given us assurance, that he is coming to another Bill, we have only five months left to the Polling day or the formation of the new Government, and it has taken the Government three months to bring this Bill here, I do not see the reason why they are still holding on with the constituencies.  We have rumours, various -(interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of information.  Thank you very much.  If you look at Article 11 on page 15, subject to Article 53 of the Constitution, Uganda shall be divided into constituencies for the purposes of election of Members of Parliament and each constituency shall be represented by one Member of Parliament.  If you read through up to Clause 4, you already see that for example, in Clause 2, when marketing constituencies for the purposes of sub-section 1 of this section, the Commission shall ensure that each county has approved by Parliament, has at least one Member of Parliament, except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county.  You already know which counties we have, you can go on, subject to Sub-section 2 of this section, the boundary of each constituency shall be such that, the number of inhabitants in the constituency is, as near as possible equal to the population quarter.  We already know what the quarter is?  Yes, the quarter was passed here, we did, 70,000 is the quarter. 

Mr Chairman, if you read this properly and you relate it to the past league we have passed here, you will know what the number of constituencies are in this country. 

DR MAGEZI: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that he should stick to his guns, because 63 (i) of the Constitution, clearly states that this august House will decide on the number of constituencies, not by reading the provision in the proposed Statute and that this population quarter only comes after we have decided on the number of constituencies; the population which comes first - it is the number of constituencies decided by Parliament, then we get population quarter by dividing the population of Uganda  by the number of constituencies and I do intend to move an Amendment to Article 11 creating 250 constituencies in Uganda next week.

MR SSERUNJOGI:  I want to thank hon. Prof. Kabwegyere for his information, but I would like to inform him that, the latter was also in CA and he was in CA, I was not there; the Constitution was made by him, by both of them but they are both now, fighting within the House.  At the same time, the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, should come up with a proper statement today, giving us exactly if he is coming up with the figure of the constituencies, he should bring that Motion before we finish this statement, so that we tackle the problems together.

Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  According to the hon. Member, what he is discussing is very important, because, we are all aware of the newspaper report about speculations about such news constituencies; especially in Kampala district.  I think we need to clear all these newspaper report, they have been made, the hon. Minister, I think is aware, he is keeping quiet and yet intending candidates want to be clear and be assured of what constituencies will be where.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I really see no argument in what the Members are talking about.  The Constitution simply says, Parliament will decide on the number of constituencies provided that at least no county will go without a representative.  So, it seems what Parliament has to decide is whether they are some counties which will require more than one constituency and that is all, Mr Chairman.  So, I do not see why we are wasting much time on this thing.

MR SSERUNJOGI:  Mr Chairman, I now go to Clause 18, voters’ register.  You know very well, those who have been in politics, those who have participated in voting and registration of voters, rigging starts from the very day of registration., very many people have not been able to register, because forms are not available at the registration centres.  We hear that you have to the DC or the City Council to register and it is very absurd that very many of our people who have not been able to register have already been replaced by foreigners who come direct to the City Council and register and it is very difficult for us to refuse these people from voting.  I want to ask the Minister, has he ever been able to go to the Electoral Commission and find out whether all registration centres are really operating normally, because we have -(Interruption) 

MR SIBO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  With respect to registration, I think the Minister must come up and tell us exactly what is happening. We are told that registration stopped yesterday and that there is no more registration, we are also told that cards for some who have been registered will be delivered at the time of inspection of registers. 

Now, Mr Chairman, we are now enacting a law on the election including registration.  How will you consider this registration having been completed before we enact the law?  The registration has got to be done under the provision of this law and there is no way you can conclude registration until the law at least, has been enacted.  So, the Minister must come up and tell us whether registration -(Applause)

MR MAYENGO:  Point of clarification Mr Chairman. While the Minister will be explaining that, probably he could also assist us to know exactly the meaning of Clause 18 sub-clause (i) in the Bill we are discussing, because, it says, the Commission shall compile, maintain and up date on a continuing basis - on a continuing basis, it is that phrase that I would like the Minister to tell us, where the continuation ends or what is the continuing basis.  (Laughter)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of clarification.  May be if the Minister is going to explain, what happened about registration, could he also explain why, although registration stopped yesterday, the extension was only being done at the District Headquarters for the whole district; because, people in the remote areas of the district could not and it was not possible for them to be able to walk to the District Headquarters.  In other words, the extension did not mean much to them.  What is he planning to do to those people who are not registered, just because of the distance?

MR KAVUMA:  I thank you very much, Sir and I thank hon. Members who have shown a lot of interest in this exercise.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I want by way of information to remind the hon. Members and this country, that the exercise of updating the voters’ register has been going on for over a year.  The exercise is based on a law we passed here in this Assembly in the name of the Interim Electoral Commission Statute where we specifically authorised the then CA Commission to up date the voters registers that had been compiled in anticipation of the CA elections.  We did find official time on which Government spent money and I have had an occasion to inform this House, we spent over 1.6/= billion on the up dating the voters register in the time we had prescribed first, but because of demand and request from the public, Government in its wisdom that it could leave the exercise to continue administratively, first, because there were no funds, but we felt members who wanted to avail themselves the opportunity of getting the register, would be afforded that opportunity.  So, first instruction was that anybody can go to the district Headquarters, that was later relapsed and we said, now our very well known established channel of leadership through the RCs, can assist those who want to get on the voters register and can collect these forms and can take them to their places of abode. That exercise continued until by law, the Minister responsible had to appoint a day which again, is part of the Statute we passed here, on which the update exercise would end and they are very good reasons for this.

This is information from the field, it has come, it has to be treated by the Commission, it has to be put on computer, it has eventually to go on the voters register, there must be time to display these registers so that the public can find out mistakes if they are any committed.  So, if we do not have an end to this exercise, we may find ourselves that we are going into a crisis, because, we have a time frame, within which we must work and complete all matters pertaining to elections. So, I only want to emphasise that this has been an additional effort on behalf of Government to afford as much opportunity as possible to all people who are eligible to register to get on the voters register.  It has been a very long duration of time and really anybody serious and interested in complying with the law and exercising his right, should not be heard to complain, because, in our view, we are satisfied that every thing possible and reasonable was done in this respect.

Mr Chairman, where does - I think I have actually answered, where does the - where is the basis, there, I have informed the Members.  Mr Chairman, it is anticipated that even after this election and may be, before another permanent law is passed, the Commission would have an occasion to keep up dating on a continuing basis the voters register.  Why?  Because, many people are getting of age, others are still abroad, they may come back and they want to get into the register.  Members should remember that apart from general elections, there are other areas requiring voting, things, like a referendum or referenda.  So, all that is intended, is to make sure that nobody is denied of his constitutional right to be on the voters register and this exercise has been done with utmost good faith and I just want to appeal hon. Members as leaders, to explain the position and our people should be able to understand that we are targeting a specific time fixed by the Constitution.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you wind up hon. Sserunjogi.

MR SSERUNJOGI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank the Minister for his information, but before I leave this point, I would also like to mention that everybody who saw the headline of New Vision today became perturbed.  It appears that possibly the Electoral Commission had not got sufficient funds to enable its officers to transport or to take all these forms up country.  It is clear now that forms were being collected by individuals from the Electoral Commission offices and it is now clear that some forms are still in circulation even if the day of the last day of registration was yesterday, because, how do you determine that all the forms are back, when they are being taken, by possibly intending candidates in future.  

So, we want transparency, not here, but in all Government institutions and organisations.  The voters’ role is supposed to be exhibited in all voting areas but I doubt, because, during the last CA elections, most of the areas in Kampala here, never saw those roles and voters had to travel up and down, because they could not know where to go, others could go to point A, and they tell you to go to point C and in the end, others never voted, because they lacked information as to where their names were. So, I am urging the Minister, through you, Mr Chairman, that this time, the rolls should be exhibited for a number of days and possibly information passed on to us, so that we advise our people to go and check their names.  Before I leave, I would like also to urge the Minister, if he can give us at least another two weeks for the registration to end, because, many are still needing to register. 

My third point is on Clause 37 special groups. UPDF was given 10, I am suggesting 5, NOTU was given 2, I am suggesting 5, youth was given 5, I am suggesting 4.   The reasons are; UPDF the number of army officials or personnel was reduced, therefore, there is no need to maintain figure 10, because the number of officers and personnel in the Army has been reduced.

NOTU, we are encouraging people to come and register here; we are encouraging people who would come and invest here.  A lot of industrialists are coming.  More factories are being opened, more firms are being opened.  So, in few years, we shall have more workers than we have today.  So, the number of their representatives should be increased from 2 to 5 so that their dues are brought up here sufficiently well.  The youths, the same thing.  Youths, they were given five.  I would like them to give them four because as the number of Youths reduce, because who ever goes beyond the age of 30 is automatically an adult.  Therefore, the ratio is coming down.  So, I am imagining that they should be given four.  

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member whether the Ugandans have stopped from producing.  Because when you make a statement that Youths ceases to be Youths when they reach 30, I wonder whether people have stopped producing or whether we are saying people should not continue producing.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR TIVU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that much as a Youth personality is advancing in age, the Youth problem and the crisis as phenomena will remain and, therefore, it will deserve representation.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, just for purpose of statistics, 48.5 per cent of the population is below the age of 19.  67.2 per cent of the population is below the age of 25; 51.1 of the population is women.  Therefore, the Youth in actual fact at the age 25 is more than 67 per cent of a total population of this country.  Therefore, you cannot come up and say, that the Youths are fewer because when they go beyond 30, then they become adults.  In fact we have got a higher dependence ratio than any other country in Eastern Africa.  

MR SSERUNJOGI:  Mr Chairman, in view of the information received in this very House, I withdraw that last statement. Mr Chairman, Article 40, 2 - I would suggest that whoever is intending to stand should only deposit a fee of UShs 50,000.  The reason is, you know very well that as we stand here we have not been paid our allowances for four months.  That means Government does not have the money.  If the Government does not have money so is an individual.  So, it is a clear indication that since the Government does not have money and is the highest employer, therefore the inhabitants of Uganda do not have money.  Therefore, I am suggesting that only UShs 50,000 should be a fee paid by the intending candidate.

Women Representatives, that point was made clear that they should be voted for directly by all individuals in Uganda.  

Mr Chairman, campaigning.  That is Article 52.  I am suggesting that there should not be any beauty contest again because when we stand in a line like this, you are more-or-less in a beauty contest.  Someone may not be able to give you a vote because you are ugly, short.  So, we need everybody to go on his own and solicit votes.  This is a very primitive way of soliciting votes.  I want the Minister to tell me any two countries in the world where this system has worked successfully.  Failure to that we should allow Members to go directly to the people, solicit votes without standing in a line as though we are competing for the prize. I am intending to move an amendment deleting the entire section and replace it that someone should be able to go directly to the people and solicit for votes instead of standing in a line.  

Mr Chairman, I have a very important section which I would like to mention before I close.  That is 65, 1.  Where two voters appear under the same name.  I want to quote that.  ‘Where a person represents himself to be a particular voter and applies for a ballot paper after another person has voted in the name of that person.  The second person shall only be entitled to receive a ballot paper and to vote after taking the oath of identity.’  Mr Chairman, what time do we have?  We are only given two days to vote.  Someone has one day; someone has come and voted in my name, and you ask me the proper person in my name that I should go and take oath before I come.  We have information right now available that very many people have been imported to this country to come and vote.  They may have registered in our names.  

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to repeat, because this is the second time, this allegation of registration of foreigners without giving substance to his claim?  Can he substantiate?

MR SSERUNJOGI: Mr Chairman, a Government Paper came out with information a few days ago; that was The New Vision.  Up to now Government has not come up with a statement to deny the allegation.  That is my stand.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to insinuate that Government operates or a Paper when actually the Paper was quoting the DP Youth of what they said rather than the Government making the statement of its own.  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Member is quoting the Government Paper’s Report.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it is true what hon. Manzi said, is that the Paper was reporting a story carried in the meeting.  Normally what Papers do, they are not the bible truth, but whatever they do they try independently to carry informative and they are always trying to be in person and true to the source of their information.  In this case, let the particular paper, be it a Government Paper, though that is parastatal normally tries to -(Interruption)- and in this case the Government is not the Author.  The DP is the author of the particular information.

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I can sympathise with the hon. Member holding the Floor on the allegation which he gives quite bit of weight.  Not long ago, during the C.A elections, an old man in the Constituency of hon. Abu Mayanja, was told he could not vote because he was a foreigner.  He countered and said that if he could not vote, neither should the Third Deputy Prime Minister, then Abu Mayanja, because he was a grandson of a Murundi person.  Mr Chairman, it has also been alleged just equally that one Haji Sserunjogi of Kawempe is really not Sserunjogi, but Serudonyi, a kinyarwanda name.  Mr Chairman, it is common knowledge that there are about a million Banyarwanda in Uganda.  But there are probably and knowingly there are more that who go under different names.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OKWERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, when I saw the Article about the importation of one million voters from outside Uganda, and they are in barracks, the source of the information did not originate from Government Paper, which is the New Vision.  As hon. Ongora Atwai has stated, Mr Chairman, this was the statement from the Uganda Youth Democrats.  The Paper tried to hasten where are these one million people.  They said, there were in the barracks.  Can a barracks be enough to accommodate one million people?  They could not answer.  So, I am saying that story was false.  So, all I am trying to inform my Brother is that you cannot hold New Vision responsible for that kind of statement which was given to them by somebody else.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, based on this information from various hon. Members, could hon. Sserunjogi substantiate this allegation or else he is taken as a source of the information.

MR SSERUNJOGI: Mr Chairman, I would imagine that when a Paper reveals such information, the reporter makes the report.  It goes to editor for checking before being published.  Once the publisher is satisfied that he has got enough information for substantiation, then he publishes.  It is not in my interest now to tell the House where the information from.  

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to avoid the question put by the Chair that he should substantiate or withdraw?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Sserunjogi, either you substantiate or you withdraw the allegation.

MR SSERUNJOGI:  Mr Chairman, I withdraw.  Mr Chairman, with these few remarks, I end my speech.  Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  With that we come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Tuesday next week, starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.03 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 February at 2.30 p.m.)




