Thursday, 15th February, 2001 

Parliament met at 2.53p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS REGISTRATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Muruli Mukasa): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Non-Governmental Organisations Registration (amendment) Bill, 2000, be read a First Time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the appropriate Committee for consideration to report within two weeks from today.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LAW REVISION (FINES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Law Revision (Fines in Criminal Matters) Bill, 2000, be read a First Time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the appropriate Committee of this House for consideration and to report within two weeks from now.

Now, I want to clear up this matter – I understand yesterday there was a debate under Rule 42 of our Rules of Procedure. Apparently the matter was affecting the hon. Member representing the Workers. It appears because the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is directly responsible for the subject, he was not here; the debate was adjourned to today. But what is not clear to me is whether the debate will proceed on the motion as it was presented yesterday. Because, apparently following the debate of yesterday, Members did not have the right information to competently and adequately debate the motion. It would appear the proper question should have been to the Minister to tell the circumstances. Then, having known the circumstances, that is when the decision would have been made, whether to proceed with the debate or not. Therefore, I do not whether we get a statement immediately or there is an amendment in the debate. 

But there is one thing I want to say. Many issues were considered yesterday, but principally it affected hon. Lyomoki. And from the debate, it was apparent that there are criminal proceedings that are intended, may be, against the hon. Member. Now, when you debate this matter, is it to help the Member, or is it going prejudice him? Is the debate going to conclude that, “No, no proceedings should be taken?”  

Suppose the hon. Member affected volunteers a statement or participates in the debate, do you not realise that it may eventually prejudice him although what is said here cannot be used against him, but whatever he says here may help those investigating against him to screw the investigation? 

So, these are the matters that you have to consider when you are handling this matter – is it helping, is it prejudicial?  But anyway, you are free to proceed as you want. But since this matter was raised by hon. Pinto, I think before the Minister makes a statement, I would like him to clear my mind to know the trend of the debate.

MR.PINTO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am very grateful for your guidance. Indeed the Order Paper indicates the motion. On advice, it would be proper for me to ask a question in order to be enlightened by the Government on the circumstances. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I beg your leave so that I ask this question and also effect the order on the Order Paper. If this is accepted, I shall proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Accepted!

MR.PINTO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to ask a question to Government to explain hon. Dr. Lyomoki’s arrest, which has caused anxiety among hon. Members and the general public. Hon. Lyomoki was reported to have been arrested by security agents during the course of his duties. It was reported he was roughed up, handed to Police and later produced in Court where no charges were brought against him. Subsequently, he was released.  

This act seemingly deprived the hon. Member’s rights, privileges and immunities as an hon. Member of Parliament. It is alleged that hon. Lyomoki was arrested near Uganda Club, a registered property of the Parliament of Uganda, therefore, a precinct of Parliament.

Under the Constitution, Article 29(d), it is clear that, “Every person shall have the right to freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition”. Could the Government explain to the House the circumstances leading to hon. Lyomoki’s arrest and release without charges being brought against him? 

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr. Muruli Mukasa): Mr. Speaker, the circumstances regarding the arrest and subsequent release of hon. Lyomoki stand as follows:

On Tuesday, 13th February at about 9.00a.m. hon. Lyomoki was arrested by the Police in front of the main gate of Nakasero Presidential Lodge. Hon. Lyomoki had gone there with the intention to pitch camp there in order to make the President aware of the Workers’ grievances. 

On arrival there, the officers of the Presidential Protection Unit asked hon. Lyomoki to leave the front of the gate and if he wanted to make the President aware of the worker's grievances he should seek a formal appointment to meet the President and therefore present the grievances. Hon. Lyomoki refused to heed to this advice and he chose to pinch a camp there. 

Hon. Lyomoki had in his possession a tent, a camp mattress, and he was at that time dressed informally and did not cut the pose of an hon. Member. The act of pinching camp in front of the main gate to the lodge was construed by the PPU as a clear threat to the security of the lodge and of course the President. The President Protection Unit therefore - (Interruption)

MS.BABIHUGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. In accordance to our Rules of Procedure, it is only when hon. Members of Parliament are in this Chamber that a dress code is prescribed. Is it in order for the hon. Minister in charge of security, who is not even dressed according to our Rules of Procedure, to say hon. Lyomoki was causally dressed and did not even look like an hon. Member of Parliament whereas he does not say the rule that prescribes how an hon. Member of Parliament should look like outside this Chamber? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well this point of order is not easy for me because this is a personal assessment of a situation. Your personal assessment maybe different from his and this is his personal assessment. It is outside the House but on looking at a Member outside that is how he assessed the situation.  He may be wrong but I cannot rule him out of order because this is a personal assessment, and I do not have facts to make my personal assessment as the Chair.

MR.MURULI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. In view of the circumstances, the Presidential Protection Unit called in the Police who effected the arrest. Hon. Lyomoki was taken to the Central Police Station and his file was prepared. The file was then sent to the director of public prosecution for advice. The Director of Public Prosecutions is yet to give his advice to the Police on the way forward. Hon. Lyomoki was on the same day released on Police bond.  

I would like to say that hon. Lyomoki was not roughed up when he was being arrested and he was actually arrested outside the precincts of the House of Parliament. If we go by the definition of the precincts of the House of Parliament as given on page four of the Rules of Procedure for the Parliament of Uganda, which were passed by this House. I beg your indulgence to quote from the Rules of Procedure, "Precincts of the House or Parliament means the Chamber, the Lobbies, the Galleries and the grounds of Parliament House and such other places as the Speaker may from time to time specify". 

The areas generally referred to as Uganda Club is now fully being utilised by the Presidential Protection Unit and it is not ordinarily free to Parliamentarians and Parliament. These are the circumstances regarding the arrest and subsequent release of our colleague, hon. Sam Lyomoki. Thank you.

MR.PINTO: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for giving us this information. We now know the circumstances fully well.  But may I seek from him some clarification. First, as regards the definitions on precincts. We know historically and legally that Uganda Club is registered as a property of the Parliament of Uganda, we know that it is being used by organs of the state. But that does not remove the legality and ownership. Could the Minister throw some light on that matter? 

The other is the remark he made about cutting the image of a Member of Parliament and since it is subjective, one would wonder whether the Minister standing there has dressed to cut the image of the Member of Parliament.  That is subjective. But let me ask the fundamental question regarding Article 29 (d) of the Constitution. It reads: "Every person shall have the right to freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition". What would the Minister say the avenues available for the hon. Member who is representing workers to demonstrate and put the case forward? Was this inappropriate? Was he out of order? Was he not operating under the provisions of the Constitution? Could the Minister please clarify?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you see what you are raising are possible defences for hon. Member of Parliament when he is charged. Do you want to exploit these defences before the charges are - you see, you are weakening the defences. By posing all these defences now, you may be arming the investigating Department to nullify all these things and this is not in the interest of the hon. Member. That is my view but it is subject to your decision. Please do not prejudice the hon. Member about his defences by prematurely presenting them even before the charges are brought out. But you are free to proceed.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker I am guided and I shall not insist on my questions being answered but maybe the item of cutting the image could be answered by the Minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Ongom.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Yesterday when this matter was being debated, another incident of unwarranted arrests was also debated and it was expected that the Minister was also to make a statement on that. A whole family was arrested one night apparently for campaigning for one of the presidential candidates. After being harassed and beaten they were released and not charged; and it is not known that they are going to be taken to court. We expected the Minister to also enlighten the House as to the circumstances, which led to the arrest and release of the members of this family. Is the Minister likely to give us insight into this incident?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you in position to answer this question also?

MR.MURULI: Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to hon. Pinto for heeding to your advice. However, when I referred to the pose or the poise of the hon. Member of Parliament before the lodge, I was referring to the impression which the officers of the PPU made of the hon. Member of Parliament. It was the same impression among others, which forced them to call in the Police so that the hon. Member could be – so that was the whole thing.

DR.LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank you hon. Minister for giving way so that I can be able to give this information. I do not know whether it is pertinent for me to clarify the circumstances -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are not obliged but it is up to you. As I have told you, you do not have to make your defences here, because first of all, this is not a court of law. Secondly, this House can not pass a motion to tell the DPP not to charge hon. Lyomoki. So it is your freedom to keep to yourself what you know so that eventually when it is necessary for you to defend yourself, you do it at an appropriate forum rather than this Parliament which is not a court of law.

DR.LYOMOKI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I will therefore clarify on some issues and not into the details. The hon. Minister has said that the impression by the officer in charge was that I was dressed in a manner that I could not be recognised as a Member of Parliament. But the truth of the matter is that the officer whom the hon. Minister has referred to called me by name immediately he saw me. He said hon. Dr. Sam Lyomoki, MP for Workers. So that already proves that the officer was aware that I was a Member of Parliament.  

The second point I wanted to raise here is that, - okay thank you very much. I have been advised not to proceed.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But your speech is protected anyway.

MR.MURULI MUKASA: Mr. Speaker, the other concern raised by hon. Ongom regarding the arrest and subsequent release of Hajji Ramadhani Muwonge, these are the facts or circumstances as we know them in the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  

Hajji. Ramadhani Muwonge with his son Silaje Kulumba and their visitor by the name of Kamu were abducted or arrested from his residence on the 12th February 2001 at 2.00a.m. in Nakinyogozi zone Luwafu, Makindye division.  They were taken by men dressed in civilian clothes with over-coats similar to those of the army.  

Hajji. Ramadhani is the vice-chairman of Dr. Besigye’s task force in the area and it had been reported that he was involved in intimidating supporters of other candidates. These people were taken to Mbuya and the people who took them reported to the officers there that they had arrested thugs. The officers put them in, but they omitted to carry out one important item, that is, of asking the captors the identity even making a record of their identity before they could let them go. There were non-commissioned officers at the gate and it was at night. 

After the authorities had received reports, it was found that more investigation had to be carried out. Subsequently, Hajji. Ramadhani, his son and the visitor were released and investigations were ordered. The Police are currently carrying out investigations to try and establish who these captors were. However, the people who were on duty that morning have been already arrested by the military for negligence of this very important duty. All I can say now is that Police and other security agencies are working hard to find out who these captors were and once they are found out, then appropriate measures will be taken against them.  Thank you.

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Obviously the Minister’s statement leaves a lot to be desired. The first thing that one would ask to be clarified on is, why did these people who had army overcoats – assuming that they were civilians – why did they take these people to the military establishment? Is this a standing instruction that anybody who harasses or commits an offence related to this election campaign should be taken to military barracks? Why did they go there straight away with their victims?  

Secondly, is the Minister really telling us the truth about the identity of these people? Is it the practice in the military barracks, and of the army of the reputation of UPDF, that anybody can march with prisoners in your barracks and you just let them go scot-free without knowing who they are? Is that a standard practice? I think the Minister should do a little bit better than that; it is a cover up and I think he should do a bit better than that. He is insulting our intelligence.  

A lot of violence has taken place and is still taking place during these campaigns. Apparently, it is around two candidates mainly apparently who are two major contending candidates. It would appear this kind of reaction to an incident like this is admission that Government is behind this and it is condoning these kind of activities. Can the Minister assure us that the Government is not behind this violence?  

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, from my observation, when the Minister was explaining, I thought he was a bit constrained and in pain to try to answer the questions because I do not think he finds the situation comfortable. I could see this visibly and I think in the interest and for the image of our Government, the matter causes him and all of us concern. It is because of the circumstances in which this particular case or others related to it. 

If it is correct that it is our in interest to keep a good image, to keep law and order, and to maintain the guarantee of freedoms and liberties; could the Minister tell this House what steps the Government is going to take to ensure that this is not repeated? Could he widely publicise caution to all elements, be they village or district LDUs, Police or the army that the public feels there is excess use of power?  

There is this fear and I call upon the Minister, since I saw the visibly uncomfortable position in being Minister of security, to assure us of that security. That is the kind of thing I would like to hear from him. I am not going to question whether he is telling the truth or not but that he finds out more and gets to the root of this problem.

MR.BAMWANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I have listened to hon. Muruli Mukasa the Minister in charge of security and I am really concerned that one of these days, he will find himself in a Police station mistakenly for not cutting the image of the Minister in charge of Security. This is not the first time the Police and the Army have been misusing their power.  

I remember one time, Justice Tininyondi was arrested along Kampala Road near Uganda House on the grounds that he did not cut the image of a judge because he was walking even when he had his own escort. However, I imagine that hon. Lyomoki representing workers, must have started his early campaigns for parliamentary elections when he went to camp at State lodge. But surely everybody who cared would have known that this is a Member of Parliament representing workers and therefore the questions of mishandling him by mistake should not have arisen.  

Uganda now is at cross roads especially when we are going for the presidential elections because we have got everything to lose as incumbents if we can actually allow this political violence to go on unabated. It is only a few days ago that we were told that an army driver rammed into the supporters of Kiiza Besigye. It is only the other day that we heard that some army men were being arrested.  You know we are arming our opponents, we are campaigning for them. It is in the interest of us who support Museveni to make sure that we do not make any mistake.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are not here for your opponent or for your candidate. This is a question concerning the nation. As I told you last time, please, do not use this House as a campaigning platform for your candidate. So if you are asking a question, ask it on the matter before us, and that is Hajji. Muwonge. But for campaigning, you go outside and campaign.

MR.BAMWANGA: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry, I was just giving an example.  But I am saying that one of these days, I do not want to be mistaken for not cutting the image of a Member of Parliament. I want an assurance from hon. Muruli Mukasa that tomorrow, I will not be mistaken for not cutting the image of a Member of Parliament, and he himself could end up in a military barracks for not cutting the image of a Minister of Security. What assurance are you going to give us so that Security Officers do not mishandle civilians and journalists?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, hon. Members, this is not really the main question; it was incidental. The matter was of hon. Lyomoki and then something cropped up; I think the Minister should and answer and we proceed. I understand you debated this matter yesterday. 

MR.PAJOBO: Thank you Mr. Speaker for allowing me to enquire from the hon. Minister. First of all, we very well know that hon. Lyomoki camped there because there were issues and matters affecting the workers. We have been handling these matters through other means, but the Government has been adamant to hear our cry; and indeed the workers in this country are ready –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are concerned about one incident where hon. Lyomoki was involved; that is the arrest at the State Lodge. Right now we are concerned about his arrest. Whether he had a cause or he had no cause, that is a different matter

MR.PAJOBO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your advice, but still I think we are not given a chance of trying – I am not talking about the arrest of hon. Lyomoki only, but now I am trying to say what about the issues raised? I think it may cause more arrests than that one of hon. Lyomoki. That is what I wanted to say; thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, what was the question and what was the clarification?

MRS.ZZIWA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to bring out one small issue. During this period of campaigns, there are many – I do not want to call them atrocities – but some kind of problems, which are occurring to various people. I call upon the security agencies, the Police specifically, to be more vigilant. I can quote one case, which could even not have been reported in the newspapers, which occurred in Kiswa parish in Nakawa Division. 

A lady who works in the market went to get some posters – I think for candidate Museveni – and she came back excited. She said, ‘oh, at least I have got some posters’. Then another one who was pouring some tea in a cup to serve some customers felt agitated and said, ‘take away your Museveni’ and poured the boiling tea on the one with Museveni’s posters burning her chest. The case was taken to Police but the Police told them to settle it out of court. The woman who was burnt said she needed some money for first aid and she was only given Shs.5,000! 

There are many cases of intimidation and wife battering and so many other things. So, I request the hon. Minister for more vigilance in handling these cases. They should be taken as serious offences and not just casual cases and they should be handled and due regard given. That is my point of concern. 

MR.MURULI MUKASA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Members for the concern they have exhibited with regard to this phenomenon. I affirm that what I am saying here in this august House is the truth as we know it in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. There is nothing to hide, there is nothing under hand, and there is nothing below the table.  This is in line with our age-old practice of open methods of work.  

What happened to the Hajji. is not an act of Government nor does Government condone it at all! If there were any condoning at all, then the soldiers who neglected that cardinal duty would not have been arrested. They are now under arrest and investigations are going on to find out exactly who did this terrible act of abducting this Hajji. It is not in the interest of Government to condone this act, not at all!  

Well, the question as to why these people were taken to the military barracks, may be a pointer to what type of captors these people could have been. They could have been civilians but we are just speculating. The moment citizens get somebody and hand him over to the Police, the Army, or somebody of authority, they think they have done their job. So, it is not that now it is an established practice that anybody arrested must go or be taken to the military barracks.  

I am not insulting the intelligence of the hon. Members.  I would not be the first person to do so, and I am not going to be, and I am not going to be the last. So, I am not. I respect the hon. Members; I know they are the cream of this country and I know if I insult their intelligence I will be insulting myself as well, and I do not want to insult myself that way. 

The Government and the Ministry of Internal Affairs are concerned about this violence and they have not left it to go on unabated. They have taken steps and elaborate plans have been laid down to contain it. If nothing had been done, probably the level of violence would have been higher than what it is today. Given the kind of circumstances and available facilitation, I think the Police have done a good job to contain this kind of violence. It is unfortunate that it has not been eradicated completely. 

Since the campaigns began up to about 5th February this year, 101 cases of violence have been reported to the Police. There are, of course, many others, which have not been reported. Others have just been mentioned by candidates and their agents in the press or at the campaign rallies but those reported so far are 101 and they are being investigated. Some have been investigated; the Police are actually handling them. There are cases of some of these people who have already been committed to court by the Police. Others are still under investigation, others have been found to be mere alarmist stories. So, the Police is already committed to making sure that there is no violence and they are following up any report that is given to it to follow up to its logical conclusion. 

I appeal to the aggrieved people to report immediately to the Police so that these grievances can be followed up. And maybe the people concerned should also exercise some restraint and control over some of the zealous supporters who may be in their various camps. 

I may have appeared to be under constraint and pain to hon. Pinto. I was not pained because there was something to hide; I was pained that such a thing could have happened. I do not want it to happen at all and I do not think any hon. Member would want this kind of thing to happen. I think hon. Pinto read my facial barometer very well. I do not want it to happen. That is why the Police must be pressurised to make sure nothing of this kind ever happens.  

Yes, hon. Margaret Zziwa, definitely vigilance is required. As I have said, an operational order has been drawn up to effectively address this problem of election violence between now and polling day and maybe several weeks after polling day. We shall do our best, I promise.  Thank you, hon. Speaker.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I would like you to look at the hon. Members, particularly hon. Kayonde in “kapere,” hon. Wamulongo in kitenge and the Minister in that attire and determine whether their dress is proper for this House, considering that we take great efforts to appear decent in Parliament. Are they in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this is an issue that should be determined as soon as possible. I have looked at the Minister in charge of Security, I do not know - well, it could be “kapere”. I do not know whether he could put on a necktie but I see he cannot. And I do not know whether it is a dress of a certain country or not. I think the sooner this matter is resolved, the better but I appeal to hon. Members to look at others and dress as they dress and that problem will be addressed.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (LANDS) (Mr. Baguma Isoke): Mr. Speaker, I thank you. Yesterday, while I was answering an oral question put to me by the hon. Member for Lubaga South, I left one question unanswered and that question became property of Parliament. I promised Parliament that within 24 hours I would come back and give an appropriate response. That question was, ‘Who is the owner of the property being developed in the Kitante Golf Course area as a hotel?’ I have since searched the land register and I have established that the registered owner is a company known as Golf Course Holdings Limited of Post Office Box 22774, Kampala. Since the land register is a public record accessible to everybody, I have no hesitation to table here that record for avoidance of doubt. 

On the Order Paper, I am supposed to make a statement and that statement has got two elements, that is, the first element – (Interruption)

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, when you are registering a limited liability company in the registry of lands, you are also supposed to take a photo copy of the company limited to indicate who the shareholders are. This is the legal practice. I am wondering whether the Minister, in photo copying that copy, left out that part which would show not only the name of the limited liability company but also the shareholders. This is part of the completeness. So, would the Minister be kind enough to ensure that for completeness of the information he has given to Parliament, he should photo copy that part, which is also in the registry, to indicate who the shareholders of the company are. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the document you have laid before us include the shareholders? Maybe it could be there.  

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, the land register, which is operated under the Registration of Titles Act of 1922, does not require for the details of a company to be exposed in the land register. That detail can be obtained in another law, not the one I administer as a Minister of Lands.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, in other words, you are saying that –(Interruption)

MR.OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Minister, may I inform you that as of today if you are going to register a limited liability company in the Ministry of Lands, you take the Certificate of Title together with the last page indicating who the shareholders are. This is the standard practice within your Ministry and I am informing you.  Thank you.

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: What I am informed by the senior lawyer yonder only applies in another law, which I administer, the Trustees Incorporation Act of 1964. That is the one, which requires that the trustees’ names being incorporated and their physical addresses should be registered. But, under the RTA the person being registered is the company. The company comes with a certificate of registration from the registrar of companies, the registrar of titles so registers on the title.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I do not see any problem because they have told us the name of the company. A search can be made with the registrar of companies for details.

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The second element concerns the law this Parliament passed last November, in particular, the Land amendment Act 2001.  That law has since been gazetted in the Uganda Gazette on 9th February 2001. I invite Members of this House to give the widest publicity to the content of this amendment Act all over the country so that the very many land disputes which have been disturbing the countryside and developers can be handled by the judicial institutions. These are the LC and Magistrates courts in accordance with the Act passed by the Parliament. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How about the regulations, which were passed at the same time?

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: The regulations for the implementation of certain sections of the Land Act were also passed by this Parliament in November last year. The First Parliamentary Counsel and the Legal draftsmen in Parliament are handling the text. I have not followed it strictly, but I am of the opinion that a draft statutory instrument is about to be signed by the Minister responsible for Lands. Thank you.

MR.LWANGA: Mr. Speaker, since the Minister has come in with an amendment to the Lands Act, is it possible at the same time to try and make corrections to the original Act because there were mistakes done. There are things we passed here and what they printed was different. For example, we said in this House and passed that if somebody wants to get a transfer of land to freehold he could only transfer 100 acres. But when the Land Act printed, it was completed differently. I have discussed this with the Minister many times and he never came up with a clear answer to that.

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, hon. Lwanga is raising a very serious matter and alleging a very serious inaction, omission or commission by those who drafted the text of the Act after the Bill had been passed by this House.  Time is coming when a comprehensive amendment to the Land Act is going to be handled by this House. In November last year I explained that we had come up with the amendment to section 98 of the Act to take care of the cases which were lodged in the Magistrates courts and could not be disposed off in the time frame given. It was a matter demanding urgent attention of the House. A comprehensive amendment will be coming before our term expires, but I do not promise that there was any such error that is going to be attended to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the hon. Member’s observation was not about the amendment. The Member was saying that the law was not correctly printed.  You do not have to amend if we passed it and I think I am a witness. We passed that for one to get a freehold, he should not exceed 100 acres. That does not necessitate an amendment, it necessitates a correction and this is always done. So, what has to be done is to look in the Hansard and see what we passed, see the omissions and then there is a corrigendum in the gazette and then matters are corrected. That omission does not require an amendment. When you talk about an amendment it means we are accepting the amendment or not. He is talking about something which was already passed over which we have no power unless we have made a change. He is saying the text does not reflect what was passed.

MR.BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Speaker, your advice seems to be putting a rest to this issue. But it is more serious than that because earlier in the year another Member of Parliament made a similar allegation that the text does not reflect what this House had passed. As the Minister administering the Act, I cannot speak to the correctness or otherwise of the text. Our voices are recorded on tape and transcribed and the draftsmen merge what is passed with what is in the text of the Bill. And before the President assents to the Bill, the Clerk of Parliament has got to write a certificate indicating that the text conforms to the amendments and the text of the Bill.  This is the work of the Clerk to Parliament, and the draftsmen.

MR.PINTO: I am rising on a point of procedure, Mr. Speaker. I think you have correctly guided that the statement by the hon. Member on the text does not match with what we passed. The Minister has said the problem is more serious because another Member said a similar thing. What he is telling us is what it should be normally, unless he disputes what the hon. Member has said and what another one said. I only want to hear from the hon. Minister that he is going to check and consult with the hon. Member for that specific item so that if there are errors, they are corrected. But the procedure as to what the Clerk does, when the President does what, these are standard processes. I do not think this is what you wanted, Mr. Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think what we do is this. Definitely, there are errors in the printed Act and omissions were made. For instance, you have passed the regulations of changing leasehold to freehold, and without collecting that, anybody is free. Therefore, it is necessary before even talking about amendment, that is a different subject. Maybe what we can do is to sit with the people, say the chairman of the Committee which spearheaded the Bill, - because now you are responsible for this law. They are telling you that there are omissions. So, you take it upon yourself to ensure that you get the assistance of the other parties involved so that corrections are made and then gazetted in the Uganda gazette and this will effect the errors that are in the Act.

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank you for the guidance. I just want to express my surprise that we have Article 119, but the Minister does not utilise it.  I thank you.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

MR.LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala): Mr. Speaker, I beg to make a personal explanation. I would like to express concern over the inhuman way I was recently treated by the CID officers before being dragged to the Chief Magistrate’s Court on Buganda Road on charges of inciting violence in Lubaga South.  

I would like to specifically draw your attention to Bukedde Newspaper, a Government Newspaper, of 13th February 2001 (Interruption).  

MR.KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to talk about a matter that is before court?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We should not talk about matters before a court and when this case starts, the procedure will be evidence on your case because the prosecution will call evidence on how you were arrested. So, it is part and parcel. I think hon. Omara Atubo will agree with me that this is what is going to happen. What is going to happen when your trial starts? Assume it starts, the case is not withdrawn, that will be evidence on your case.  So, it is part of the evidence that is going to come in court.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I know that the matter is subjudice. But on matters related to personal liberty, even if you are charged and sentenced, you are entitled to food as a human being. I am talking about the torture that was inflicted upon me as an individual. 

With reference to that Newspaper, Vol. 7, No. 142, on the front page, the picture shows one Police prosecutor, Moses Sakira openly, forcibly, and cruelly dragging me to court. The said officer wanted me to go to court without my lawyer. I insisted that I needed the company of my lawyer in court. 

I wish to report that I was tortured by the Police officer as the picture I mentioned can openly demonstrate. I would like to lay on the Table an extract of the page, which shows the torture physically.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, the problem is that you are making a statement which is controversial and the rules do not allow you to make to do so. You allege that you were tortured, and somebody will say, ‘no, he was not’. It is becoming controversial contrary to our rules. If you want to make a personal statement, it should not be controversial. Now, what do we do? 

If your rights were violated, you have a right to redress.  You can go to court, you can go to Human Rights Commission and present your grievances and you will be compensated. You see? But it should not be controversial; once it is controversial, you read the relevant rule, please. 

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Most obliged, Mr. Speaker. It is on record that I have not been feeling well in recent months. I have been receiving medical treatment from Mulago and you are aware about that because I documented that. Much as that is so, I recently struggled to go to Nairobi to attend the UNEP 21st Session of the Governing Council in my capacity as Vice President of Globe International in the company of the Minister in Charge of the Environment, Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo. We were representing our country. 

I returned to Uganda on 11th February 2001, and on the following day, I addressed a press conference at Fairway Hotel on the outcome of the UNEP Summit.  

The CID detectives led by one Victor Aisu interrupted the press conference and forced me to end it prematurely. They sent me a note, informing me that I had been arrested on site and that I had to go to the CID headquarters there and then. The picture, which I have shown you here, shows me trying to resist being dragged to court before speaking to my lawyer. It was a violation of human rights of the highest order, to be denied to talk to my lawyer. 

Finally, one should not be presumed guilty until one has been proved so.

MR.BAITERA MAITEKI: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much.  As you rightly pointed out, the photograph is subject to interpretation. Is it in order, therefore, for the hon. Member to say that the picture demonstrates how he was being dragged when to me it was like he was posing, putting his hands in the pocket, like this, posing to a Police officer? That is my interpretation. I could be wrong, but I am saying is it in order for him to say he was being harassed, when actually he was posing before a Police officer?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but you see, it could even be interpreted as that the hon. Member was fixing himself on ground so that he cannot be moved. So, that was resistance. But anyway, finish your statement.

MR.LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, I was telling hon. Members that one should not be presumed to be guilty until one has been proved so. I am concerned about the harassment, which was mounted on me as a Member of Parliament, let alone, the people’s representative. If an MP could be treated like that, how about people below the rank of an MP? What form of treatment would be mounted on them?   Today I am in the dock; tomorrow is your turn. 

As a legislator, I wish to warn the CID officers who harassed me that what they did is not only a violation of human liberty, but it also negates Chapter 4 of the Constitution of Uganda. Article 20(1) states; and I want to quote it verbatim. “Fundamental human rights and freedoms of individuals are inherent and are not granted by the State”.

Article 24 adds - and I want to quote it verbatim -“No person shall be subjected to any form of torture – and I repeat - torture, cruel inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” I therefore need an apology from the CID for tarnishing my name, let alone rendering me to look like a criminal without justification. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, this statement does not invite any comment and that is the end of it. Under what rule, we have received it.

MR.KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I think it is important for us to get one clarification from our Brother, especially that he is being accused in courts for using machetes, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Under what rule?

MR.KARUHANGA: Under elucidation. If you are allowed to make a statement, you make a point of elucidation. But if the hon. Member is using machetes to cut people and then, he is asking for human rights, how can we get – (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he has been advised to take the matter to court. 

Hon. Members, I have been advised that there is a seminar, a sort of meeting with some guest speaker at this time. Maybe this is a convenient time to adjourn the House until Tuesday, 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 4.10p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20th February 2001 at 2.00p.m.)



