
Tuesday, 16th February, 1993
The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

P R A Y E R S

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to Order.


BILLS
FIRST READING

The National Drug Policy and Authority Bill, 1993.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH (Mr. M. Katureebe):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that a Bill Entitled, ‘The National Drug Policy and Authority Bill, 1993’, be read a First Time.  I beg to move Sir.

The National Medical Stores Bill, 1993.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH (Mr. M. Katureebe):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I beg to move that a Bill entitled: The National Medical Stores Bill, 1993, be read a First Time.


MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION
SEEKING TO GUARANTEE LOANS TO KINYARA SUGAR WORKS

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa):  Mr. Chairman, Sir, as hon. Members will remember, they have already guaranteed 30.2 million dollars to be lent to Kinyara Project.  This was because the donors lent money to that tune, directly to the Uganda government and, therefore, as the law requires, NRC had to guarantee directly the balance of the money, which is equivalent to 21.8 million dollars. Therefore, the law requires the Minister of Finance to guarantee this loan, but the Minister cannot do so without the circulated Resolution.  This is the purpose of this Resolution; to complete the funding to Kinyara.  

Kinyara Sugar Works Ltd. was approved on 6th January, 1992, and it has since then received foreign funding to the tune of 53.1 million dollars.  In December last year, the Government, who is to meet the balance on this project, released the first batch of its counterpart fund of 500 million shillings to enable the project to start, and it has started.  

The operational facts, briefly, are that there is 430 hectares of seed cane that was planted in 1989, and this is sufficient to meet commercial planting for the project.  1,000 hectares of commercial cane will be planted this year and 2,500 hectares will be planted in 1994/95.  By 1996, approximately 7,600 hectares is expected to be planted.  Cane crushing will commence in November or December 1994, with the production of 6,000 tons of sugar.  By the year 1996, sugar production is expected to be 37,000 tons, and by the year 2,000 it will be 60,000 tons, with the help of the out-growers.  Provided that Kakira and Lugazi meet their installed targeted sugar production of 75,000 and 60,000 tons respectively, then Uganda will be self-sufficient in sugar by the year 1996/97 with Kakira producing 37,000 tons.  That means we should be able to export 42,000 tons of sugar, since the projected sugar consumption in Uganda will be 130,000 tons of sugar in 1996, and as I have already informed Members - Uganda is a member of the Sugar Protocol of the ACP in the European Community and currently, it has an allocation of 5,000 tons, which we cannot supply at guaranteed prices because of our low capacity for production.  

Therefore, this Resolution is intended to give the Minister authority to sign the guarantee for the top up funds, which have been mobilised.  Briefly, and in passing, before I came here, I had some Colleagues who wanted to know whether Kinyara would be sold after this money has been mobilised.  

I have informed them that because of their demand to know, government has decided to put the matter of divestiture under the Prime Minister and also to expand the membership of the committee responsible for preparing - not now - the White Paper they were asking for, but to prepare the Bill which will be debated, and which includes all matters regarding divestiture. However, for the moment, this money is being mobilised to sell Kakira.  This money is intended for the purpose you have already been informed about, and for which you have directly guaranteed 80 per cent of the money.  I thank you very much. (Applause) 

MR. ADYEBO G.K. (Kwania County, Apac):  Mr. Chairman, and hon. Members of the House, it is quite some time since Members of the Council received official information about the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Programme.  It is, therefore, in order for me to ask you to allow me give Members information on the progress of the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Programme up to 31st December, 1992, so that during the deliberations concerning this issue, Members will react accordingly.  

A decision was made by the Cabinet Minute No. 72 of 1991, on 6th March, to undertake a new policy initiative towards reducing government equity holding considerably, in a number of Public enterprises through divestiture, either in full or partially, and through the promotion and development of the private sector.  The decision on the policies on Action Plan and on Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture was taken following the recognition by Government that the Public Sector in general was not performing well, and as a result, was causing considerable financial drain and administrative burden to the government.  Prior to the formulation and adoption of the policies in the Action Plan of the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture, a number of studies were conducted through consultancies founded under the Public Enterprises Project.  These studies included the Divestiture Design Study, whose objectives inter alia were, first, to update the government with the options regarding the instrument and nobilities that might apply to expedite the divestiture.  Secondly, to determine the capacity, interest and needs of the existing private and public Commercial Banks, Financial Intermediaries and local businessmen, who would participate in the various processes and outcomes inherent in a successful divestiture programme.  Thirdly, to determine the requirement and source of funding that would be necessary for the divestiture programme and thirdly, define the range of possible instruments to utilise in Uganda, in view of the legal, economic and financial situation in the country, in order to undertake this programme.  

The recommendations arising from these studies were discussed and approved by both the Policy Review Working Group Committee of Permanent Secretaries; all Permanent Secretaries are members of this group, which we are calling Policy Review Working Group. What did they come up with?  They came up with the following conclusions:
    
There exists good opportunities for carrying out a successful privatisation programme in Uganda.  
That the Government should come out with a clear Policy Statement on privatisation and Public Enterprises Reform in 	general. 
That the major objectives for carrying out privatisation in Uganda will include the following;  
    i. Revitalising the private sector;
    ii. Relieving Government from a big financial and administrative burden;
    iii. Raising revenue through selling of assets, and encouraging domestic savings through mobilisation of resources, which would otherwise be kept out of the Banking Sector;
    iv. That substantial budget drain continues to flow into the Public Enterprises sector; and
    v. That there is scope for improving the management and efficiency of the Public Enterprises and substantial scope for improved supply response from the Public Enterprises sector, if rehabilitation programmes such as that in Kinyara are carried out and other forms of assistance are given to improve the management, technical efficiency and very low capacity utilisation. 

Cabinet then took policy decisions on this Enterprises Reform Programme.  Accordingly, on March 6th, 1991, Cabinet decided that 16 Public Enterprises were to remain fully owned by Government, and I think hon. Members were given copies of this.  Cabinet decided that 24 Public Enterprises should be retained under majority shareholdings, 10 Public enterprises under minority shareholding, 46 Public Enterprises to be completely privatized, and 17 Public Enterprises were supposed to be rounded up as they were no longer performing.  The names of the Public Enterprises I am talking about are appearing here in the Annex and I think you were given copies.  

The names of the Public Enterprises that fall under the five classes I am mentioning are attached herewith, and for convenience maybe I should read to you.  Class 1, that is the 16 Public enterprises which were to remain as fully owned by Government included:  Land Development Corporation, that is the Starch factory, and two National Enterprises Corporation with its subsidiaries.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to bring a discussion to the House a matter that is not contained on this Order Paper?  It is out of order. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is quite in order.  Proceed please, order.

MR. ADYEBO:  Mr. Chairman, I was giving information to the Members and I was just reading the list of the 16 Public Enterprises that were recommended to be fully owned by the Government.  These are the National Enterprises Corporation with its subsidiaries, National Insurance Corporation, National Water and Sewerage Corporation, The New Vision, Nile Hotel, Trans-Ocean Uganda Ltd, Uganda Air Cargo, Uganda Development Corporation, Uganda Development Bank, Uganda Electricity Board, Uganda National Parks, Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation, Uganda Prisons Industries Ltd., Uganda Railways Corporation and lastly, Uganda Tourist Development Corporation.  They are 16.  

In category 11; were those 24 Public Enterprises to be retained under minorities’ shareholding, they are the following: African Textiles Mill Ltd. at Mbale, Coffee Marketing Board, East African Steel Corporation, Foods and Beverages, Kampala International Hotel Ltd., Kilembe Mines, Lint Marketing Board, National Housing and Construction Corporation, Nile Breweries, Nytil, Peoples’ Transport, Produce Marketing Board, Soroti Meat Packers Ltd., Tororo Industrial Chemical and Fertilisers, Uganda Airlines Corporation, Uganda Cement Industry at Hima and in Tororo, Uganda Commercial Bank, Uganda Diary Corporation, Uganda Grain Milling Company together with Uganda Millers; Uganda, Libyan, Arab Holding, Uganda Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Uganda Spinning Mills Ltd., Lira, UGMA, and Kinyara Sugar Works.  

The 10 Public Enterprises to be under minority shareholdings, are Agip Uganda Ltd., BAT Uganda Ltd., Lake Katwe Salt Project, shell Uganda Ltd., Sugar Corporations, Total Uganda Ltd., and Uganda Fisheries Enterprises Ltd.  The large category (d), which includes 46 enterprises, to be completely privatized, are a bit many. I do not know whether, I should read all of them, but I think, I will give you information in detail because there is a Bill to this effect coming.  Yes, it is only because of delays that we could not present it earlier, and because of recent; you know we have been very committed; all of you have been very committed handling this and other issues.  

The classification list included those Public Enterprises that had been expropriated in 1972, and fall under the jurisdiction of the Departed Asian Properties Custodian Board.  These Public Enterprises are to be divested under the Expropriated Properties’ Act of 1982.  The Public Enterprises are included in the attached Appendix, but I will send copies of this together with the Bill in a very short time from now.  From the cabinet classification list, these Public Enterprises include, all those that appear in Appendix III attached, which I will send to you also.  The Divestiture Implementing Committee (DIC) may, however, divest only government shareholding in Public Enterprises under the Departed Asians Property Custodian Board and to recover any Government Investment in such Enterprises, prior to repossession.  Following the cabinet classification, and at the time of negotiation for the New World Bank Enterprise Department Project, the Government agreed with the World Bank on an Action Plan for Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture.  This is a five-year plan intended to facilitate the implementation of the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Programme.  According to this plan, the Government was to divest 38 Public Enterprises, rehabilitate and restructure 12 Public Enterprises, and liquidate 20 Public Enterprises within the first five years starting with this Fiscal Year, 1992/93.  The list of the Public Enterprises under the respective Actions are also attached and I will send you in due course the list.  It can be observed that the list includes Public Enterprises that fall under the Departed Asians Property Custodian Board because this agreement was a general undertaking of the Government to divest, liquidate and rehabilitate enterprises in the Public Sector.  The Divestiture Implementing Committee is concentrating on those Public Enterprises that fall under Big ‘S’ as in Appendix III.  

This is a very long report.  It is about 10 pages, and I do not think we shall have enough time for me to go through them page by page, but I would like to summarise that, following the recommendations of the World Bank, the Cabinet decided to handle the Divestiture process through a Bill entitled, ‘The Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Bill, 1992’, and in this Bill, which is about to come to you, there has been a lot of consideration. For example, Members of the Council were not happy about the manner in which the divestiture programme was taking course -(Applause)-, as a result cabinet had to review the complaint made by the Members.  Consequently, the numbers of the DIC members were raised from three to over five members of the Cabinet.  Also, the Cabinet considered and recommended that representatives from the House, and more so the Chairman of the Committee on Economy, be included in the brainstorming group, because the programme is in line with the struggle to restructure the economy.  Cabinet, therefore, recommended that the Chairman of the NRC Committee on Economy, should be among the members of the working group, the Policy Committee Working Group, and this is being incorporated in the Bill.  Had it not been because of disruption, this Bill would have been passed here because there is nothing, which prevents Government from tabling this Bill for endorsement.  We believe that the Legislature is part of Government and it is just in order for them to give a blessing to this Bill.  Otherwise, I would plead to hon. Members that while this Bill is being considered, because tomorrow also it would be on its way here, while this Bill is being awaited, we would like other actions to be taken.  For example, we would like Kinyara to take a new shape as quickly as possible.  Everything has been done, now we are expecting Kinyara to give about 2,000 vacancies for employment of Ugandans, and the sooner we move with the decision, the better, and, therefore, the Deputy Minister of Finance and Economic Planning came in time with the Resolution, which Resolution I am asking you to endorse too.  With these few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I promise that this Bill will be coming and I also plead to the Members to endorse the Resolution accordingly.  Thank you very much.   

DR. BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.   I would like very sincerely, to thank the Deputy Minister for Finance and Economic Planning, for having come up with this Resolution in this House today.  In fact, we have been agitating for this Resolution since we went for recess.  The main reason is that without this Resolution, lending agencies to Kinyara cannot carry out certain obligations.  At this stage, I would like to inform Members of the House that we were honoured sometime in November last year, When His Excellency the President visited Kinyara National Sugar Works Factory.  That visit gave us a lot of morale in Masindi.  The expectations of the workers and the people of Masindi, were set very high, and His Excellency the President promised that by the end of this year, everything would be done by Government to make sure that Kinyara is fully rehabilitated.  It is, therefore, in line with that promise by His Excellency the President that I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for having come up with this Resolution.  

The road to the rehabilitation of Kinyara has been a very long and painstaking one.  Arrangements to rehabilitate Kinyara started in 1987, soon after the National Resistance Movement had assumed power during that period, Government and the people of Masindi and Hoima were in constant dialogue with each other and also with some of these institutions, to fund Kinyara.  Mr. Chairman, a list of about II well-wishers, all of them financial institutions outside this country, volunteered to support this project, and for all these, I would like again to thank the Government for having painstakingly taken time to discuss with them bilaterally and also multilaterally in some cases, and also the institutions, for having accepted to fund this very important national asset and project.  

Already, there have been delays in the rehabilitation of Kinyara, and these delays have been due to the lengthy negotiations that have to take place.  Hon. Members are aware that in most of these projects that we are talking about, the inception, negotiation and the implementation phases take very long, and we are aware, we in Masindi and Hoima, that Government has painstakingly taken time to negotiate with these organisations, and we appreciate that very much.  

A lot of costs have already been incurred as the Deputy Minister said, and already, some stages of rehabilitation have started.  The seed plant and the cane have already been planted on more than 400 hectares. Another over 500 acres are now being prepared for planting.  We feel that any delay in the passing of this resolution will directly affect the pace of rehabilitation, and if I am not wrong, some of the funding agencies might pull out.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, -(laughter)- this is not being almost - most of these agencies deal with each other.  They have got what we call cross over effects; negotiations with others, for example, if the Islamic Development Bank or BADEA were to pull out, two or three other institutions would also pull out.  So, this is very critical for us in Bunyoro; it is a crucial project. (Laughter).  

As I speak now, the costs to this nation, if this project were to stall or to stop, the costs would be more than the cost of continuation.  We have reached a stage where we cannot go backwards.  If I can continue with my presentation, the hon. Members know very well that this is very crucial for us. (Laughter)  

As all hon. Members know, the benefits of this institution to the people in the area of Masindi and Hoima, goes unmentioned. We expect that once rehabilitated, more than 2,000 new jobs will be created in this area.  In an area where the job market is very depressed, I am talking about casual labour, but of course that does not exclude other high personnel jobs, which will draw workers from the rest of Uganda.  I am talking about the infrastructure that will benefit our people such as schools and dispensaries once this project begins, and also, those who will be involved in the out-growers scheme, and of course in the light industries in the periphery of the project area, such as the jaggery mills.  All these infrastructures will be of benefit to the people of Uganda directly and of course, we should not lose sight of the fact that we shall have sugar by the end of 1994.  This sugar will be consumed by the people of Uganda, and as the Deputy Minister has said, we shall have surplus for export.  

It is, therefore, in that spirit, that I asked hon. Members of this House to realise the value of this project. (Laughter)  I kindly request you to support this project. Otherwise, not giving support to this project is tantamount to sentencing the people of Bunyoro to continued poverty, which you know we are trying to fight.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

DR. MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality East, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion.  The most serious observation about our Sugar Policy is the fact that, it is not properly coordinated, and much as Uganda Government is seeking authority from us to guarantee this loan, the truth of the matter is that the ordinary person cannot afford the price of sugar today.  I would, therefore, request the powers that are, to look into the costing of sugar.  

Secondly, it is evident that manufacturers of sugar are also importers of sugar.  To date Kakira is importing about 2,000 metric tonnes of sugar and yet information given to us by the hon. Deputy Minister is that Kakira should by now be producing enough sugar.  Now, why are they even being given money to import sugar when they have been rehabilitated by more than 90 million dollars?

DR. LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, straight away that, Kakira has not imported sugar in this country, and I would challenge him if he can show proof that Kakira has imported any sugar.  This House has always been told lies, especially by Members who come from -(Interruption)

MR. APILA:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Member to insinuate that we are here to debate lies?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No that is not what he meant, proceed please.

DR. LUYOMBYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  This House has been lured into believing what is not on the ground, because some Members do not bother to make thorough homework before they bring information here.  There was a -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Give information and stop there please.

DR. LUYOMBYA:  So, Mr. Chairman, I will be very glad if the hon. Member on the Floor can provide figures to prove that Kakira has imported sugar, which is not true.

DR. MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  This sugar was being cleared through Jinja Customs last week and I will be able to name the clearing agent, and possibly if they do not mind, they can give us part of the import documents for which I would not have access to.  Dr. Luyombya should know whether I should really have access to these documents.  Anyway, Mr. Chairman, my other point -(Interruption)

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, it is disappointing that a Chairman in Kakira sugar Works is misinforming this House that Kakira has not imported sugar into this country.  I have evidence, Kakira Sugar Works received over 1 million dollars to import sugar and they received the money at a subsidised rate from Bank of Uganda.  I can give the details at a later stage and presently, we have over 5,000 tonnes of sugar at Lugazi Sugar Corporation, which is lying there because our policy on sugar just as Dr. hon. Magezi said, we have no serious policy on sugar, because we allow, especially the Ministry of Commerce, Cooperatives is allowing traders to import sugar, and these traders are not paying all the taxes.  We are losing; and by killing our local industries, our people are losing their jobs and they are really crying; they have no money.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SSENDAWULA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the hon. Member who has just given a point of information on sugar that comes in.  Sometime ago, when Kakira was about to undergo the second phase of rehabilitation, they indicated that there might be a need to import sugar to cover the gap. (Laughter)  That is the truth of the matter. It helps all of us if we can all accept information from people who may have the facts.  The truth of the matter is that Kakira managed to undergo the second phase of rehabilitation without needing to import sugar.  Certainly, we have had sugar, and there are other people importing sugar into this country. Our concern, like every other citizen’s concern, is payment of tax.  It is true there have been loopholes in taxation, but that is not directly a responsibility of the Ministry of Commerce and every step is being taken to ensure that these loopholes are covered; or otherwise it is our wish that we should see some sugar coming. (Laughter)

MR. J.S. MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Deputy Minister of Commerce, Industry and Cooperatives, that smuggling is not part of taxation.

DR. MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Before I leave that point, I would like to make the observation, that good governance dictates that Chairmen of Parastatals like Kakira, are there to protect the interests of this House and the citizens of Uganda.  I would like to call upon the Government, the policy management of the sugar industry to really investigate the matter of small-scale sugar industries in Uganda.  For as little as shs. 300 million, we can get a mini-sugar plant which can manufacture 30 tonnes of sugar per day, and it would make common sense to scatter these small industries throughout Uganda, to encourage out-growers to create jobs, and to create other advantages from infrastructure.  According to me, it would appear that unless Government is prepared to guarantee even the private individual Ugandans like we are going to guarantee Kinyara, this programme might not take off.  I now see it is a contradiction in the sense that as we privatize - I am calling for Government guarantee, but I am sure logistics can be worked out whereby they facilitate mini-sugar plants to be established in Uganda.  

It is difficult for me to sit down without making a passing comment on what the Rt. hon. Prime Minister has told the House this afternoon.  A good thing, if presented badly, can be rejected with the best of intentions, and I call upon Government that they should be transparent and accountable to this House.  It is really a mockery of this House for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to say that a Bill was drafted in 1992, it has never been brought to this House but privatisation is going on day after day, and -(Interruption)

MR. OKODI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I talk in my capacity as Director of Nile Hotel, the bids for Nile Hotel have been opened and Nile Hotel is due for sale this Thursday and it is among the 16 which should have been retained.  

DR. MAGEZI:  Mr. Chairman, when we eventually discuss the PERD Bill, what will be remaining there to be sold?  Everything will have gone and as Members of the National Resistance Council, we owe it to ourselves to explain to our constituents this privatisation about which no statement written has ever been made to us in this House.  What are we supposed to say?  Can Magezi explain to us how they are privatising Nile Hotel?  How did you sell Pepsi Cola?  What is the PERD Committee?  I call upon Government and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister to suspend privatisation until the Bill has come here and has been discussed in this House.  Failure to do so, I lobby this House to throw out that Bill when it is presented because those are wrong methods of work, uncharacteristic of the National Resistance Movement for which we are part and parcel of.  It will be difficult to defend decisions taken on enterprises where every peasant feels that he has a share in, and yet we have not participated properly in its policy guidelines.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Member on the Floor, that barely two months after we had guaranteed the Nile Breweries here, and since it was in the first classification, it was de-classified from the first classification and sold for shs. 500 million, hoping that one day, somebody from the Commonwealth will come here and value it and we get funding.  Now, this is one of the areas that we are not happy about. That we guaranteed it a loan from the East African Development Bank and barely a couple of months later, this parastatal was de-classified and given away. I was on the board and we were not even consulted. Yet it was given away and we got a cheque, which we have heard of - the saga of the cheque of Nile Bank.  It is, therefore, a very important point that the hon. Member is making that we must be transparent.  Thank you.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, thank you for giving me a chance to clarify because, I think a wrong impression is being created that the government sold Nile Breweries for half a billion shillings.  That is not true.  The Government has never sold Nile Breweries.  The position is that, following the operations of Idi Amin, the owners of various properties in Uganda left as you know.  In respect of certain properties, legislation was passed in relation to them, and the best example is Pepsi Cola.  Other properties such as steel and sugar, were placed by decrees under various institutions.  However, for whatever reason, no definite action, whether through the Decree on Nationalisation or through whatever purchase was carried out by the government of the day in relation to Nile Breweries, was made.  All that happened was that a group of government officials entered Nile Breweries and began managing it without any specific provision under the law, as to what right the government had in Nile Breweries.  In other words, it was like someone found your house and he just entered it.  That is what exactly happened.  

So, what has happened is that the National Resistance Movement has come and re-established law and order, and an investigation has been carried out in relation to the correct ownership of Nile Breweries.  It has also been found that at no time, be it under the Custodian Legislation or by Nationalisation, have shares in Nile Breweries been transferred to Uganda Government.  They always remained in the ownership of the previous owner.  However, during the period of either trespass by the government, if you may call it so, from the beginning, the government behaved as if it was the owner of Nile Breweries.  So, the government did the following; first, they borrowed money and put it in a bigger bottling company.  The Uganda Government borrowed that money.  Secondly, they borrowed money to put in a bigger brewing capacity.  That was ongoing at the time of the return.  Thirdly, the Government of Uganda injected a working capacity of shs. 900 million present value.  It behaved as if the property belonged to Uganda Government.  Now, the NRM having established rule of law and as a natural consequence, it was established that the Uganda Government has no legal claim other than by virtue of spending money on it; the property always belonged to the owners.  So, what has been done is simply that, by virtue of being people who observe the law, it was decided that the property should be now legally handed back.  That is why I said there was no sale.  However, because the Government of Uganda has spent money, what was left was working out mechanisms for recovering that money.  In other words, the classification of Nile Breweries was wrong.  It should not have been classified as property to be retained under minority or majority because at no time has it ever belonged to Uganda Government.  So, all that is left now is for Uganda Government to recover its property.  The negotiations followed the following pattern:

(a)	What do we do about the loans, which were borrowed to expand brewing capacity and bottling capacity?  It was agreed that the owners should inherit these loans. What happened to the Shs. 900 million which the Uganda Government put in as working capital?  It was agreed that before we can let you into the door, you first give us part of it - half a billion shillings and then the rest would be in accordance with the agreed procedure.  

The Government then agreed to hand over the Brewery to the owners.  What happened to the cheque afterwards is of no consequence to this transaction.  The loans have been inherited, and the workers future was clarified.  Those measures having been put in place then, the Government, like a good custodian, walked out.  We never sold Nile Breweries at any stage.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

DR. MAGEZI:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, government, collectively, has a duty to explain to the population of Uganda what is happening to their assets.  We should consider these assets as personal properties, and if they are, I doubt whether politics would make some of us take decisions which are being made about our parastatals today.  In other words, PERD is a fuss, and whatever good intentions it had, are being eroded away because people are not properly informed.  Therefore, they rely on rumours and they speculate, and I would like to say that the same thing is likely to befall the decentralisation policy which has been on for the last four years, and we understand that in July, some districts are going to be decentralised.  This House has never received a Bill, a White Paper or whatever document, to discuss the matters of decentralisation in Uganda.  So, it is very dangerous for Members of Parliament to be ignored about such vital policy programmes.

MRS. SSEBAGEREKA:  Point of information.  In April last year, there appeared in a foreign newspaper called The Guardian, a list of companies that was to be sold off.  I brought this information here and it was rejected.  I would like to inform the House now and the Members holding the Floor that it is exactly that which is coming up now -(Interruption)  

DR. MAGEZI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Finally, this is again good governance and proper methods of work.  There has been for a long time, debate on the Custodian Properties.  This House sat for a long time, under the Chairmanship of His Excellency the President, and a Select Committee was set up.  On the programme of Bills that were to be discussed, there was a report from the Select Committee before even today’s Order Paper.  This issue has been taken off for debate and our people are asking us questions about custodian properties.  The Custodian Board has put up their rates per square foot and per square metre, and people are being evicted from properties.  The people who are coming in are not giving them the mandatory days or months they were supposed to give them.  There is a Mandatory Amendment to the 1982 Expropriations Act.  Now, we feel as if we are outside the law and yet we are the lawmakers.  Are we going to pass a law to defend actions that have been undertaken prior to the law coming in force?  This is bad Governance.  We must avoid that because we are all answerable to the people and our Government. The National Resistance Movement is a very good Government and it must not be spoilt at this eleventh hour by making haphazard and unresearched proposals. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up please.  Have you finished doctor please?

DR. MAGEZI:  Yes.

MISS ESTHER OPOTI (Women Representative, Nebbi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this chance to debate on this Resolution.  I would like to extend my thanks to the Minister of Finance and his Deputy, for bringing this Resolution for Kinyara Sugar Works into this House at this eleventh hour. Before I go into the debate, I want to sound a warning to the Members who have already perceived the idea of blocking these loans that blocking the loan guarantee at this time is blocking development.  Sugar is an essential commodity.  The fact that most Ugandans are not affording it now is not because they do not want, but its because it has been expensive due to scarcity.  The aim of Government putting up or wanting to rehabilitate Kinyara Sugar Works is to increase the amount of sugar in circulation, so that maybe the price can go down.  So, if we are going to sit in this honourable House and preach our politics which are anti-development, then I am sorry.  As it has already been stated by my Colleague, hon. Byaruhanga, that the guarantee of this loan has been long overdue, since we were appointed as directors -(Interruption)- the main problem we have been having was lack of Government guarantee on the loans given to us by foreign donors.  Mr. Chairman, -(Interruption)-

MR. PETER OKURE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am just learning that there is a lot of sugar in this country.  For the last four months, Kotido depot has never had sugar and we have been depending on sugar coming from Kenya.  Well, I do not know whether there is sugar in this country. (Laughter)

MISS OPOTI:  Mr. Chairman, that is the reason why Government wants to increase the amount of sugar within the country so that people of Kotido can also be able to afford it when the price comes down. I was on the point that since we became directors in this company, one of our problems has been seeking Government guarantees to have these loans forwarded to us by the donor banks who have accepted to give us the money, and it has taken such a long a time; almost two years.  Right now as I talk, it was sometime last year that this House gave guarantee to the PTA Bank and the PTA has gone ahead to have this money disbursed.  The last time I was talking to management, we were already being charged the interest of about thirteen thousand ($ 13,000) dollars, which we have not used.  Why we have not used it is because of some of the pressure coming from other donors who cannot put in their money because of the guarantees.  

So, to have this guarantee given and eventually these other donors giving in their money, will mean the company is fully taking off.  Right now, as it has been mentioned, government has already put in part of its share for the year and we expect, especially after the President has visited the site that the rest of the money that the company is demanding will be put in place.  

I also share the concern of the Members about the performance of some of these factories and the loans guaranteed to them.  But I wish to clarify a little on Kinyara Sugar Works particularly.  As compared to Kakira and Lugazi Sugar Works, Kinyara Sugar Works is a majority government shareholding company.  It is a hundred per cent government holding and it is under an expatriate management.  For these two years, the expatriate management has kept the company running on the meagre funds that have been injected in by government.  However, to say that once this money is given to the company not much may be seen, is to tell a lie.  Because, right now, I compare Kinyara Sugar Works to Nile Hotel and Sheraton Hotel, since the two were rehabilitated at virtually the same time. But Sheraton is being considered as making profit while Nile Hotel is considered as making losses.  I mean Sheraton is making profits and Nile Hotel seems to be making losses, and maybe that is why it is being sold off.  I believe that with an expatriate management, who are right now on the ground and they have been handling most of the issues- (Interruption)

MR. OKODI:  Point of information.  Allow me to correct the impression being given by the Speaker that Nile Hotel is making losses.  Nile Hotel is making losses because of the International Conference Centre, but the Hotel is making profit.

MISS OPOTI:  Mr. Chairman, I brought in the issue of Nile Hotel and Sheraton when I was talking about management.  It is the management of Nile Hotel that is manning Conference Centre.  So, it goes to emphasise my point that Kinyara Sugar Works is having an expatriate management and we believe when it is fully functional, it will be able to help the development and increase in production of the sugar industry in the country.  

Lastly, as it has already been stated by my Colleague hon. Byaruhanga, for the last two years, though at a very slow pace, we have been able to employ about 300 people who have been maintaining the plantation and also the machines.  We are already developing an out-growers scheme and there is negotiation to have it developed wider so that it provides market for the people around, and it is important to note that it is not only in Bunyoro where Kinyara Sugar Works is, that it is of importance, but it is very important to Government also.  I say this because we already have people from West Nile who are working there. (Laughter)  And with the production of sugar in 1994, as we are already convinced, Northern Uganda may have more sufficient quantities of sugar on the market, as compared to now.  With this, Mr. Chairman, I beg that Members do support this Resolution and we have the Loan Guarantees.  Thank you. 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The issue of Kinyara Sugar Works, is a crucial one in the sense that this is a very big enterprise in the country.  This is an enterprise that will lead us to development.  Resolutions of this nature should not be taking so long to be passed in this House.  The problem is that such Resolutions are brought when they are right but at the wrong time.  Why the wrong time?  This Resolution should have come long ago when the money was being negotiated and things were being put in place, not at the eleventh hour when things are actually getting stuck.  The problem we are having with government loans is that the policy does not seem to be transparent to the people who will pay later.  People who will pay later, and who are the citizens, and we are their vanguard, we should know what is happening.  It is this lack of transparency that creates an element of conflict, in the sense that we do not seem to know exactly where things are moving.  There was a report, which indicated the companies to be sold and those to be half sold. But this report is almost null and void because the companies were actually given away.  In other words, the study, if it was at all a study, was not deep enough to give all the facts.  What we are demanding and what we want is to have a divestiture policy document; to have a clear perspective of what is being divested; why and when?  

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Point of order.  Would the hon. Member state which company has been given away?

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are out of order.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for protecting me because, we know that Kinyara Sugar Works is owned by the Government 100 per cent.  Our worry is, when are we going to selling it?  Are we selling it as soon as we have put in the money?  That is the question that has arisen. If you look at what we have been trying to sell or what is being sold, things are being sold below cost price.  I am equally aware that when you sell property or goods, you sell them at the market price.  The market price is always different from the book price and it is also different from the replacement cost.  The issue, therefore, is why should we sell in a hurry?  Who is forcing us to sell in a hurry when the market is actually at the lowest?  When the market is depressed, sellers actually withdraw and buyers come up.  If the market is high, sellers bring goods to the market.  Why is it that we must hurry to sell when it is very well known that the market is very low?  Why is the market low?  The currency in circulation in this country is shs. 85 billion, and the money supply in this economy is shs. 170 billion, yet we are selling properties worth one trillion shillings.  There is no way this economy can buy our properties because the amount of money in circulation itself cannot support buying them.  In other words, you are actually saying that to be able to sell, you must invite foreigners.  I agree with that, but when you invite them and they know you are desperate, they will buy low.  We should, therefore, look at a situation where the Divestiture Policy is put in place -(Interruption)

MR. SSENDAWULA:  Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member who is holding the Floor. I would like to know from him, whether advertisements restrict people to buy these properties only from within Uganda, because when we advertise, we are inviting everybody and, therefore, inviting even foreign investors to bring in money to contribute.

MR. MANZI:  Mr. Chairman, a clarification of that is very clear and that is what I am trying to explain.  The fact is that the money supply in the economy is very low, and because of the financial obligations that can sustain a big organisation, means we must get money from outside.  Also, the fact that the private sector cannot be guaranteed by government, and that government can only guarantee public corporations, which are actually dying, means that we must invite the foreigners to invest in this economy. What I am trying to say is that if you invite foreigners when you are desperate they will buy cheaply.  

If you earmark 7 million dollars into rehabilitating Nile Hotel and somebody bids for it at 3 million dollars, surely would you go ahead and sell it?  If you put 16 million dollars into Lake Victoria Hotel and somebody bids for it at 11 million dollars, would you go ahead and sell it?  The point is that the money sank in those organisations was not properly monitored.  Therefore, the money might have not been put in the organisations.  Therefore, what they see there is not necessarily what you think was there and now that it is not there, it may be better for us to have contract management to manage our properties since we have already lost, so that we do not lose twice. (Hear, hear!)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up, please.

MR. MANZI:  Mr. Chairman, we have borrowed 2.1 billion dollars since 1986, and if we are not careful, we shall over-borrow and if we over-borrow, we shall lose the absorptive capacity in the economy -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.   Mr. Chairman, we circulated to this House, as a result of a requirement for Government to inform you of each external borrowing we make.  It is disappointing that sometimes you leave behind your papers.  Because if you add, we have circulated information on how much we have borrowed since we came to this Government, and each one of you here has a copy of this statement.  I will be pleased if you refer to those facts because other countries listen attentively to your contributions and once you do not give the correct figures, you distort the picture.  This is a humble request.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. MANZI:  I thank the hon. Deputy Minister for that information, but I want to restate that the actual borrowings up to June 1992, was 2 billion, 101 million dollars.  He has his papers in his office, and they are part of the Ministry of Finance, that can be consulted.  I have it and I - (Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform hon. Manzi, because when he gets confused, I get even more worried.  There is a difference between the total indebtedness of this country and the money this Government has borrowed since it came into power. The two are separate. (Laughter)

MR. MANZI:  Mr. Chairman, by profession I am an economist and I was also a lecturer in money and banking.  I know the difference between total indebtedness, total commitment and total loans, and what I said was, total loans borrowed since 1986 was 2.1, some of it, of course, has been paid off. But I am talking of total loans borrowed during that period -(Interjection).  

I think, what we really need while we support Kinyara to borrow this money, because it is a national project, is to increase transparency in the operations of the loans we get and in government in general, because we as the back benchers are also the eyes of government.  It is very embarrassing to go outside and when you try to explain, you find you did not even have the information, because if these Bills are brought in on time, and this information is also brought in on time, I think we shall move together rather than wait until an issue like this one comes up then we read a statement.

While supporting that Kinyara should get the loans, I think we could cease being like pathologists who believe in finding facts after the person has died.  We should look for facts when the person is still alive, so that we can protect the person when he is still alive.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.   

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to thank very much the hon. Members for their contribution to this Resolution and for their concern about the supply of sugar to our citizenry.  I will not endanger myself to tread on matters that are not related to the Resolution.  I just want to assure the House that the intention of government is to try to be self-sufficient in some of the things which we use in our daily life, so that the country is not always held at random either by activities on the borders, because the border is closed and, therefore, your people may not have sugar, and I am glad that everybody who has spoken has supported this government move.

Hon. Dr. Magezi, in the beginning of his speech, when he referred specifically to sugar, I appreciated his concern that the ordinary people cannot still afford a kilo of sugar, because the supply of sugar in this country has not yet matched the demand.  And, therefore, that is why it is important that if our people consider sugar to be important for them, we should find means to produce this sugar and, since it is not bulky to produce it here because the facilities are conducive to sugar production.

I want to refute hon. Sekiziyivu’s argument that any organisation can go to Bank of Uganda and is given Foreign Exchange at special rates. This is not possible.  Foreign Exchange is bought at auctional rates.  People who want to buy the foreign exchange auction it and the buyers pay at the auctioned rate.  It may change at every auction but it is not - there is no one who has a chance to go to that Bank and get money at a special rate that is not correct.

The Minister of Industry and his Deputy are here, and they will investigate hon. Dr. Magezi’s concern about the future development of many sugar plants vis-a-vis big plantations.  I think that they will take this into consideration.  The Minister of Agriculture wants to inform you about it.  

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs. Sekitoleko):  Point of information.  If I can inform this House, Mr. Chairman, the reason many sugar plantations have developed in Uganda is basically because this has been left to the private sector.  When I was a banker, one job I tried to do was actually to promote many sugar plantations. But the answer I kept getting from everybody who was growing sugarcane was that, when I grow sugarcane, I process everything into jaggery and I sell everything including soil.  Now you want me to go into sugar, where I have got to clean up, throw away the soil and whatever and then start looking for the market.  When they produced sugarcane - when they produced jaggery, the jaggery buyers looked for them.  When they produce sugar, especially when Madhivani Metha and Kinyara are in production, they will have to look for the market.  

So, that is the dilemma.  If we want to promote many sugar plantations once again, we may have to do it through government, which you may have to guarantee.  Thank you.
 
MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Thank you very much Madam Minister for your information. But these matters are being handled, and I am making a humble proposal, on matters of national concern, like sugar production.  Let us not create a big difference between who is government or who is Parliament, and who is specifically responsible for what.  I think -(Interjection)- please, I may make my point, Mr. Chairman.  I think these matters we meet quite often when we talk about many matters. But I do not think sometimes we need to first come to this House in order to have only primary matters of concern to our country, or to have a confrontation between what is specifically done by Ministers and what is specifically done by Members of NRC.  I think we should go together as a Government and take these responsibilities together.

I also want, to propose humbly, that you consider what matters go on without being handled by the Parliament. It is a humble request.  I think we are not working enough hours as Members of Parliament, to handle all matters that come before us.  (Interjection) Yes, please, I also listen when you speak.  I can also request that I be listened to, gentlemen and ladies.  

Hon. Members if we work three days a week with so much work to be done, it is a problem to cover all the work we have to do if we do not undertake more hours a week, in order to finish the work which is before us, and I am proposing also most honestly that it also costs money to make these legislations.  The current cost per legislation at the rate going is shs. 60 million per legislation.  Therefore, if we do ten laws in six months instead of doing ten laws in one month, there is a limit -(Interjection)- please, there are humble suggestions to think about. I put it to you gentlemen because you regulate your meetings, I am suggesting -(Interruption)-

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister to go into an area of a general nature rather than sticking to the Resolution so that we finish it and have enough time to tackle those serious problems he is referring to?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order.  Proceed please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform hon. Maj. Gen. Elly that a complaint ha already been raised that the Resolution has come too late.  Hon. Manzi has raised that this Resolution could have come earlier, but there was no time, and he came here when there was no business.
So, I request that in your regulation of conduct of business, we try to find how we can maybe, put in more hours in order to cover all the work that is supposed to come before us -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to finish up, please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  No, I have been informed on that and I am replying on that -(Interruption and Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, please.  Proceed please.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to assure hon. Manzi that there is really nothing intended to be opaque, which is the opposite of transparency, in the matters of bringing resolutions here.  The resolutions we bring here, is because the law requires us to bring them and even if you are not in session, we wait for you.  Therefore, bringing these resolutions here is a sign of government acceptance of a principle of transparency.  Now that you have approved without -(Laughter)- now that you have approved this Resolution, I want to give credit where it is due, and to thank all the Directors of Kinyara Sugar Works, for one reason, and all other members who happen to be on boards which really function, where activities take place, and where actions are going on. This Board has worked very hard to try to rehabilitate, and to get something out of where nothing existed.  And, therefore, I want to acknowledge them for their dedication.  This Board is headed by hon. George Agola who has done a lot of work as Chairman.  On this Board we also have hon. Ongaria, hon. Opoti, hon. Dr. Byaruhanga, Dr. Sam Nahamya, Mr. Sekumbo., Mr. Christopher Iga, RC V -Kampala, Mr. Twinomusinguzi, Madam Nanono, and Mr. Tabibwa.  They have done tremendous work in the exercise of mobilising all the funds and ensuring that the projects come to a production stage, and we owe them a lot of gratitude.  With these remarks, I thank you very much and I thank the hon. Members of the House.

(Question put and agreed to).


MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF THE NATIONAL RESISTANCE COUNCIL SEEKING TO GUARANTEE LOANS TO KINYARA SUGAR WORKS LIMITED.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move that the Bill entitled, ‘The Constituent Assembly Bill, 1992’, be read a Second Time.  

The history of this piece of legislation is very well known to Members, but for the sake of emphasis and for the purpose of keeping records, it is important to briefly outline it.  This country obtained its Independence in October 1962, and everybody in this country looked forward to a happy relationship and the return of full democracy.  The country had just undergone a general election in 1961, and another one in 1962, and people generally believed that this democratic process would continue.  Unfortunately, by 1964, people in Uganda begun to doubt the intentions of the leadership then; particularly regarding the democratic process.  In May 1966, the Constitution had been suspended.  Things moved from bad to worse and following the battle of Mengo, many people were put in detention, and the 1962 Constitution was thrown out. It was real terror.  

However, the population still hoped that by 1967, when the Parliament of the day was due to end its tenure, the general elections would be held and people would be free again to exercise their democratic rights and make their choice of leaders.  That was not to be done.  The dictatorship consolidated its hold on Uganda, and the first Parliament was not dissolved as expected, nor was the general election held or even called.  On the contrary, the leadership of the day extended the term of office of the outgoing Parliament, and converted itself into a Constituent Assembly to debate the then draft -1967 Constitution.  This act was illegal, undemocratic and unconstitutional.  The act of extending the life of the Parliament that had ended and the conversion of the same Parliament into a Constituent Assembly. 

Nevertheless, the 1967 Constitution was debated in this House and it was debated when the House was surrounded by armed personnel.  I recall two Members who are still in this House; hon. Abu Mayanja and hon. Obwangor, they debated - took part in that debate -(Interjection)- well, you can say, freely but it was obvious that the atmosphere was not free.  Indeed, both of them plus others who opposed the Constitution found themselves as inmates in Luzira.

Now, this is very important. The population was not consulted at all, and the people debated in fear. Nevertheless, it was passed.  In 1971, there was a change of leadership.  This was ironical.  People complained about the reign of terror under Obote, but when Idi Amin took over it was like moving from a frying pan into fire.  People were detained, and many lost their lives, and the gallant soldiers, the sons of Uganda and Tanzania, after Idi Amin had attacked Kagera, took up arms and physically removed Dictator Idi Amin.  By 1979 April, there was jubilation in Kampala, and in the rest of Southern Uganda, that the dictator had gone and a new era had been ushered in, which would be democratic and peaceful.  This again did not happen.  Trust was removed and although people debated on the floor of this House and agreed to work together under an umbrella movement. But as soon as they left this House, they conferred the partisan way. Self-interest took over nationalism, and the umbrella was torn.  Then elections were held in 1980. General Elections, which were massively rigged, to the extent that some of our leaders were forced to take up arms and fight the regime of Obote physically.  

These are important historical events this House must bear in mind before they make the next move.  It took the Movement five years to fight and topple the regime.  In the process, there were casualties on both sides and these were Ugandans.  They were our people - it involved even foreign elements, because in 1979, we refused to take heed.  When the struggle was going on in the bush, the National Resistance Movement, partly because of this feeling of 1979, and partly because of its leadership, decided to lay down a limited agenda contained in the Ten-Point Programme.  This limited agenda had as priority, realistic restoration of democracy, and as soon as state power was captured by NRM this agenda, the was published and was known to everybody.  The Government started to put into practice what it had promised; the return to democracy and to set up Resistance Committees, whereby people looked after their interests and planned for their interests in the local areas.  Had it not been for the insurgency that started about a year later, even this House would have been expanded much earlier.  

Nevertheless, the expansion of this House was part of the democratic process that was started in the bush.  You can see in the book, the RC is one.  Now we have, I think as soon as we attain the minimum the economic recovery, as soon as we achieve peace and stability, the government put proposals in this House and enacted the law setting up the Constitutional Commission and it started in 1988, and the operational law appointed 21 Commissioners to go around the country with a mandate to sensitize people, and to interest people, the population, in good governance, the Constitution and related matters.  Today everybody knows the word Constitution although by the time we came to government some people did not know what it meant.  

At this juncture, I would like to pay tribute to those 20 ladies and gentlemen, members of the Commission who traveled all over this country to try and educate our people in Constitutional making.  They have done a very big job under very difficult conditions - bad roads and poor logistics, and this has in a way, contributed to the delay in producing the Constitution beyond the statutory two or three years that was originally intended.  This House nevertheless should salute these ladies and gentlemen for the work they have done. 
 
I will be failing in my duty if I did not draw the attention of this House to the many donors who have helped us to maintain and service this Commission, and in providing transport, by providing logistical equipments, and by providing local currency to run the Commission. (Applause) I would like to mention in particular the following countries: the Government of Australia, Her Majesty’s Government of Great Britain, the Royal Danish Government, the Government of Ghana, the Government of Nigeria, the Government of the Republic of India, the Government of Sweden and the Government of Norway - U.S.A. (Applause) I would also like to add to the list, the French and the German Governments.  Some of these governments have provided facilities for our people to see what is happening in other areas, and to come back and relate them to our own situation.  I would like to assure, Members that at no stage has the Commission used or borrowed without consideration of any institution from this country. They used them for study and for comparison purposes.

Lastly, I would like to thank the Uganda taxpayers because a lot of this money has been actually from taxpayers.  Without their tax and sweat we would not have made it.

At this juncture, I would like to officially report that the Constitution Commission completed the draft Constitution on the 31st of December 1992, and at the Ceremony that was held in Mbarara, handed it over to His Excellency the President.  Additionally, they also presented to him a report, but that report still required some editing and they are working the last stage of that editing.  

I have heard complaints from Members that it has not been possible as yet for them to receive copies of the draft Constitution and report.  I would like to offer my personal apology for that.  The situation has been beyond my control as a Minister and beyond the control of the Commission.  The situation at present is that my colleague the Minister of Finance is trying to mobilise funds to be able to print and publish both the draft and the report for everybody to see it.  I can assure you that once the report and the Constitution drafts are ready; they will be circulated to all Members of the NRC free of charge.  Because of the costs involved we will not give free copies to the public, but they will be sold at a subsidised price.  Of course, when this Bill is passed, Members of the Assembly will also receive copies of this Constitution and copies of the report and additionally, they will have freedom to look in the archives of the Commission.

I will also to appeal again that we still have to call upon the donor agencies and governments to help in the exercise of running the Assembly because our situation is still bad -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  

MR. SAM NJUBA:  We will still count on friends both internally and externally.  I note it is bad to beg, but when you have no alternative you will still do it.

Mr. Chairman, the present law regarding the Constituent Assembly or the passage of the Constitution is as contained in Section 14(b), and it provides that the NRC and the National Resistance Army, in addition to other bodies, shall enact a Constitution.  However, and this must be understood, the Government has decided to recommend to this august House to amend this law.  The reasons are many and I will pick only the most obvious ones.  First of all, the Uganda Constitutional Commission went out to the people and collected the views specifically on this issue, and there was an overwhelming call to the Commission that the Constitution should be debated and enacted by a National Constituent Assembly and not the present NRC.  

So, the very people who sent you here recommended that the Constitution should be enacted -(Interruption)- this is not secret; it is contained in the report and at the time this Bill was discussed at the NEC, the same question was raised and the interim report of the Constitutional Commission was produced and evidence tabled to this effect.  

So, the interim report of the Commission is available and it is contained even in the main report.  It is a pity we do not have the report here on the Table, but when it does come you will see it.  But that is not the only reason.  You will agree with me that many of us were not elected, but many of you who were elected were also elected indirectly, and it is democratic to seek fresh mandate when you are handling such an important issue in our development.  Your people are saying we should go back and get fresh mandate.  All of us except a few -(Laughter).  Mr. Chairman, I seek your protection.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  

MR. SAM NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, when you go to the Bill, I shall indicate why I put some exception, but principally it was recommended that the majority of Members of the Constituent Assembly should be directly elected -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  No. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. SAM NJUBA:  Of course, Mr. Chairman, we must also recognise a third point that the NRC, besides being a Parliament of this country, also acts as the political organ of the Movement.  That alone, is likely to give the impression that the Constitution we are enacting now is for the Movement, because the political organ of the Movement is making it, that is if we are already in the NRC -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.

MR. SAM NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, the government wishes to avoid the charge that it is forcing; government wishes to clear the air and give everybody the opportunity to elect people who will make the Constitution.  Why?  It is because all along we have said this is a people’s Constitution. The people must have their input. When they decide they want to participate, by sending a fresh delegation, who are we to refuse them? (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. SAM NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, this government has always insisted on transparency and that justice must not only be done, but must be seen to have been done, and if you claim to be democratic you should bow to the demands of the people, if the people want that.  We want to avoid the issue of saying all those people who passed that Constitution were Museveni’s men, all of you and, therefore, the others will start disassociating themselves from this Constitution.  So, in order to avoid this developing at all, the government is proposing that the majority of members who will enact the Constitution, should be directly elected by adult suffrage, under secret ballot of one man one vote.  Therefore, the Government is proposing the following:

First of all, that about 180 members be directly elected.  It has also taken into consideration other interests; namely, the National Resistance Army, the National Resistance Council, the women, youth and the workers of this country.  This composition has been carefully thought out, and it will be dominated or led by a majority who are clearly and directly elected.  The National Resistance Army cannot be brushed aside, as indeed, I said at the beginning, it was the National Resistance Army that ushered in this peace.  Secondly, it was provided previously that the NRC will work with the National Resistance Army among other things.  Thirdly, that there is need for the soldiers to know what they are going to protect because, in future, they will be protecting these documents.  Soldiers are also nationals of this country.  I can go on enumerating but I do not think any Member here would underrate or disregard the role of the National Resistance Army.  So, we recommend to you, Mr. Chairman and Members that they should be represented by ten members of the army.  

Concerning the women of this country, as you know, they form the majority in this country -(Interruption)- but because of our cultural upbringing we still look down upon women.  This is unfortunate, and to compound the situation, even the women sometimes do not vote for their fellow women.  There is need, therefore, to bring them up, to pull them up and expose them so that their capacity may be appreciated.  There is also need to bring them up so as to expose them to natural politics.  This has been the policy of this Government, to expose our women to public life so that eventually, their contribution is recognised.  

So, we propose that there should be eight Women Members in Parliament, and the Government also proposes that the youth should be represented in this House in their own right, and that they should be four of them.  We also propose that the workers should be represented by two people and these are the National Union of Trade Unions and its affiliates.  We propose that, since this House was the original part of those who are supposed to pass the Constitution.  They should also have ten Members sent to the Assembly.  This does not exclude the right of each and every Member of NRC who wants to contest the election.  

We propose also that the Government should have some people nominated.  First of all, I would like to make the position of Government very clear.  Government has decided that it will take the Draft Constitution as its document, and it will bring it to the Assembly and there will be a free debate by all.  In other words, the doctrine of collective responsibility among the Ministers will not apply so that we take benefit of all interests.  When we say Government wishes to nominate some people to come to Parliament, we are saying that Government will take care of some areas that are lacking in representation.  People whose positions cannot allow them or facilitate them to go into the ordinary elections and yet they can make substantial contribution towards the new Constitution.  I do not want to prejudice the chances, but I think you will see them when the time comes.  I said each of these groups will choose and the others will be elected directly.  When you talk about direct elections, people here become very nervous.  The 1980 elections were, as I said, extensively rigged and we have devised a way by which we shall get rid of this rigging.  First of all, there will be registration and there will be enough time to do this.  We shall set up a Commission that will oversee the entire exercise.

AN. HON. MEMBER:  And observers.

MR. SAM NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not mention the observers although they are welcome.  I said we shall set up a Commission to oversee or to conduct the registration and thereafter act as a Secretariat of the Assembly.  We want to base the Constituency on the count, because that is where all hon. Members come from so that each county is represented irrespective of size.  However, as an electoral area, where a county has a population of 160,000 and above, we shall consider giving that constituency more than one person.  That means for every 80,000 people in that Constituency there will be one delegate elected.  If you are in an area where you have 160,000 people, then there will be more than one delegate coming to the Assembly.  But the point you note here is that the constituency or every electoral area will be initially the county.  But where the county has a population exceeding 160,000, then we shall take the factor of 80,000 to produce one delegate.

People who wish to stand will seek nomination and at the time of doing so, they will have to pay a fee of 100,000/-.  This is not a deterrent, but this is a contribution towards the great expense of running these elections and running the Constituent Assembly.  Democracy is an expensive affair.  So, anybody who wants to benefit from it, must contribute towards it.

We propose to prepare a special ballot paper.  This special ballot paper, as those who have looked at the Bill, will show the face of the aspirant, and the name and box where the voter will tick.  I am aware that some people cannot read, but they can at least see the face of the candidate standing.  But even for those who are incapacitated, we have made provision in the Bill for them to either enlist the assistance of one of their relatives or friends to help them in identifying a person, or where they do not know anybody, we shall put a public officer to assist in this exercise.  If you do not trust the public officer, then you will be required to bring either your relative or your friend.  But we believe that with a picture, we will reduce much of the possible confusion by those who cannot read.  If you can read, surely you will read the name and you will see the person and then you can tick off.  We propose that this voting, although it is secret ballot, should be in the open.  We, therefore, propose that there will be on one end of a table the representatives of each candidate - and we allow every candidate to have a representative at every polling station.  We will also have the Presiding Officer with the ballot paper duly prepared and that ballot paper will be handed over to the voter, in public and in the presence of these officials.  Te voter will then proceed some feet or yards away where he will sit and tick off the candidate of his choice.  He will then move at this point so that we can also see him mark but we will not see what he has marked.  We will see that he has only marked but we will not see what he has marked, and we shall also see that he has only one ballot paper.  He will move a few metres further, where he will drop his ballot paper in a ballot box placed in the open.  Everybody will see him or her, but will not be able to see which candidate he/she has voted for.  There will be only one box at every polling station.  And from there, will be a point where he will be marked off as having voted and that will be the end.  

We believe that by this method of voting, we will be able to get rid of the major areas where rigging is normally done on the voting day.  I should have indicated that at the beginning, this box will be opened for everybody to see and make sure that there are no extra ballot papers.  I should add that we are looking around for security printers who will be able to print the ballot papers again to avoid forgery and rigging of elections.  Here, I would like to say that these elections will be non-partisan.  People will be voted on merit, because we feel that this exercise is very important for this country.  It is a foundation, which should not spoil the process.  I may have forgotten to mention that we also recognise that in this country, there are political parties and we know that among those who will stand and will be returned, will be some partisans.  But that does not worry us.  I should have said it earlier that each political party that existed in 1980 should bring two delegates in their own right as party members.  But at the election there will be no party campaign.  We will allow people to campaign but on their own merit and they will be addressing the issues in the Constitution. So, how do we propose to do that?  

We propose that the authorities in the area after nomination day will arrange candidates meetings at parish level where all the candidates who have shown an interest and have been nominated will come forward and address the public on issues concerning the Constitution.  We feel that this one will keep peace, and will rid us of insult and violence that has been experienced elsewhere, and will also promote reconciliation.  Normally, it is not common for decent people to insult each other when they are together and then pick up quarrels.  But if we allow individuals, they will be inciting people wherever they go saying so and so is bad and that kind of talk.  Secondly, to argue on party lines will not help the situation either, because in the Constituent Assembly itself the question of party politics will be addressed.  So, it will be premature to start dealing with it or handling it at this stage.  I said campaign meetings for candidates will be arranged by the authorities at the Constituency level and all hon. Members should go there and campaign if they want to be elected.  However, we do not rule out campaigning by mail or campaigning through newspapers, but not through the radio. (Interruption) 

 Somebody is quoting from the Rules, I have not yet gone there.  But I intend to rule out both radio and television for the obvious reason that there is not enough space on that radio or TV for everybody to be accommodated.  There is need for transparency and you will find that only a few will be accommodated on the radio because of space.  So, we shall not allow campaigns on the radio and on TV.  You can go on CNN, if you can afford it. (Laughter) But on public radio and TV, this will not happen.  

Mr. Chairman, we have proposed that the Commissioner who will be assisted by two deputies should arrange for registration according to the Bill, and should continue to work at the Secretariat for the Constituent Assembly.  This, first of all, is to keep consistency with the law and to maintain transparency.  The Minister or Government will keep clear of this Commission.

Hon. Members have been reading in the papers and there has been a lot of healthy debate about the contents of this Bill.  Here I can see people saying we should do it.  But this idea of a Constituent Assembly besides having been proposed by the people and Government was really anticipated by the change in 1989, when they talked about NRC and the Army Council.  What we are doing here is simply to polish up that provision by making it more democratic and by bringing people who are directly elected to reinforce the provision.  But it is not true that we are creating something totally different.  We are only polishing up the provision as laid down.  

I said, I have been looking at debates in the newspaper and people were saying, ‘We have been completely ignored, NRC will be swept aside and some strange body will come and enact this Constitution’.  I am saying that, first of all, that is not true.  Because the idea of the Constituent Assembly was anticipated by Section 14(b) Legal Notice 1986 as amended way back in 1989, when we talked about NRC, NRA, the Army Council and other bodies to enact the Constitution.  What we are doing is simply to improve on that arrangement.

I would like now to turn specifically to the Bill and try to point one or two things.  For those of you who have the copies, I would like to apologise that there are some typographic errors.  On the first page just after, ‘The Constituent Assembly Statute, 1962’, on the fourth line ending with ‘Assembly’ - in the Title ‘A Statute to provide for the establishment of a Constitution Assembly for the purpose of considering and enacting a new national Constitution for the Republic of Uganda to provide for the composition and functions of the Assembly’, there is a clause missed out there which reads,  ‘To establish a Commission for conducting the election of delegates’.

HON. MEMBERS:  It is there.

MR. SAM NJUBA:  But I am sure some copies do not have it.  Those who have it, okay, and those who do not have it should check and see.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17th February, 1993, at 2.30 p.m).

