Wednesday, 14 February 2007 

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament 
House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. Yesterday, honourable members, I informed you about the tragic news of the demise of Mrs Winifred Karungi Otafiire and informed you that burial arrangements would be communicated to you later. I have now received the details of the burial arrangements. 

The body is expected to arrive at Entebbe at 6.45 p.m. and there will be a vigil at hon. Otafiire’s home on Ismail Road in Mbuya. Funeral services take place tomorrow 15th February at 10.00 a.m. at All Saints Cathedral, Nakasero. Burial will take place on 16th February at Kashenshero, Bushenyi District of Ankole. Those are the details. I am sorry I have used Ankole but that is the language in the Constitution although people forget it many times.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last Thursday there was an issue regarding the closure of NTV and at that time the Minister of Information was not in the House to give an explanation. Now that he is in the House could you guide me on how we can move on that matter? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.50
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INFORMATION (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the honourable member for raising the issue. It occurred when I had gone to India to mark the 100th anniversary of the initiation of the freedom struggle by Mahatma Gandhi. I was informed while I was there- so let me take this opportunity to give some background as to the circumstances and conditions and how we are moving ahead.

NTV applied for a licence to operate here long before I took over that portfolio, but it was during a time when there were a number of new entrants in the airspace. Up to 140 radios, 20 TV stations and so many other players were allowed in the airspace of Uganda to operate as part of our liberalisation policy. Unfortunately, there was no coordinating mechanism with an end result that if there was any news of national significance, the radios would play different programmes even at that crucial time. 

When I came in I looked at what had been done and according to the old procedure there was an arrangement whereby any person could buy another person’s licence and operate under it which is equivalent to selling kits when you have no intention of using them. In my wisdom I advised the Broadcasting Council to ensure that any person who applies for a licence should apply as an individual and people should not be able to utilise another’s licence. 

Furthermore, that any person who came should have some basic conditionalities imposed on him as an obligation to the sovereign State of Uganda. One was that we should be able to organise so that if we have national occasions or messages they should be transmitted simultaneously on all radios. I said that if they are willing to accept the new conditions then we would consider them for licensing. That they did and I think they were given a licence and they started operating.

In between a problem arose that while they were given the licence they had to get some permission from the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation to be able to use some of the facilities we have. During my absence, something developed which necessitated them to be switched off and I think those problems are being solved. As soon as they are solved they will be back on the air. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, hon. Banyenzaki? 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the minister for having laboured to explain these issues the way he has done. But, Mr Speaker, you ordered through the Leader of Government Business in the Parliament, the Prime Minister, so I would have expected the minister to come up with a clear and conscious statement or an explanation regarding to the closure of this TV station. This is because according to the allegations on the closure of this station, it is alleged that there is political interference and corruption. Therefore, it is not as simple as you have explained here. 

It is alleged that people maliciously went to the mast where they had hosted their wireless codes and they maliciously tempered with their signals so that they would push them out of the market. These are people who have invested US$ 4 million here. They are not like these investors who come here to invest here and at the end of the day they start asking for guarantee from Government. They have come with their own money. They are not asking for any penny from your ministry. 

There are very many fake investors but this is a real investor.  Why is he being frustrated the way you have said it here. US$ 4 million and you say we are handling it! As Parliament we want a clear answer as to why some media houses are being frustrated. Is it political interference; is somebody corrupt so that he is maliciously interfering with them? It should be a clear statement. This is not a simple matter that you say we are handling. For example, if you agree that you did it in a wrong way why are they not on air as we speak if you are conceding that you are handling it? Tell us. There is malice in these issues. Mr Speaker the minister needs to explain. It is a complex matter and not as easy as the minister explains.

THE SPEAKER: Well you can answer but you see he has given an answer. Apparently the answer as far as you are concerned is not satisfactory. So ask specific questions so that the answer is clear. If you are aware that there is corruption you will be free to ask him that isn’t it true that because of this corrupt tendency this was done. I think that is the best way to handle this. So, if you have specific questions that require more detail, please ask the question and he should answer.

MR BANYENZAKI: Well, Mr Speaker, if it needs to be put in writing I will do it. But as far as I recall you directed the Minister of Information through the Prime Minister last week that the minister should come here to explain. Those questions are in the Hansard. Maybe if the minister tells me that the frontbench is not informed about what happens in Parliament. But when you come to Parliament here you are supposed to answer queries arising from members of Parliament. So, Mr Speaker there is some negligence being manifested here.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we should do is to refer the minister to the relevant Hansard so that he can read for himself what took place and then as a result of reading he can come back. Maybe somebody told him that NTV is complaining about being switched off. Maybe he will come back with more details. But honourable minister as you have heard, as far as he is concerned there is corruption and political interference. Those are some of the things that are being alleged. Next week I hope you will come back and give us a satisfactory answer.  

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS
2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to present to this house a brief to Parliament on the IDA credit of special drawing rights 48,700,000 to finance the Uganda Public Service Performance Enhancement Programme. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the document be taken up by the Committee on National Economy, scrutinised and promptly report to Parliament for action.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

THE SPEAKER: Well he is not here. Next item.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

2.59
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nsubuga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are proposing that instead of repealing Section 4(1b) let it be amended by substituting it with a clause that provides for the representative of the entire private sector.” The justification is to allow the minister have a wide range of private sector representation from which he or she can make appointment to URA board. I wish to move.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I have no objection.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended agreed to.
 
Clause 2

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing to delete clause 2 and the justification is that clause 2 contravenes the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 and the Code of Conduct and Ethics for the Uganda Public Service. I wish to move.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman and honourable members, we concede.

THE SPEAKER: You don’t oppose, you concede? Okay. There is a proposed deletion. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Do you have two amendments on this particular clause, because I see in your report insertion of a new sub clause 5 in Section 9?

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, this is clause 2 that we are on and we are proposing deletion. We don’t have another amendment.

Clause 2, as amended agreed to.

Clause 3

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Chairman, we are proposing that clause 3 be substituted with the following: “Subject to Section 9 of the principal Act, the board shall appoint officers from the level of manager and above on such terms and conditions as the board may determine”. The justification is conventionally, it is a good corporate management practise. I beg to move.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman and honourable members, we did discuss at length with the committee and agreed that the equivalent of the former position of Principal Revenue Officer is the rank of the manager. So we concede.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the title stand part of the Bill.

(Question put  and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.04
MR OMACH: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2006” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES(Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for adoption of the report from the Committee of the whole House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House on a Bill entitled, “The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2006”. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2006

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for a third time and do pass.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Revenue Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read a third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY AMENDMENT ACT, 2006”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, Bill passed. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNITS OF ACCOUNTS 20 MILLION FROM AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING THE SECOND SUPPORT TO HEALTH SECTORS STRATEGIC PLAN PROJECT

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move a motion for Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow units of accounts 20 million from the African Development Bank for financing the Second Support to Health Sector Strategic Plan Project.  I beg to move.  

THE SPEAKER: Supported.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the purpose of this loan is- as members may be aware Government of Uganda discussed with the African Development Bank for the latter to provide financial support for the implementation by the government of the Support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project II. 

This will be a follow up project to the just concluded one, which is Project I and the proposed project will consolidate the contribution of the SHSSPP I, especially in the areas of Mental Health Services and also contribute to the improvement of delivery of reproductive health services in order to reduce maternal mortality in 10 districts of South Western Uganda.  

Now SHSSPP I, mainly concentrated in the areas of East, North and North Western Uganda. This particular project will expand nationwide; Mental Health Services funded by the latest ADB intervention under SHSSPP I. As it was with SHSSPP I, the proposed financing is closely aligned with the Health Sector Strategic Plan priorities.  

The major objective of this loan is to improve delivery of quality Mental Health Services in the 10 districts of South Western Uganda namely, Mbarara, Kiruhura, Ibanda, Ntungamo, Kabale, Rukungiri, Kanungu, Kisoro and Bushenyi.  

The second major objective is to strengthen the provision of Mental Health Services in the whole country. 

In order to achieve the above objectives, the project will comprise of the following components: Component one will be to improve access to quality mental health services specifically financing the remodelling and new construction and equipping of selected regional and District Health Services, including antenatal structures, blood banks, obstetric blocks and delivery rooms in Health Centres IV and III in project areas.  The Committee on National Economy will give the details of these specific areas.  

The second component is the expansion of delivery of mental health services, especially targeting construction and equipping of seven Mental Health Units in the Regional Referral Hospitals of Mbale, Mbarara, Lira, Moroto, Jinja, Masaka and Mubende.  

Mr Speaker, training of mental health professionals in handling mental disorders, stress related disorders, with the objective that mental disorders are adequately addressed nation wide.
 
The third is management specifically targeting provision of goods and services necessary for project implementation and coordination.  The project will be financed jointly by the African Development Fund Loan of units of accounts UA20 million and Government units of account UA 2.22 million. 

From the above, the ADF loan will cover 95 percent of the total project cost and units of accounts 6.94 million in local currency. The Government will finance 32.0 percent of local cost estimated at UA2.22 million plus taxes and duties. 

The terms and conditions of the loan are very concessionary. The loan amount as already mentioned is 20 million units of accounts. Maturity period is 50 years, including 10 years of grace and service charge of 0.75 percent of disbursed and outstanding accounts. Mr Speaker and honourables, I do recommend that the House do pass this loan request.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Chairperson, are you going to read the whole report – why not give us the highlights?

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Mr Speaker, I have no problem reading it entirely, but if you want me to make only the highlights –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please summarise for us.

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request from African Development Bank (ADB) of units of accounts 20 million for financing the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project (SHSSPP) II under the Ministry of Health. 

The Government has negotiated for a loan of units of accounts UA20 million from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank group. The funds are to be used to meet the cost of Support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project (SHSSPP) II under the Ministry of Health. This project is a follow up of a successful similar five-year project that was funded as (SHSSPP) I also under the Ministry of Health.

Methodology

In carrying out the scrutiny of the proposal on SHSSPP II, the committee perused through the following project documents:
•	Credit agreement
•	Project appraisal document
•	Project implementation plan
•	The completion report of SHSSPP I

The committee also held meetings with the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Health together with their technical committees. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of my committee on this job. I also lay on Table the credit agreement from African Development Fund under Government of Uganda.

The Project Appraisal Document together with the Project Implementation Manual. The Project Completion Report for SHSSPP I: SHSSPP I was implemented for a period of five years with a loan and grant secured by Government of Uganda from African Development Bank to support Mental Health Services in the whole country and Primary Health Care Services in 11 districts of Arua, Yumbe, Nebbi, Adjumani, Moyo, Apac, Lira, Kaberamaido, Soroti and Kapchorwa. I invite members to look at appendix I and II. 

The total project cost was US$ 48.17 million. This is disaggregated as follows: ADF loan US$ 40.18 million, ADF Grant of 3.34 million and Government of Uganda counterpart funding of US$ 4.65 million.

The project supported strengthening Mental Health Services in the country and the provision of Primary Health Care in 11 districts.

Page 3 highlights what was involved under Strengthening Mental Health Services, and page 4 highlights what was under Mental Health Services. 

Page 6 provides for the proposed Support to Health Sector Strategic Plan Project Under SHSSPP II

Background

The proposed Support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project is a follow up on SHSSPP I. SHSSPP II will shift to South Western Uganda to cover the districts of Mbarara, Kiruhura, Isingiro, Ibanda, Ntungamo, Kabale, Rukungiri, Kanungu, Kisoro, and Bushenyi. It will also cover seven Mental Health Units in Masaka, Mubende, Mbarara, Mbale, Jinja, Lira and Moroto as can be seen in appendix III.

On page 7, we go straight to the project, but in 5.2, there are other interventions which Government is doing apart from SHSSPP. In this project, the objectives are to improve delivery of quality Reproductive Health Services in 10 districts of Western Uganda and to strengthen provision of Mental Health Services in the entire country.

The project components are mainly two:

The improvement of Reproductive Health: This will cover full rehabilitation of the Mbarara Referral Teaching Hospital to improve the functioning of the referral system especially for obstetric and other emergencies in the region. Under this intervention, the hospital will also be provided with essential medical equipment, furniture and a fully equipped ambulance.  

•	Strengthen the Ministry of Health reproductive health division to effectively monitor and support reproductive health services in the country and to develop relevant tools. 
•	It will also improve access to quality reproductive health services in the 10 districts where they will: 

i) 	Construct, equip and furnish 39 Health Centres in 9 districts; 13 of them will be Health Centre IVs and 26 Health Centre IIIs.

ii) 	Provide obstetric equipment and furniture, including equipment for emergency obstetric care to 9 district hospitals within the catchment area so as to link the referral systems. Four public hospitals, that is, Kabale, Kitagata, Itojo, Kambuga; and 5 private hospitals, that is, Ibanda, Kisizi, Nyakibale, Ishaka and Rushere hospitals will be covered.  

iii) 	Provide a fully equipped ambulance to each of the nine hospitals and 13 Health Centre IVs to strengthen referrals, especially for obstetric emergencies. 

iv) 	Provide communication equipment to health centres and hospitals to improve referrals, radio calls or toll free telephones. 

•	This programme will also cover training facility based health staff in various reproductive health skills like postnatal care, life saving skills and others.

•	It will disseminate relevant guidelines and protocols; support family planning outreach activities and camps to promote methods mix especially for long term and permanent methods.

•	It will also support community mobilisation programmes and advocacy, and involvement of the community leaders in management of their own health. This will be through information, education and communication like film vans, radio campaigns, use of community-based structures like community health trainers and community health workers.

•	It will also strengthen adolescent health friendly services by supporting an existing Adolescent Centre in Mbarara with two mini buses and relevant equipment for the youth centre/youth outreach activities. The centre will act as a hub for adolescent friendly services in the 10 districts. 

The second component of SHSSPP II will cover the following activities:

•	Constructing, equipping and furnishing mental health units at seven regional referral hospitals, that is, Mbale, Mbarara, Lira, Moroto, Jinja, Masaka and Mubende.  

•	It will also cover post basic training of mental health specialists: psychiatrists, health tutors, psychiatric clinical officers, clinical psychologists, health tutors and psychiatrist social workers. 

•	In-service training of staff at referral/district hospitals and health centre levels to strengthen their skills in managing mental health patients and to help integrate mental health into routine programmes.

•	Community mobilisation for mental health to reduce stigma, considering the rising burden of mental illness due to HIV, civil strive, and others.

•	Lastly, this programme will cover support to the Ministry of Health’s mental health division in its supervision activities, office equipment, and one station wagon for health coordination will also be provided.

As already alluded by the Minister of Finance, this is a highly concessional loan with 50 years of maturity including 10 years of a grace period, a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum on disbursed and outstanding amounts, and a commitment charge of 0.5 per annum on undisbursed funds.  

Observations of the Committee

1. 	The committee appreciated the infrastructure installed under SHSSPP I and applauded the level of workmanship generally.  

2. 	The units visited were appreciated by the communities around which was confirmed by the large turn-up of patients in the various centres.  This shows, therefore, that the facilities are put to use.  

3. 	There is inadequate staffing in all hospitals and health units visited by the committee especially of psychiatrists and midwives. It was reported that most of the health units in Koboko District have one staff, just a nurse.  However, we were informed that Butabika has stepped up the training of this specialised sector to equip all health units.  

4. 	There was inadequate housing in the health units and hospitals visited. This has led to defection of staff from rural areas to urban centres.  

5. 	Like all Government departments, all health centres complained of inadequate funding as one of the causes of poor service delivery. It was reported to the committee that there is need to reinstate the Appropriation-In-Aid approach to allow these centres which charge some fee to plough it back to running those centres. 

6. 	There is no clear policy on how to maintain the constructed health units and hospitals.  

7. 	The Mental Health Units have played a major role in rehabilitating many mentally sick people. All units were active and members noted that there is hope in patients recovering. It was noted that there are outreach plans despite the limited transport facilitation and sometimes limited trained psychiatrists.

8. 	Patients overwhelm health units and the infrastructure is inadequate. These centres deserve to be upgraded- here we have highlighted Koboko Health Centre IV and Katakwi Health Centre IV. Mubende is not a Health Centre IV so we should not have it like that. I beg your indulgence. Mubende should be confirmed a regional referral hospital. 

9. All the proposed sites for upgrade and construction of health facilities have secure and sufficient land. 

10.	The hospital land in Butabika, which was allocated to investors, greatly poses a danger to the nature of the services being provided by the institution. The purported investors’ land is being built up with residential houses instead. 

11.	Transport facilities are a major setback and the view of health centres visited is that pickup ambulances were not good enough for the patients. 

12.	The committee noted that there are some structural problems in the completed infrastructure. This was particularly in Buhinga in Fort-Portal where there were some structural cracks and the ceilings were vandalised by the patients. Arua Mental Health Unit also had cracks in its ceiling. Members were informed that this is being rectified by the contractors. 

13.	Another cause of the problem is the local tenders, which are influenced by politics; and contractors do shoddy work. The committee noted a theatre in Atiri Health Centre IV, which was a structural disaster. The machinery is lying idle and cannot be installed. 

14. 	Some health units have a big catchment area and transport and staff inefficiencies complicate follow-up activities and mobilisation efforts to deliver effective medical services. This is both in mental and primary health care service. An example is Masaka Referral Hospital with only two small rooms as a department of psychiatry; and a small mortuary. 

15.	Some structures in most referral hospitals are as old as 80 years and need urgent repair. These were mainly missionary or kingdom hospitals like Mbarara, Masaka, Mubende and Buhinga.

16.	There is urgent need to repair Mbarara National Referral and Training Hospital. This has to take into account the referral linkages of Mbarara Hospital and the lower health facilities.

17.	Teaching hospitals like Mbarara University Teaching Hospital have no clear demarcation as to what belongs to the Ministry of Education and what belongs to the Ministry of Health. 

18.	The committee noted with concern the untidiness in Buhinga and Mbale referral hospitals and calls on the responsible authorities, including the Ministry of Health, to address the situation. 

19. 	The project should be rolled out to all regions of the country because of its positive impact on the provision of health facilities. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee came up with the following recommendations:

1. 	The Government should urgently look into staffing of the health services’ sector to avoid turning the infrastructure installed at huge costs into white elephants. Affirmative action should be considered for this sector as it was done for the Judiciary.

2. 	The committee greatly calls upon the Executive to review the allocation of Butabika land to investors in the interest of the mental national referral hospital and training campus which are at Butabika, and considering that under SHSSPP I Government injected in Butabika over US $8 million, making it one of the best equipped hospitals we have in Uganda. 

3. 	The Government should consider allowing funds collected at health centres and hospitals to be used at source since funding from the centre is always inadequate. However, monitoring and supervision should be strengthened to avoid any abuse of such a facility. 

4. 	The department of monitoring and supervision of the Ministry of Health should be strengthened to ensure compliance with the standards of health service provision at the health centres. This includes strict supervision of local contractors who allegedly thrive on political patronage.

5. 	The Government should put in place a clear policy for maintaining the infrastructure put in place under the various projects in order to ensure their sustainability.

6. 	The ceilings of the mental health units should be concrete to avoid destruction and given the nature of patients being catered for.

7. 	The contractors and project managers should avoid setting similar, generic plans, for the structures across the project without analysing the situation on the ground. This will minimise adjustment costs as was seen under some mental health units in SHSSPP I.

8.	The Government should look at funding similar programmes in the areas of need through the budget process.

9. 	The health centres, which are overstretched with a number of patients, should be upgraded to district hospital status. These include Koboko and Katakwi health centre IVs while Mubende should be confirmed as a regional referral hospital as had earlier been proposed by the Ministry of Health.

10.	The Government should provide health facilities in a comprehensive manner as the SHSSPP II project in order to deliver comprehensive health facilities in regions not yet covered like the central, and others.

11.	The issues of proximity to health facilities should be considered in the next phase in order to maximise health service provision. In this case, the project should look into adjusting the allocation of the facility to Kabuyanda and Kikagati, which have a high maternal and mental case rate, in Isingiro District. 

Mr Speaker, we had field visits and the Committee on National Economy did them together with the Committee on Social Services.

In conclusion, the committee noted with satisfaction that there is need for this (or a similar) project to be concluded by Uganda. But the above concerns should be addressed in order to realize full benefits of the projects. 

The committee would like to thank the Members for their resilience during field visits and the ministry officials who accompanied them.

The issues of health service provision in nature will be handled by the Committee on Social Services. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: So, you support the loan?

MR KADDUNABBI: We support it, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

3.41
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing here in support of this motion for the government of Uganda to borrow this amount of money, but I have one concern. It is a good loan with a very good objective of addressing reproductive health in Uganda, a concern we have actually moved a motion for. So, when we see a loan coming, we feel all great and happy. But I am perturbed a bit by the distribution of the ten districts, which have been selected to benefit from this loan. They all went to south west and we have four traditional regions in our country. I was thinking loud: “Would it be too late or possible for us to go back to the drawing board and distribute the ten districts equally within the whole country?” 

If possible, then we should get two from central, two from the North, two from the West, three from wherever and we get ten. I do not think they are affected more that side than anywhere else in the country. I think if it is not too late, the ministries of Health and Finance should sit together and redistribute the ten districts. It is a humble request. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.43
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion because the areas for which we are going to borrow money are very important and very close to my heart, especially the areas of mental health, reproductive health and antenatal problems. 

Mr Speaker, regarding the issue of mental health, I would like to inform all the Members of Parliament that in a day you experience madness, except that the degree is minor. There are times you wake up in your house and you do not know which direction to go, what dress to put on, actually you are mad –(Laughter)- so, what makes a person mad and you call them mad is that the degree is higher and it lasts longer. But all of us are potential mentally ill persons. So, we must support this loan without any hesitation. 

It is true we have been depending only on Butabika Hospital. I am happy that the Ministry of Health has really equipped and opened up these centres in various districts, which has really reduced the problem of bringing mentally ill persons all the way to Butabika. The problem as expressed in the report is that they do not have personnel there. Taking an example of the one of Arua, I do not know whether they have taken some staff, otherwise it has been closed for a very long time because of staff. Currently, I think they have just upgraded one staff that moves from the hospital to serve in that centre. 

I support this motion so that our mentally ill persons can be helped and they can be treated. With mental illness, definitely, you maybe cured but it can come again depending on the situation which causes mental illness. It may be because of alcohol and if you stop you may improve, but when you go back to drink, it starts. 

I am happy because the distribution is even throughout the country: West Nile, Eastern region and Western region, that is how things should be done –(Laughter) Why distribute even for mental health then when it comes to reproductive health and antenatal health, you only restrict yourself to the Western region? For sure! It is in the gospel that the little will be taken away to be given to those who have more. I think the Western region is well served fairly compared to the rest of the regions. I support the idea of the honourable member who said we should redistribute this allocation so that we from the North, from the East and Central can be happy with the government as well.

I would like to thank the Committee of Social Service –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, when you are debating this issue, you should consider that this is phase II. You have to also think about phase one. Do not think that this is the first time, so you have to look at one and two and to debate in a balanced manner. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. I think the Minister should tell us how the first one was distributed then we shall be comfortable. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will come in later. Okay, give the information, it will help us.

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think during the debate I am beginning to detect one thing. It is as if there was a bias in the distribution of services. This is not true. 

Ship one, as we have been told, was maternal child health and mental health. A mental health unit was built in Arua; a mental health unit was built in Soroti and Butabika, Hoima, Fort-Portal and Kabale. So, reproductive health units in the Soroti and Arua area and health centres III and IV were improved. The service has been organised that we handle region by region. This is ship II; there will be a ship III, maybe a ship IV. 

With these loans you have to complete one ship at a go. Ship I was completed. It was partly a loan and partly a grant. When we went to Tunisia to negotiate for this loan, we thought we were going to get a grant but we found that Uganda had been upgraded economically. They thought we were economically capable of taking a loan and we could not change that. We cannot again go to the drawing board to say that we should redistribute. The loan was negotiated; the works were identified and mentioned in the contract. We cannot redistribute it. Let us finish ship II and then we can go to ship III, identify the areas of need and we shall go ahead. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Mr Speaker, I thank the Minister for his explanation but my worry is that the situation is appalling in Koboko District. We would really love to have one or two health centre IVs upgraded. We need to be assured about the interval of your request: ship I, ship II; and I should be assured of when ship III is coming so that I can wait patiently.

I would like to thank the Social Services Committee for reaching Koboko Health Centre IV; they have seen for themselves that there is only one staff there. In Koboko, the population is 36,000 persons. You can imagine the situation there. I am happy they have recommended Koboko Health Centre IV to be upgraded to a district hospital. I would like to be assured now by the Minister when it will be effected so that I go back to tell my people of Koboko and we wait. Otherwise, you have seen how much we are suffering in Koboko. Thank you very much.
 
3.52
MRS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): I stand to support the borrowing of this loan and commend Government for its effort in addressing these two key areas of reproductive and mental health. 

Mr Speaker, I am glad to note that under ship I, Gulu Referral Hospital was among the hospitals, which were provided for in the mental unit. Some three year ago, I had an opportunity to visit Gulu Referral Hospital and found that the psychiatric ward was extremely overwhelmed with patients and yet the staff they had was just one person plus another one from Gulu University. As we put in place these mental units, I do hope that the training of the staff is something that is going on very fast and that these units we are placing all over the place will have adequate staff. 

A few months ago again, I was in Oyam District and we were fortunate to receive an ambulance donation and one of the issues that did come up was the question of women dying when giving birth. The district health boss defended the medical workers that the reason why sometimes when women go to deliver they do not have people to attend to them was because they do not have adequate staff. They have a situation where they can have one nurse or one midwife expected to work in a health unit for 24 hours without relief. The question of trained adequate staff in the health units is critical. Unless we staff these places properly, and pay these people properly, we shall continue having a high rate of death in these hospitals.

It is a pity that this committee – I know they could not go everywhere – but I wish they had visited the new district of Oyam. If they had gone there, they would have found that this baby district is really in problems. We have a health centre IV, which is acting now as a district hospital and hardly has any facilities. It is in a very poor shape and needs urgent help. I would want to take this opportunity to ask the Minister of Health to please give affirmative action to Oyam as a new district as well as other new districts. New as we are, we still need the services that Government can give to us. I thank you.

3.56
MR FRED BADDA (Independent, Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I thank the committee for preparing this good report. However, I have one concern that I think is major and it was also rightly observed by the committee on page 11, observation No. 11. It talks about the ambulances. It has been and is going to be one component for which the money we intend to borrow is going to be used. 

Previous experience has shown that a number of ambulances were bought in form of pick-ups and they have caused more problems than the expected good out of them. They are used to transport sick people and they are carried in the open at the back where they take in a lot of dust, wind, adverse weather and all bad things can happen. 

I want to appeal to Government that if we are borrowing money to buy transport facilitation, the priority should not be transport for the health officers but transportation for the sick people. They should be ambulances not these pick-ups that are used to carry charcoal, dead bodies and the following day they are carrying an expectant mother. If Government can consider this one – for example in Kalangala, we requested for at least one boat and a good ambulance. But we ended up getting two pick-ups. The problem is that you cannot use a pick-up on water. 

Secondly, you cannot transport a person all the way from a district like Kalangala to a referral hospital in Masaka on a pick-up. It is really very dangerous. So, I request the Minister of Health and the committee to take this seriously. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.59
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the well researched report and for the observations and recommendations they have made.  

On observation No. 3, I concur with the committee’s observation that there is total inadequacy in staffing all health centres. Recently I toured all the health centres in my district and I found out that they were all under staffed and yet we had a restructuring exercise sometime back, which recommended that some of the health centre IIs, if not all, are supposed to have five staff members. Health centre IIIs are supposed to have 18 to 19 staff members. Contrary to this, you will find a health centre III which has nine or eight staff members and yet they are supposed to be full time at these health centres. The Minister should explain when the ministry intends to respond to the restructuring exercise recommendations.

On observation No. 4 about staffing, if we are really to help our people to access the facilities, medical staff need to be housed at the health centres. It is unfortunate that you find a health centre which has got a maternity ward, but no accommodation for even the midwife! We are actually privileged to have the traditional birth attendants (TBAs) who have helped in attending to expectant mothers and yet they are not facilitated.  

In my tour I found one of the TBAs in Kicungura. She actually had five expectant mothers waiting to be delivered. I wondered what was happening! I went down to find out what was happening and yet when this woman is attending to these women, she is not facilitated with gloves, not even with a Mama kit. Here we are supposed to respect the Millennium Development Goals on reducing on infant mortality rate. I want the Minister to assist us in telling this august House, how does he intend to help the TBAs who are supporting the government’s initiative towards reduction of infant mortality rate?

Thirdly, on supporting the government to borrow this loan, of recent we have had so many people developing diseases connected to the heart, the kidney and we do not know what our Government plans to do. Last night on TV there was a child of seven months who was asking for assistance so that she is assisted to be ferried to India to undergo a kidney transplant. The Minister should tell this august House about the plans that the government has especially in trying to put in place some of these facilities, which would help our people with these diseases. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.04
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the borrowing of this money and I thank the committee for the report.  

The Minister has explained the distribution of these facilities but I think it is very clear that when they are considering SHSSPP II or SHSSPP III, they should distribute evenly. I think the consensus is that it is not good to concentrate in one area. This breeds bad faith. 

I would also like to inform the Minister that there are districts, which do not have district hospitals. They should be focused on when they are upgrading at least to level IV.  Luwero District does not have a district hospital and district hospitals come with facilities, which we are lacking. So I am appealing to the Minister to consider Luwero for a district hospital and also to upgrade many level IIs and IIIs to IV so that our people can access the health facility.

On observation No. 6 on page 10, the ministry having no clear policy on the maintenance of the facilities we are putting up, is a very serious matter. The ministry should sit down, maybe with their colleagues in the Ministry of Housing, to see that we really maintain these facilities. It is not good to continue building when we cannot maintain. A clear policy should be worked out so that our facilities do not rot.

On the transport issue of the pick-ups, I request the ministry to immediately erase the word “ambulance” from those pick-ups. It is a shame to talk of pick-up ambulances. I know the issue is that it is going be used as an ambulance and transport, but putting the word “ambulance” on a pick-up! I think we should remove it. I propose that we erase that word “ambulance”, but it continues doing the services it was meant for as an ambulance and transporting drugs and officers.

Lastly, let me talk also about the generics plans the chairman of the committee talked about. These plans have a problem. They are sent to the districts from the ministry. The moment you put up the structures, medical workers start complaining. The plan says good louvers, doctors say, “we do not want louvers, they allow in dust.” Plans do not provide for wall tiles; when you put them up, the doctors say, “There are no wall tiles. We cannot use these facilities.” 

o, I think let the ministry sit down and educate its people to the minimum standards so that they do not disturb at districts. Thank you very much.

4.08
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons With Disability, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this motion. I support the motion basically because of two reasons: Number one, government has committed a lot of resources in laying the infrastructure in the health sector. It is, therefore, no surprise that all these programmes and policies have found a conducive environment where service delivery can be done.

Secondly, the Ministry of Health has played its role for Ugandans to see and realise value for money through implementation of this first phase of this project in the health sector.

It is very difficult for a country to prosper and progress when its population is faced with disease. It is, therefore, a very important decision for Parliament through our oversight function to scrutinise these programmes and projects whether they have been of value to our people in the country and thereby that acting as a basis for us to approve such loans. Indeed, I urge my colleagues to support this second phase to enable the population in this country to access better and adequate health services.

I wish to comment on the intervention mentioned in providing essential medical equipment, furniture and fully equipped ambulance. I represent PWDs in Parliament. Quite often you find that a component of such a project does not integrate fully equipment or essential ingredients that can cater for PWDs. If you look, for example, in reproductive health, this is a component that is vital and has a direct effect on our national development. But does it really integrate issues and problems that affect PWDs?  In a referral hospital and health centre IVs, you cannot find any provision for even a bed where a pregnant mother with a disability can be helped to deliver. Yet this is a simple thing, which I believe would not cost much in such a component.

I want to contribute also on this problem, which has been mentioned by Engineer Byandala. How can we put infrastructure which cost colossal sums of money and we do not have a policy of maintenance? Year in year out in this House, Members have observed that this has been a problem almost in every sector. Government puts up infrastructure but the question of maintenance is lacking. I urge the Minister of Health that this component of maintenance, which ensures sustainability, should be looked at seriously if we are going to maintain our infrastructure, which we put painstakingly with money received as loans.

I wish to commend the committee for this well-researched report and also commend the implementers of this programme that it is circulating from one region to another and eventually as has been a recommendation here, it will circulate throughout the country. I urge the implementers of this programme to remain consistent and implement it as they did on Phase I. 

Lastly, I urge Members that since there is a component of mental health, this is a very important area, which we must look at. Quite often, we have seen Ugandans with mental illnesses coerced. That is why I support in this report community mobilisation to make us understand the way we must treat Ugandans with mental illnesses.

I wish to commend the management of national mental hospital in Butabika for the job well done and I urge Members of Parliament, who may not necessarily be on the Committee on Social Services which normally interacts with these people, to pay visits to this Butabika mental hospital and you really see that there is a very big change in that hospital. Our contribution should come on the floor of this House particularly when these hospitals, where we are all potential candidates to go and join, come here to present their budget. Please, I think we should all support them. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, don’t you think for purposes of this motion of a loan we have sufficiently debated it and the issues are common. Maybe we get the answers from the two ministers, the owner of the motion and the minister in charge of the sector. We shall have an opportunity again when the Committee on Social Services handles matters of the ministry. Very soon we will be dealing with the budget of these various ministries and that is where we examine these matters. Don’t you think we should hear from the ministers and conclude?

4.14
THE CHAIRMAN, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Mr Speaker, I just would like to say something about the request by Members for this programme of SHSSPP covering the entire country as we recommended. It is just because the way SHSSPP was designed is a comprehensive project and it covers: outpatient facility, maternity ward, labour suite and placenta pits, a general ward, dental unit, three staff houses for the health centre IIIs and four staff houses for health centre IVs. 

It caters for appropriate sanitation, a VIP latrine with water supply and a backup generator. General equipment for primary health care; it has fully equipped ambulances; it has motorcycles and bicycles. It has audio and video equipment; it has heavy-duty photocopiers; water quality testing kits, lawn mowers and solar equipment. 

I just think that it might be late but I do not know what the minister has to say about this SHSSPP II. Maybe it should not take another five years to negotiate SHSSPP III.  

THE SPEAKER: That is an open cheque you have given the minister.

4.16
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Steven Mallinga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A lot of questions have been raised in this debate some of which are valid and others a misunderstanding.  Perhaps the honourable members have not been very keen in observing what is going on in their areas. I have already said the way the loans are structured from the World Bank; you get a loan and you specify what you are going to do with that loan at the headquarters of the World Bank in Tunisia. If you are going to build Butabika Hospital, you say that and at the end they come and see whether you have done what you said you were going to do with that money. 

In the case of SHSSPP I, we did extremely well. By the end of the specified period, we had utilised 93 per cent of the loan and work was excellent. The work at Butabika Hospital is not shoddy; if you go to Fort Portal and you look at the mental health unit there, it is not shoddy work and wherever this work was done. So, let us not talk of shoddy work. We would not have been approved for SHSSPP II if the first lot was shoddy.  

Hon. Baba Diri, there was such a very quick multiplication of districts and we did not have the money to cope with the creation of districts to build district hospitals. But Koboko is one of my favourite areas. They had an outbreak of Cholera and before long they had an outbreak of Meningitis. We have been trying to control it and we responded at once. But Koboko still has a health centre IV. The way we are trying to structure health centre IVs, while we are waiting for money to build district hospitals, is to make them functional.  

There is a definite plan. Those who are saying there is no definite plan we have a specific plan now. We have built many units and as I speak, 72 per cent of the population in Uganda is within five kilometres of a health unit. (Interruption)

MR BUKENI: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You have said that the question of shoddy work is not there yet the committee on observation number 13 commented on this. I am a Member of the Public Accounts Committee and one of the problems which the IGG has is the issue of value for money and when you talk of value for money, it is shoddy work. If the minister comes here and convinces us that the work done is satisfactory yet the committee found out that the work actually is shoddy, what do we do, Mr Speaker?  

Secondly, they are telling us that there is some machinery, which is lying idle. This is happening everywhere in almost all health centre IIIs where they built theatres; the equipment is there but no work is being done in those theatres. I want a clarification from the minister. Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much. I have just been talking to the chairman of the committee and he has assured me that he did not detect any shoddy work in SHSSPP I. (Interruption)

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, I think we need to get the difference of the two. What was done in Atiri Health Centre IV was not under SHSSPP I project. Atiri Health Centre IV benefited form SHSSPP I but earlier on, there had been a theatre which was constructed with the money which went through the district which actually is not operational up to now. Even the equipment, which was supposed to be installed, cannot be put in.

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, with due respect, hon. Kaddunabbi on page 12 he categorically said, “The committee noted that there are some structural problems in the completion of infrastructures. This was particularly in Buhiga Hospital where there are structural cracks and the ceiling vandalised by the patients.” When you go to 13, he gave an example of Atiri. Is he in order to dispute his report?

THE SPEAKER: Proceed. This debate is not taking us anywhere.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, there is a lot of shoddy work in the construction of health units and that is the result of decentralisation. Districts carried out most of these constructions where there is shoddy work. The Ministry of Health submitted plans but in order for some people to benefit financially, they changed the plans. The mixtures of cement were not proper; they were mixing one bag of cement maybe to ten bags of sand. I have gone round and seen how the districts constructed these theatres and we rectified that.  

Since 2002, the Ministry of Health has carried out very close supervision of construction of decentralised health units and the problem of shoddy work has been controlled. Thank God! (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has an engineering unit. Is the minister telling Parliament that the engineering and infrastructure unit of the Ministry of Health is incompetent and it cannot work with district engineers to supervise construction work at the district level? 

DR MALLINGA: Am I getting information, I don’t know? 

HON. MEMBERS: It was a clarification.

DR MALLINGA: I did not hear that it was a clarification. If it was clarification, okay. The honourable member is aware and I have just said, the engineering unit from the Ministry of Health has been carrying out close supervision of the construction of the health units since 2002 and the problem of shoddy work has been controlled. 

But prior to that, when we allocated the construction of clinics or health centres, we left it to the districts to carry out the construction and the engineers, CAOs and politicians at the district took advantage of it to make some money and the constructions were shoddy. I agree with you. I have been all over to see some of these clinics and they are really shoddy. I encourage you to visit those in your areas and you will agree that since 2002, there has been a lot of improvement in the construction because of the supervision from the Ministry of Health. (Applause)

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, we are seated here as a Parliament, debating on behalf of the Ugandans who elected us. The minister has recognised that there is shoddy work but they request us to authorise them to borrow more money. What assurance is he giving to Ugandans that what we are passing today is not going to add on the existing shoddy work?

THE SPEAKER: No, the answer has been given. He has said that since 2002, they have taken positive steps to ensure that shoddy work is not done. That policy is still obtaining. That is his answer.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you, Sir. The question of shortage of health staff: You realise that in SHSSPP I and SHSSPP II, there is a provision for training of health staff like doctors and nurses and all the people who work especially in the psychiatry unit. What we have to emphasise is that, psychiatry all over Africa and maybe all over the world was neglected. We did not think that it was a problem. So, very few people trained as psychiatric nurses and very few doctors trained as psychiatrists. Fortunately, because of SHSSPP I, we at least have a psychiatrist in each of those units which were constructed. Because we took a special interest in training psychiatrists, we have psychiatric nurses in each of those units plus other units. We are trying to modernise psychiatry in this country and be able to treat it like any other illness just like you treat Malaria.

When you go to Mbale - I am surprised nobody mentioned it - the psychiatric unit there is like a jail. It is one of those, which were constructed in the past. But Mbale is one of the hospitals, which is going to benefit from this SHSSPP II. The same applies to Jinja, whose psychiatric unit is away from the hospital. It was one of the district houses. But Jinja is one of the hospitals, which are going to benefit.

So, we have taken all this in account when planning ways of improving on psychiatric services in this country. We are becoming sophisticated now and psychiatric illnesses are coming out. So, we are trying to address that and I hope that you work with us to accomplish that. With shortage of staff we realise that. 

But in the area of regular nurses and midwives, for the first time this year, we recruited enough people to fill all the positions in all institutions. All the training schools are now full. We have filled them with students who are going to be nurses, midwives etcetera. (Applause). We hope that as we go along, we shall be able to address that problem.

Health centre IIIs and IVs: We do not just promote these health centres without planning. One, they are dependant on the population. Every sub-county is entitled to a health centre III; every county (constituency) is entitled to a health centre IV. Health centre III has a maternity unit and staffing is close to 30. But we have never been able to fill all the positions because of the shortage of staff.  Health centre IV’s staffing is almost 35 and there are supposed to be two doctors so that the hon. Baba Diri at Koboko, if her district was doing the right things, they should have been able to attract two doctors at Koboko.

About interviewing the doctors. I will tell you one of the areas, that is, Nakapiripirit has almost all its health centres filled by doctors. They have a doctor at every health centre. What they did was to pay some money above the salary for their doctors and they constructed houses for their doctors from revenue from the local government. So, if our districts were also aware of this and at least subsidise the salaries of the doctors in their districts, it is possible for our entire health centre IVs to have doctors.

Traditional Birth Attendants (TBAs): The honourable member from Masindi is in great praise of the TBAs. There has just been a publication by the London School of Tropical Medicine that TBAs have not helped to reduce maternal mortality or infant mortality. In fact, in some areas TBAs have contributed to maternal mortality by retaining patients in their clinics for a long time. Sometimes they retain these patients for three days with ruptured membranes. 

I had complaints when I went to Mbarara that TBAs were delaying to send patients to the hospital. As a result, these patients arrive at the hospital when they are totally exhausted. Mbarara Hospital has very good obstetricians, some of them from Cuba. But still they lose patients because the TBAs retain them in their clinics trying to extract little money from them and they do not want to let them go. They were trained –(Interruption) 

MRS LAGADA: Mr Speaker, I remember that the TBAs were a major government programme. Government trained them and they have worked on the women in the countryside free of charge for all these years. Now that the honourable minister is saying that TBAs have done more harm than good, may we know what the Ministry of Health has done either to retrain the TBAs or to stop them from rendering those very dangerous services?

DR MALLINGA: I think the honourable member made a statement, which I did not make. I did not say TBAs are doing more harm than good. TBAs were trained for a very short time to deliver normal deliveries. If a delivery is going on well and is progressing on time, a TBA can handle it. But if there is prolongation of labour, TBAs were instructed to refer those patients to the nearest hospitals as soon as possible. They are not supposed to handle complications, but some of them take it on themselves to want to deliver twins -(Interruption)

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, the minister has said that the TBAs do not want to release patients because they want to extort money from them. But: -
(i)	Doesn’t he think that it is the patients themselves sometimes who do not want to go to the health centres because of the treatment they are given when they are there?

(ii)	When they go to the hospitals, don’t they extract a lot of money from them, which they fail to pay and some of their belongings are confiscated?

(iii)	Is transport available to all the TBAs to transport these patients to the district hospitals and what not? Because there is a problem of transport and fuel. No double cabin will move from wherever it is to go and pick somebody from the village, unless somebody has provided fuel and given some allowance to the driver. How many Ugandans can afford that? 

THE SPEAKER: But now what I see, this has become a very major debate on policies of the Ministry of Health, when actually the motion was about a loan. And as I told you, the Committee on Social Services, which is in charge of health, should really examine this matter, have a full discussion with the ministry officials and others. This motion now has so much widened from its original territory. The territory was to authorise a loan so that certain things are taken. But I think the minister must now take note that this is a serious matter, which he should discuss with his staff. Let him take what he has gained here and find a solution. But soon the Committee of Social Services should definitely handle a debate or an inquiry on this issue.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As far as TBAs are concerned, I am just going to say the final thing. The responsibility is upon the person who is conducting labour. If you are a doctor or a TBA doing it and need arises that you have to refer that patient, you do not have to wait. Your skills have reached the maximum. You cannot handle it any more; send it to somebody who is more skilled to wind up –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But that is why they have told you that the ambulances you gave cannot serve the purpose.

DR MALLINGA: I think with the new constructions, hon. Katuramu, we are taking your concern into consideration now. There is a provision for disabled people in the laboratories –(Laughter)- and also in access to different areas of the clinic. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think there are more issues to the mover.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, for me, I am in agreement with the report but my fear is the duration of this loan. We have always been very happy in passing these loans, but the timing. I remember for the last five years, the ADB loans we have passed have not taken off. Now, when you go to places and excite people, they will be waiting. So, can I be assured of when this loan will mature and it begins work? Will it be in 2012 or something like that?

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, first and foremost, SHSSPP I was rated by the Board of the African Development Fund as being very satisfactory. And this led to the same board approving this borrowing under SHSSPP II on the 8th November last year. I would like to thank the Committee on the National Economy for moving very fast to bring this report to Parliament.  

The borrowing of this money was only awaiting the resolution of Parliament for SHSSPP II to be immediately effected. So, this resolution is obtained and I am praying through you, Mr Speaker, that we approve this loan request today and we shall be on course. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, now it is my duty to put the question on the motion by the Ministry of Finance for authorisation of this loan.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much! Now, do you think you are ready to debate the Nanyuki report? They still want more time. This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.44 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)



