Wednesday, 23 February 2005
Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you.  Currently, the Parliamentary Committee on the East African Community is meeting in Entebbe. Members of Parliament from Tanzania, Kenya, the East African Legislative Assembly and Uganda are meeting there to discuss issues affecting the East African Community and the realization of political federation anticipated in 2013. A consecutive meeting between the East African members of Parliament and members of Parliament of Uganda will take place on 26th February between 9.00 a.m. and 10.00 a.m. and then there will be a break at 2.00 p.m. in Grand Imperial Hotel. You are requested to attend this important meeting so that we discuss matters affecting our region.

I understand hon. Muzoora Kabareebe has been elected Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs replacing the Minister of State for Higher Education. Congratulations! (Applause)

2.38
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disability, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two issues to raise: One arises from your communication that there is going to be a meeting to which we are invited in Grand Imperial and I wanted to let you know that Grand Imperial Hotel is one of the most inaccessible buildings in Kampala.  Grand Imperial and Equatoria Hotel are very difficult areas in terms of accessibility for people with disabilities. Is it possible to change the venue of this meeting to avenue, which is more accessible? And maybe in future when Parliament is considering venues for people like us, I think in your fairness, both Grand Imperial and Equatoria should be avoided. That is point number one.  

Point number two, Mr Speaker, I want to find out from Government as to why the work on Jinja road has stalled for the last three or four months? We saw Jinja road being repaired; the contractors were busy and we had hope that the Jinja-Bugiri road would be repaired within a reasonable time. But within the last three or four months, work has stopped and the road is a big hazard to road users - to motorists, cyclists and even pedestrians. Would Government explain why all of a sudden work has stopped on Jinja road construction?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe to respond to your first issue you raised, I quite appreciate the concern you have expressed about inaccessibility to Imperial Hotel and Hotel Equatoria. I think the point has been made and the proprietors will be advised about this query and I believe very soon, it will be rectified. But as for changing the venue, I think arrangements have already been made that we will have a meeting there. I think I would advise that if you have really time you also go there, that in spite of inaccessibility and the point could always be put. But I assure you we shall communicate.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I am acquainted with Grand Imperial Hotel and of course, in this case it depends where this function will be held. Some of the areas are very inaccessible but others could be tolerated. So, it will depend entirely on where the function will be held and I will try to be there.  If I cannot access the function, I will come back.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

MR AWORI: Matters arising from the Communication from the Chair.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, let us –(Interruption)

2.40
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I have two point to remind the Government because I raised them in Parliament and I do not like the Leader of Government Business to be leader of Government lies. Sometime last week - I said I do not want you to be leader of Government lies.  Yes, I am protecting you.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is honourable Nabwiso in order to suggest that the Leader of Government Business is the leader of lies? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I could advise really without making any ruling on this, let us use a sober language.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The two reminders that I want to bring to the Government are as follows. Last week, the Prime Minister promised that Government would come out with a ministerial statement on the five districts, which Government has intimated will be granted in the next financial year. These are the districts of Kaliro, Koboko, Ibanda and two districts in Tororo District. We want to find out whether Government has already started budgeting for these districts and whether there will be a resolution in Parliament to accept these districts. What steps are being taken?

The second reminder is that, in 2003, Minister Kahinda Otafiire promised that he would come with the management contracts, which Government has made with Nile Ply. This is a company of foreigners who have been allowed to grow pine trees in three forest reserves in Kagoma County and Nile Ply has been chasing away people from the forest reserve. But we do not know under what conditions they were given these contracts? We asked for the contracts in 2003, they were not available. Can Government make these contracts available to Parliament because I have to explain to my people what is really happening?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

2.45
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  At the end of last year, I did move a motion under Rule 97 for a Private Member’s Bill and under sub-rule (2) of Rule 97, the Clerk’s Office is supposed to publish and gazette this Bill. I would like to know why this has not been done because the matter of deleting National Social Security Fund from the PERD Act is very important and my constituency would like to know what is happening.

THE SPEAKER: This is to remind the Clerk that necessary action should be taken.

2.46
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I need your guidance in regard to your communication. You have already briefed us about the meeting of the East African Legislative Assembly now going on at Entebbe. Yesterday, I raised concern about the many traders who deal in mivumba (used clothes) whose tariffs are becoming unaffordable in so far as the East African tariff system is concerned. The inquiry I am making is whether the failure of the Government to answer me yesterday was as a result of consultation possibly going on in the on-going Assembly.

THE SPEAKER: Your question was a national question; the meeting I am talking about is a regional meeting.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: In other words, Mr Speaker, when am I to be answered because I was not there?

THE SPEAKER: I think you put the matter yesterday, give it time, it will be answered. But do not connect it with a regional conference.

MR LUKYAMUZI: But there are cases where you immediately assign the ministers to answer, what about my case?

THE SPEAKER: Did I do it yesterday? If the matter came up yesterday, then why do you bring it now?  Please, hon. Lukyamuzi, let us know when to stand and make a point.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HOUSING)(Capt. Francis Babu): Mr Speaker, honourable members, hon. Mwandha was asking about Jinja road. I am asking him to be patient with us, I have just asked our ministry to give us a full brief on why they have stopped work on Jinja road and in the next few minutes we should get it and I will pass over the information.

THE SPEAKER: Very good, thank you.

2.49
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Matters arising from the Communication from the Chair yesterday. Mr Speaker, I was most delighted to hear the news when you announced that one of our ambassadors, Winnie Byanyima, has been appointed to a senior position at the African Union Secretariat. 

Arising from that, I would like to know from the Leader of Government Business, why are we missing so many opportunities at the highest level in international organizations where we are members?  I am specifically referring to the matter of President of African Development Bank. I am told that one of us applied for the position and was not supported by the Government, and now we are supporting a candidate from Rwanda. Why do we support other people’s candidatures and our own we are most reluctant? I would like to know the position of the Government in matters of senior appointments at international level.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Leader of Government Business, do you want - and this should close this item.

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the issue, which hon. Aggrey Awori raised was a little bit general. I would request him to put a specific question and it will be answered by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to answer my honourable colleague that I am referring to the candidature of Dr Kaberuka, a former Minister of Finance in the Republic of Rwanda. In our own case, our candidate was supposed to have been Mr Richard Kaijuka. We never supported his candidature.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, this ends this business.

2.51
MR MICAH LOLEM (Upe County, Nakapipirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is about Karamoja famine. Unfortunately the Leader of Government Business is not around otherwise, as we speak now, there is hunger in Karamoja and my question is, is the Government serious? Does the Government know that there are people in Karamoja who should be assisted? Because last year there was no rain in Karamoja and up-to-today nothing has been done to assist those people who are dying because of hunger. Thank you very much.

2.52
DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. We have a problem of children and women from Karamoja, who have run away from the area because of famine and hard conditions. Those people are dispersed in almost every town, Mbale they are there, Iganga they are there, Jinja they are there, and Kampala. But there is no Government policy of trying to help these people while they are in these towns to feed them and to send the children to school. Can the Leader of Government Business please clarify what plan the Government has for the women and children of Karamoja, who have run away from the place and are now resident in the towns I have mentioned?  Thank you very much.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government is aware of the famine problem in Karamoja and in fact, as I left Cabinet, Cabinet was discussing supplementary expenditures and support to Karamoja was one of the items contained in that. Very soon it will be brought to Parliament for approval.

As far as the children and women who are moving to other areas are concerned, I will ask the appropriate minister to come and explain to you.  Thank you, Sir.

MR ARAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime ago, I sent a question for oral answer about the escalating school dues in tertiary institutions and universities and the Minister of Education, hon. Bitamazire has always told me that she has always been ready to answer that question but it has never been put on the Order Paper. The last time I saw it on the Order Paper, it was on matters, which were pending. When is that question going to be answered?

THE SPEAKER: Let that question be put on the Order Paper on Tuesday.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE & ANTIQUITIES (Mr Jovino Ayumu Akaki): Mr Speaker, honourable members, last week I was requested to inform this Parliament about how tourists, travellers, workers are protected against tsetse fly. 

Members will recall that in May 2002, Government of Uganda adopted a new wildlife policy of protected areas systems plan. The network of these protected areas is part of a greater interlinked system of natural resources including wetlands, open water bodies and forest reserves, as you will see in Annex I attached. The quality and values of these natural systems and, therefore, the environmental role they can perform will depend on conditions of component individual attributes. The intricacy and nature of dynamics of ecological processes and life support functions of this system is ultra sensitive to non-selective approach to removal of some species, which may be considered or viewed as problem species.  

Tsetse fly is indigenous to some of our most pristine and internationally acclaimed viable ecological systems, where it constitutes or it is part of ecological processes and life support function of the central systems associated with wildlife conservation areas like Murchison Falls, Kidepo, Queen Elizabeth National Parks, among others. In this setting, tsetse flies, like many other animals with a potential to conflict with man on interaction, the species is protected as a biological resource, and can be maintained in that form through research and monitoring, coupled with environmental friendly control, without negative impacts.  

Mr Speaker, general distribution of tsetse flies in Uganda is not even as is indicated in Annex II, again attached. The regions of Busoga, Bunyoro, parts of Toro and West Nile are the most affected areas. Teso region has also been reported though this region was originally a low infestation area.  

In the wildlife conservation areas, tsetse flies are prevalent in Murchison Falls National Park and associated Budongo Forest in the district of Masindi. Other conservation areas especially Queen Elizabeth National Park and Kidepo Valley National Park, have reported low prevalence of tsetse flies infestation. In other conservation areas, however, tsetse fly is very insignificant and is not of much concern to management, that is management of protected areas.  

Justification for protection of wildlife conservation areas in their pristine condition, with the associated ecological processes and life support functions:

• The Wildlife Conservation Areas, Mr Speaker, are by law given a special dedication to protection and maintenance of the representative biological diversity of Uganda, the natural and associated cultural resources, and are managed as such.

• Protected areas perform many environmental functions and vital ecosystem services as protecting watersheds and soils and shielding human communities from natural disasters.

• A component bio-geographical and geo-morphological set up embody important biological and cultural values (in Annex III), are important for research and education as control component of management planning for human benefit, and they contribute significantly to local and regional economies most obviously through tourism.

• Protected areas, Mr Speaker, are major international attractions and generate substantial foreign exchange and employment especially from tourism. Besides, the logistical issues as well as environmental concerns associated with spraying insecticides in protected areas, it is important to protect the revenue base for the country and think of the consequences of massive spraying on the ever growing tourism industry in this country.  

A question may be asked, why spraying of a wildlife conservation area is not recommended.  

• Most spray approach to tsetse control programmes in Africa have failed because reinvasion of the tsetse flies usually occurs after a period of time. Studies have shown that pupa stages of the tsetse fly can remain buried underground for up to three months, and will eventually emerge and develop into adults after eradication of adult flies. It is, therefore, not possible to completely eradicate tsetse flies through this method of spraying because of the infestation extent, nature of forested habitats, variety and resilience of the tsetse flies populations, and the logistical constraints associated with the control method.

• Alternative methods however exist like strengthening community participation in vector control, like developing technical capacity for effective vector control, control of tsetse flies infestation and consolidation of tsetse reclaimed areas. All have been applied in Uganda and have proved effective. Under the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council (UTCC), it is reported that effective control of sleeping sickness was reduced in the south eastern Uganda from over 8,465 in 1980 to 169 in 1997, while apparent tsetse fly population density was reduced by 95%. Mr Speaker, I will move on to the next point.

• Spraying with insecticide is known to cause considerable negative and environmentally harmful effects on the non-target organisms.  The insecticides are usually non-selective and will always kill insects and other organisms that come in contact with the spray. Natural ecosystems are generally dependant on insect pollination for plant reproduction. Spraying, therefore, undermines or completely impairs this natural ecosystem function. Similarly, the effects may in the long term even spill over to other organisms like birds particularly the flycatchers that feed on insects thereby introducing the insecticide into the ecosystem food chain. The method can also lead to adverse pollution to the general environment including water sources. It is, therefore, environmentally not advisable to spray such natural ecological and biodiversity reservoirs.

Mr Speaker, for such big tracts of wild land, ground spraying is not feasible as only a small area can be sprayed at a time. Aerial spraying on the other hand is generally associated with high costs; it needs specialized equipment and suitably trained personnel. Besides, most of the protected areas inhabited by tsetse flies have thick vegetation that spraying them from the air may not be effective since all the insecticide will be trapped in the canopy, and will not reach lower levels where the flies can hide during the spray. This will be a complete wastage of resources as the spray will not be effective at eliminating the tsetse flies.
 
Mr Speaker, the main concern was how we are protecting the tourists, the travellers and people working within the protected areas. This is where I want to turn to now. 

Currently, a number of emergency measures are in place especially in Murchison Falls National Park where there is a relatively high tsetse fly infestation. Traps impregnated with insecticides have been placed in areas with human habitation in protected areas such as camp grounds, ranger outposts and compounds of houses, lodges and other buildings. The traps are coloured blue and black purposely to attract all tsetse flies within the vicinity of the trap, usually within a radius of 50 meters and all migrating flies do converge there and are trapped.  

Other short-term measures in place have included; use of insect repellents mainly by tourists, advising tourists and workers to wear long-sleeved clothes with neutral colours that blend well with the environment and thus do not attract the tsetse flies to themselves. For example, Uganda Wildlife Authority uniforms are army green and do not attract the tsetse flies. 

Another advice is avoiding areas with heavy tsetse fly infestation, as such areas are usually known. In other words, we do not take our visitors, we do not take our tourists to heavily infested areas; the trails where we take them to, game drives, are normally where we know that the tsetse flies are not in abundance. We do some clearing of the bushes around buildings and other places of use by people, we also advise travellers to avoid travelling in open-roof vehicles, as tsetse flies will always be attracted by dust from any moving objects. We discourage travel through conservation areas where it can be helped.

Mr Speaker, concern has been raised whether tsetse flies have had some negative effects on tourism.  In Uganda, there has been no reported case of tourists suffering from sleeping sickness as a result of tsetse fly bites. Even in countries that have had strong tsetse fly control programmes, the major emphasis has been to eliminate tsetse flies and thus stop them from infecting local populations and livestock with sleeping sickness and Nagana respectively. No major impacts on tourism have, therefore, been reported but our concern here is with the population. We do not allow other people to live within conservation areas.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, conservation of wildlife resources as a government programme is not against the control of vectors, let alone other harmful species, so long as specific activity areas are mapped out for action using methods that are ecologically and environmentally safe. The rest of nature’s ecological processes and life support functions should then be left to operate as freely as possible without human interference, so as to fulfil the environmental functions expectations to man namely, water catchments, climatic stabilization, atmospheric oxygen and moisture re-charge, beside the scenic beauty and scientific research for adding value to advancement in the existing food and medical technology.

Mr Speaker, I have made reference to a number of annexes. I want to refer to Annex III, which I would like to quickly go through. Annex III is an extract taken from the book, My African Journey by Winston Churchill, 1908 The Pearl of Africa. It has great relevance to the subject at hand. It says:

“My journey is at an end, the tale is told, and the reader who has followed so faithfully and so far has a right to ask what massage I bring back. It can be stated in three words. “Concentrate upon Uganda!”  But, It is alive by itself. It is vital; And in my view, in spite of its insects and its diseases, it ought in the course of time to become the most prosperous of all our Eastern and Central African possessions, and perhaps the “financial driving wheel of all this part of the world.” My counsel plainly is - Concentrate upon Uganda! Nowhere else in Africa will a little money go so far. Nowhere else will the results be more brilliant, more substantial or more rapidly realized. Uganda is from end to end one beautiful garden, where the staple food of the people grows almost without labour.  Does it not sound like a paradise on earth?   It is the Pearl of Africa.”  (Applause).

This Pearl of Africa can very easily be destroyed by unfriendly policy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister.

3.15
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for his paper to this House, regarding the Pearl of Africa. It is very interesting that after almost hundred years ago, we still have those insects and we still have those diseases, which Churchill talked about and yet the honourable Minister is taking a very convalescent view of the whole situation. 

In his paragraph 2(iv); he is even saying in some conservation areas, tsetse fly is of a very insignificant and is not of much concern to management.  

The fact of the matter, Mr Speaker, is that however low the level of infestation may be, such an area becomes a risky area because it can be a source of infestation in areas that are already under control.  

In fact, there are areas, for example, the Lake Mburo area, which was curved out of a national park, if you had tsetse fly there, in however low infestation level, it would become a danger to the neighbouring community.

I agree with the Minister that it may not be feasible to carry out either aerial or ground spraying in large expanses like the national parks.  But there are other methods of control and indeed he referred to one of them.  That is to say, using tsetse control traps.  But he referred to them as emergency measures, when actually this should be routine control measure and to the best of my knowledge, use of traps is a routine measure of control in tsetse infested areas and this has been the case, this has been the practice with UTCC.

The hon. Minister referred as to a body, which is very strange to me, the so-called “Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council”.  It is actually the council for the control of trypanosomiasis in Uganda.  So it is the other way round, unless he has created another recently. 

I want to inform the hon. Minister that actually Tsetse traps are not made out of two colours, they are made out of three colours; it is blue, black and white.  So those inaccuracies should be corrected at least for the record. So that we are talking about the same tsetse control that are scientifically and that have been deployed officially by the Government of Uganda.

Although the Minister has referred to UTCC in passing, he has not referred to other control measures, which are currently under use.  For example, the biological control methods whereby the male tsetse flies are sterilized and on mating with the female, the females die –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, when this issue of tsetse flies was raised, it was from the presentation that was made by the Minister of Health and so the Minister of Health was asked to produce a substantial statement as to how the Government is going about controlling tsetse flies.  

So I would like to give information that- I think it should be tomorrow- the Minister of Health in conjunction with my Ministry will produce a substantial statement that will address the issues that the honourable Member is talking about.  I thank you.

RTD CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, given this background and the uncoordinated movement of troops on the frontbench, is it not better to have this statement debated tomorrow when it is a full statement than having this half-baked information?

THE SPEAKER: Well, since they are on the same subject matter and the other one will give us more details which you are talking about; for saving time, we can do that and wait for the other one, then we debate the two statement together, because it will tantamount to debating today his statement, and other will be repeating the same subject tomorrow, we have dealt with one I think before.  How much time do we have then?

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with postponing debate and debating it along with the other as long as I am assured of my right to have the first opportunity- (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: You are assured of your right, because you see the Minister was dealing with this aspect as Minister of Tourism, that is how the subject will be completed by getting the statement which you requested for when the first one was given.  I think hon. Capt. Byaruhanga’s proposal is sound.

MR AYUMU:  Mr Speaker, I do agree with your ruling, but let me make one point clear.  The subjects are related in the sense that they are talking about tsetse flies, but they are as different subjects as the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture have their mandate to eradicate tsetse flies.  

I have the mandate to protect the tsetse flies –(Laughter)- the conservation areas strictly, not elsewhere.  So the subjects are not the same.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall debate this matter after the other one; we shall address all the issues involved.  So you are protecting the tsetse flies, that is your mandate?

MR DOMBO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The first time this issue came on the Floor, there was also a letter that had been written by the Minister of State for Health (General Duties) and she had in a way referred to Government’s capacity, the available resources in the control of the sleeping sickness and eradication of the tsetse fly.  

I just wanted to seek your guidance whether in the debate we shall also wait for the report from the Ministry of Health, or we shall wait for the input of the Minister of Health?  Because this issue is cross cutting many ministries, including the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Animal Husbandry and the Ministry of Tourism as the Minister has stated.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Minister of Health- didn’t he make a statement?  So you should combine the statement.  You see the dimension here is that, the Minister who has just made a statement is telling you to preserve the Pearl of Africa, which Churchill said, the tsetse fly must exist- (Laughter). But anyway we shall address this tomorrow. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SEED AND PLANT BILL, 2004

3.25
THE CHAIRMAN: I have been advised that hon. Dr Kasirvu is standing in for the Chairman, who is currently in Entebbe, is that the case?  

DR ESELE: He is the Vice Chairman.

Clause 1

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, clause one, which is the title, we propose that the title reads, “The Seed and Plant Bill, 2004” and this is because this bill was read for a First Time in 2004.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Mr Chairman, clause 3(2), we propose that clause 3(2) be re-drafted and clause 3(2) reads as follows: “The Board shall consist of the following - clause 3(2) is in two parts. 

Part (a)

1. The Chairperson of the Board, who shall be appointed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

2. A representative of National Agricultural Research Organization.

3. A representative from the faculty of Forest and Nature Conservation of a recognized University in Uganda.

4. A Representative of the Faculty of Agriculture of a recognized University in Uganda.

5. A representative of seed merchants.

6. A representative of the seed growers.

7. A representative of farmers.

8. A representative of the private plant breeders.

9. A representative from Agricultural Extensive Services and; 

Part (b)

1. The Director of Crop Resources in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

2. The Commissioner of Forestry in the Ministry responsible for Forestry or a representative of the National Forestry Authority.

3. The Commissioner for Crop Protection, who shall be the Secretary to the Board.

4. The representative of the Solicitor General, who shall be ex-officio members of the Board.

Mr Chairman, part (b) are ex-officio members and part (a) are the substantive members of the Board.  Should I read the justification?

THE CHAIRMAN: But, before you go, sorry to intervene, how do you deal with (iii) and (iv)?  Assuming you have four universities with these faculties, which you have mentioned here, what do you do?  Are they representing a particular university or they are representing faculties in all the universities?

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, in the bill it had indicated – because there could be – we have Makerere University, which is offering Agriculture; we now have also Gulu University.  So, we could have one of the universities selecting a member to be on the Board.  We are ready to –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What is he representing, the faculty in a given university or he is representing the faculties in the recognized universities?

DR KASIRIVU: The faculties of the given universities.  

THE CHAIRMAN: How do you choose whether it is Makerere University or Nkozi University?

DR NKUUHE: I think for that kind of situation where we could have more than one University, the universities could get a representative.  I think we should put in such a way that they get together and get a representative.  

The other concern I have in those lists is, you said, for instance, somebody from the Ministry of – I think we should say, “Ministry responsible for” in case the ministries are changed around, but the portfolio will still remain.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you see the problem, which he is raising?  Can you tell us, please?

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, it is the Minister who is going to appoint this Board, and I am imagining it will be in the interest of the Minister to get which representative of the University to be on the Board.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, you are equipping the Minister with the law; the Minister is not doing this discretionally, but you are giving him a law to enable him or her to do the work. 

 We are just saying this may pause a problem before the law comes into force.  Can you address it?  That is the only point, I think.  But if you do not see a problem, I will put the question.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I wanted a bit of clarification from the Chairperson of the Committee, on the ex-officio members and their designations. 

I want to accept his amendment in view of the fact that sometimes when you give a blanket cover and you say “a representative of such and such official,” sometimes they intend to send to these boards very low Junior Officers. 

 I wanted to know whether he was limiting it at Commissioner level; and if that is the case, is it cross cutting?  

In view of the constant changes in our Public Service, I would be happier if it would be a representative of so and so, either Permanent Secretary of the Ministry not below the rank of this and this.  That would be much better.  But I wanted clarification from the Chairperson first; maybe I can move an amendment later.

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, the ex-officio members -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you address the first question?

DR KASIRIVU: The issue of the Universities?  Mr Chairman, it was in the wisdom of the Committee that – in the bill they talked of Makerere University and we felt it would be unfair to pinpoint Makerere University when there are other Public Universities, which are offering agriculture.  So, that is why we felt that we should limit the discretion of the appointing authority to determine from where the representative will come from.

MR CHAIRMAN:  No, the appointing authority is exercising powers given to her by the law and therefore, when contracting the law and you realize there is a problem, why do you leave that problem to her or to him if you can solve it before the law becomes effective?  But if you do not see any problem, I am going to put the question.

DR KAPKWOMU: Mr Chairman, as hon. Dr Nkuuhe had said earlier on clarification that the four Public Universities sit together and get one common person to represent them on this Board and then the name is given to the Minister.  So the Minister will come to the appointing authority.

Further to that, hon. Ruhindi was asking the level of the person to represent. In these ministries and departments we have got subject matter specialists, so it would not be necessarily for the Commissioner in person to delegate a special subject matter specialists.  I hope that answers hon. Ruhindi.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, then if you accept hon. Dr Nkuuhe’s suggestion, the formulation has to change because the formulation as it is now does not carry what Dr Nkuuhe is saying. For you, you are agreeing with him saying he should be a representative of faculties of these Public Universities then you change it.  I do not know, but I put the question.

DR NKUUHE:  It is not only the faculties, there are many other bodies, and by the way this Readers board will be a private sector type of thing, because it is going to be in the private sector.  So we want the Minister to have as little influence as possible beyond selecting the members of the board.  We want these bodies to be responsible and send their representatives.  

For instance, we could say a representative of the Faculties of Agriculture of Public Universities of Uganda nominated by the Faculties themselves. 

In the same way we could say, a representative from the Agriculture Extension Service, because those services will also be nominated by this service.  

A representative of the Faculty of Forestry and nature conservation that is fine. But a representative of the Private plant Breeders, those also could be having many Breeders organizations, they get together selected by Plant Breeders themselves.  

So, I think it is a general pattern that when we have these boards, the members should be selected by the interest groups, the stakeholders themselves rather than the Minister; he should in consultation with the Minister, consult the stakeholders.

MRS MUGYENYI:  Mr Chairman, I think that what the law is intended to do is to provide the categories of representing the different sectors of interest groups or stakeholders from which the Minister should be able to appoint a Board.  

So this category of Public Universities, but which happen to be recognized is one category from which the Minister is to appoint a relevant, experienced qualified person, that is how I understand it, Mr Chairman.

MR CHAIRMAN: Then, if you say so, you have to make a plural rather than being singular. If you are to consider from the many faculties, even the formulation has to change, I do not know. 

MR ANANG ODUR: Mr Chairman, in view of the concern raised, I propose an amendment to 3.2 (iii) for the formulation as follows. A representative of the Faculties of Forests and Natural conservation recognized Universities in Uganda. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that acceptable?

MR ANANG-ODUR: I will propose also (iv) so that they can comment, because there are similar.  A representative for the Faculties of Agricultural recognised Universities in Uganda. 

DR KASIRIVU:  Mr Chairman, I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you look at it that way, any other amendment?

DR NKUUHE: My concern is that it is open ended; membership to the Board. They said the Board may co-opt additional members to the Board as may be necessary.  The Board is already 12 members or 13 or so.  

Now, how many members are they going to have?  Can we restrict the number that may be co-opted so that it is a manageable board because it is going to cost money to run it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, any suggestion?  

DR KAPKWOMU: Mr chairman, the co-opting of the members is actually meant, in case there is some other consultant or somebody useful as and when time arises and I do not think it will really have any financial implication as much.  

MR EKANYA: I just need clarification that we could do away with co-opting because co-opting is dangerous, when you co-opt somebody; you are inviting him or her to be part of the Board for quite some time.  Why don’t we say, “a board may invite or consult in any of its meeting”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: When you co-opt somebody he does not vote, he brings his expertise to the committee for proceedings before it; he is not a member of the Board but he comes because he is of some use to the deliberations of a particular body co-opting.  I put the question, hon. Members?

MR RUHINDI: Honourable Ekanya has a point because the way it is worded, if he co-opt an additional member without any qualification, he may claim all the benefits of a member. 

I think the best is to put it categorically that the board may co-opt a technical person, to advise it in its deliberations and shall not have a voting right.  

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Chairman, this is not a co-opted member, this is a member of the Board.  So we should have all the voting rights, he or she should have voting rights, a representative from a recognized University.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, honourable Minister, we have finished the other list.  Then there was this clause 3(3) where they say a Board may co-opt additional members to the Board as maybe necessary, that is what they were talking about- it is not the other one, the other one the formulation was changed in terms proposed by hon. Odur. I can put the question now.

MR WANDERA: I would like to know, Mr Speaker, whether for anyone to give technical advice to a board like this one such person must be a member of that board.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not a member.

MR WANDERA: Then if that is the case, why don’t we put it this way, Mr Chairman, that the Board may from time to time invite any person on account of that person’s expertise to participate in its deliberations.

THE CHAIRMAN: But you have to use the technically accepted language, the accepted language is to co-opt.  When you co-opt, actually you are inviting because he does not come in his own right; he comes because you have invited him.  The language is co-opting, but you can simplify it and say invite, but it is understood.  

I want to put the question - first of all, the amendment by hon. Odur is the only amendment actually we have.  Let us first deal with hon. Anang-Odur’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment?

MR BASALIZA ARAALI: Sorry, I do not want to drag you back, Mr Chairman, but I was still on (3), because when you co-opt you are adding somebody; now why do you say additional members?  When you co-opt, you are adding another person, now you are saying the Board may co-opt additional members.  This is being verbose and it does not really augur well; even in technical matters we usually say the Board may co-opt any member.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, noted.

MR KAPKWOMU: Mr Chairman, the intention is not to really have this co-opted member permanent; it is as and when required, so it is not on permanent membership.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you very much, Sir.  A lot of these technical boards, especially if they are technical civil aviation, agriculture and many others, now and then you get particular areas when you must get a member to come and sit with you for some time to actually carry out a task.  

So, most of them have got this clause, which allow them to co-opt.  It gives them a leeway that they can bring this person on and off whenever such a problem arises; and he does not have to be in a technical field only, it could also be in management field or any other areas.  So, the board is given the opportunity and that leeway to be able to co-opt somebody who can come and help them to carry out this particular task.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe to allay your fear, you want to say co-opt a non-voting member, will that address your fears?  But it is understood, honourable Members.

MR KAPKWOMU: Maybe, Mr Chairman, we could clarify this way. We are talking of the Seed and Plant Bill, where seed is any type of growing material.  It may be beans that has a subject matter specialist, it may be maize, it may be sugarcane; so it is not the same person being co-opted all the time, but a subject matter specialist as and when required. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But we are spending a lot of time on this, hon. Members.

MR ANANG-ODUR: The spirit of this provision, Mr chairman, is that for any technical discussion for which members who attended the meeting or in the board may not be able to deal with effectively, you invite somebody for that particular meeting or task.  

So, in that regard I wish to move an amendment in the following terms. “The board may co-opt any person or persons to give technical advice on any particular tasks before it.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: But, honourable members, I think we have made other laws where we have used the same formulation; and therefore if there is a problem of interpretation, they will interpret them in the same way we have been dealing with other formulations.  This is a normal provision we have been putting in other laws. I think for consistency we can keep it.  So, I put the question – (Interruption)

MR BASALIZA ARAALI:  I do not know whether you got my point, Mr Chairman.  My point was not really opposing this, I have been an administrator for many years and I know how this works. I was only opposing the word “additional”.  So, I was just moving an amendment that delete the word “additional” because when you are co-opting you are adding.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, he is saying delete the word ”additional”.

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I think it is important that we delete the word “additional” but now say, “The Board may co-opt any person or persons to the Board with expertise.”

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, when you are making the minutes, those in attendance, you will say, this ex-officio, co-opted member. I think that is how you write minutes.  

Well, I put the question, either you reject it and then we see how we proceed.  I put the question that Clause (3) as amended stand part of the –(Interjection)- so, honourable members, you can see what is facing us when it comes to the Constitution –(Laughter)- this is a simple –(Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr chairman.  Whoever, whether persons or a person, when they are co-opted they become members. Therefore, Sir, if we remove the word “additional” it is dangerous because it will mean that the Board may co-opt its own members, those who are already members are the ones to be co-opted.  So, I would request my colleague to drop his amendment so that we retain the word “additional” in the formulation.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.  So, I put the question that Clause – (Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Mr chairman, really there is a danger here of increasing the numbers as my Colleague from Fort Portal seems to be saying.  

My experience in Select Committees is that when Parliament allows you to co-opt other members, this co-opted member sits from the beginning up the end; he or she becomes additional to the members who were originally nominated by the Speaker.  So, this question of members really should be resolved.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, when you co-opt a member in a Select Committee, you co-opt him because you think he is of use for the subject you are investigating in.  What is wrong for him or her to sit until you conclude the business for which you set up?

MR WANDERA: Mr Chairman, I beg for your indulgence.  This clause has pecuniary implications.  By us saying that they may co-opt additional members without any limitation means that the Board can be as big as 100 people as long as the Board appointed by the Minister, in its wisdom, deems it necessary.  

Now, it is not my intention to go against your advice to me, but what is wrong, Mr Chairman, in having people with technical knowledge come to the Board, they advice the Board without necessarily being members of the Board?  Otherwise, if we leave it this way, you may have a Board of 50 people, and I think this is the concern of Member for Fort Portal Municipality. 

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman and honourable Members, this is not the only Board with this provision, even Makerere University Council co-opts members.  You can put a limitation, but they are allowed to co-opt members, the limitation is carried out administratively by that same Board.  

Mr Chairman, the tendency whenever we are creating these bodies is to not trust the people, and that is very unfortunate. Once you put in place a board, you have given them the power, you have empowered them and you should give them the ability to be able to limit this. You cannot say that they are going to have 100 people. These are hypothetical. 

Therefore, we should try as much as possible whenever we agree that we have formed a body that is going to carry out certain work, we should give them the empowerment and they will be able to limit it to a certain level. If you want to put in the law that they should not have more than two people, fine. But even the Makerere Council, which we created in the law, does co-opt members; even the Civil Aviation Authority board does co-opt members, and so on and so forth. 

So I suggest that we should really not split hairs on this. I am quite sure the people who formulated this law were curing a particular problem. I would have loved to hear the people who originated this law tell us why they put this provision in place. It would have given us a much higher level of debating and we would have found a better way of doing it, but I know they are curing a particular problem. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have said that many other laws are doing it. The policy is the same really but how long are we going to dwell on this simple – (Interruption)

MR OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In corporate governance the concept of co-option is simply picking on an individual or individuals with competent expertise in a given field to sit on a board during a given session. As soon as the session is over, the persons co-opted cease to be part of the board. That is the principle and concept, in corporate governance. 

In making this law, when we talk of co-option we are also following the same principle that if a board is going to meet on a given subject where technical expertise is required and they do not have the technical expertise among the substantive members of the board, then such persons will be chosen to sit on the board for that session only. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any additional –(Interruption)

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have an amendment to clause 3(4), and we have a new clause, which should read as follows: “The members of the board, other than the ex-officio members, shall hold office for a period of three years and are eligible for the appointment once”. 

The amendment is to add “once”, after “the appointment”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, also on clause 3 we are proposing to have a new sub-clause (5), which should read as follows: “A person shall not qualify to be appointed as a chairperson of the board if that person holds a public office”.

THE CHAIRMAN: What was that?

DR KASIRIVU: The sub-clause should read; “A person shall not qualify to be appointed as a chairperson of the board if that person holds a public office”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

DR KASIRIVU: On clause 4, Mr Chairman, we are proposing that sub-clause 4(1) be deleted and we insert a new clause to read as follows; “Performing any other function under this Act as may be determined by the Minister.” 

That is because in this sub-clause they are talking of the genetically modified, and we believe it is not yet in existence so we do not want to legislate in anticipation.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR RUHINDI: The insertion by the chairperson: “performing any other function as may be determined by the Minister”, I do not think that one is necessary really because it should be performing any other function related to the above, rather than the minister having to come in and determining the functions to be added onto these. It becomes very bureaucratic.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean you want to delete part of it?

MR RUHINDI: Yes, part of it.

THE CHAIRMAN: What do you want to delete?

MR RUHINDI: Delete the ministerial part of it and say, “performing any other function related to the above”, that is it.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is saying he wants to shorten the formulation and say, “performing any other function under this Act”.

MR RUHINDI: Performing any other related function.

THE CHAIRMAN: Related function under this Act. 

DR KASIRIVU: Accepted, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

DR KASIRIVU: In clause 5 we propose to amend sub-clause (4), to delete the words “total membership” and replace them with “voting members” so that it reads” “The quorum of the board shall be one-third of the voting members”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR NKUUHE: This business of the saying the secretary shall cause details of all business transacted at meetings of the board to be entered into a minute book, I want that to be struck out. That minute book is so ancient; nobody uses it anymore. So we should delete “to be entered into a minute book kept for that purpose”, the rest is okay because, nobody keeps a minute book.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Chairman, hon. Nkuuhe is a member of the agriculture team and the amendment he is moving should have been moved at the time of making the law. I am wondering whether he is in order. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Can some other person own it?

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was a member of this committee at the earlier stage of consideration, but I am no longer a member. So there should be no confusion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, even hon. Kawanga has some amendments.

PROF. LATIGO: So I want to move that sub-clause (5) be deleted. Yes, that is even what I had proposed to the committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well there is a proposal to delete that provision.

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, I want to oppose the deletion because the transactions in the board are important. If at a certain time a person is aggrieved by a decision of the board, he may opt for litigation and certainly the minutes will be used in defense of the decision of the board; if they have refused a certain application.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, there is a proposal to delete; I put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: There is also a proposal for amendment, by hon. Kawanga, which you heard from hon. Nkuuhe. I want to put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, in clause 6 we propose to amend clause 6(1). We should replace the words “National Seed Technical Committee” with the words “National Variety Release Committee”, and the new sub-clause should read; “There is established a technical committee to be known as the National Variety Release Committee in this Act.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Is that all? Why?

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, the Bill is involved with the release of varieties and we felt the issue of the Seed Technical Committee was not bringing out what the intention of the Bill was. So, we felt it should be the National Variety Release Committee.

DR ESELE: Mr Chairman, I wanted to clarify further that the Bill he is proposing is to set up the National Seed Technical Committee and the National Seed Certification Services Committee, but the responsibilities of these committees cut across both. So, this proposal is to set up a National Variety Release Committee whose responsibilities will only be variety release and we leave the rest of the responsibilities to the National Seed Certification Services.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Chairman, the amendment is supported.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, in clause 6(2)(b), substitute the word “a” with the word “three”, before the word “breeder”.  Also, insert the letter “s” immediately after the word “breeder” so that it becomes “three breeders”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR KASIRIVU: Also in clause 6(6), substitute the word “six” with “two”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, in clause 7 we propose that in clause 7(1) we should transfer the functions in (d) to (g), to clause 8.

And also clause 7(1)(h) should be deleted.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Chairman, I was standing up to support the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

DR KASIRIVU: Clause 8, as indicated earlier, is consequential. It has been transferred from clause 7.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you appreciated the amendment? I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, in clause 8(1), the National Seed Certification Services in the Department responsible for Crop Protection, I would like to propose that it be changed to “crop production” because really seeds are about production, they are not about protecting.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Chairman, I have no objection to “crop production.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Chairman, I want to maintain that it is in the Department responsible for Crop Protection, that is where this National Seed Certification Service is, not production.

DR KASIRIVU: In any case, Mr Chairman, there is a Department of Crop Protection and as we shall move ahead we shall see that the Commissioner, Crop Protection, is the central person to implement this Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you want to reverse now? You will recommit it later. I put the question that clause 8 as amended stand part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

DR KASIRIVU: In clause 9, sub-clause (5), substitute the clause with the following and this is how it should read; “The Board may grant breeders rights for a variety of seeds on the recommendation of the Release Committee.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR KASIRIVU: Also in clause 9(6), delete the words; “In accordance with the Plant Variety Protection law” because this law does not exist, Mr Chairman. It is anticipation of a law to be enacted.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Chairman, we discussed this and I support the deletion.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR KASIRIVU: There is also sub-clause 13(9). Insert the phrase: “in a number of representative locations” between the word “trial” and “but” appearing in the second line.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, this does not actually require going for recommittal. But in six, which we have just amended by deleting “in accordance with the Plant Variety Protection law”, I appreciate that the law is not yet in place but it could have been safer to replace it with, “in accordance with the relevant law” so that when it comes, it falls in place rather than actually leaving it completely blank.

THE CHAIRMAN: You want to concede to that?

DR KASIRIVU: I concede to it.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is conceded to and, therefore, accordingly adjusted.

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, in clause 11(1), substitute the word “board” with the phrase “National Seed Certification Services”.

And clause 11(2)(b) should be redrafted to read as follows: “competent and trained staff capable of carrying out effective conditioning and testing of seeds to the required standards, are certified by International Seed Testing Association”.

MRS MUGYENYI: Supported, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, I have a problem with clause 11(3) where it says that a licensed seed conditioner shall condition only seeds, which have been certified by the certification services. That is because before the seeds have been packaged and samples drawn and level of certification put, in the field the crops will be inspected. At that stage the seeds are not certified. The crop is expected and the license producer or the producer who has been authorized to produce seeds can then supply the seeds for conditioning. 

If you say that it should be only seed lots, which have been certified, even before conditioning, it is not possible to certify the seed because the certification is that it is of a certain standard and yet the conditioning is to bring it to that standard.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what do you propose?

PROF. LATIGO: I propose that it be amended to read “a licensed seed conditioner, shall condition only seed lots, which have been supplied by other licensed or certified producers” Otherwise, I would propose that it be deleted because it is creating a very technical problem and I cannot immediately formulate it. I need to consult with the members of the committee. 

I would propose, Mr Chairman, that we stay it and I consult because it is very important to the seed industry.

THE CHAIRMAN: Make your proposal so that we see how to formulate it. Have you heard him?

DR ESELE: Mr Chairman, one of the responsibilities of the seed certification services is to inspect the seeds while in the field, to make sure that they are true to time. It is only after it has been harvested that the conditioner now dries it, sorts it, grades it and stores it. So as provided for here, it is okay. The certification has to be done in the field and then the conditioner goes ahead to grade it. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard of the proposal from Prof. Latigo. I now put the question to it.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 12(3)(a) and insert the phrase, “by the National Seed Certification services” between the words “established” and “for”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any other amendment?

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, clause 12(1) says that all the seed offered for sale shall be properly labeled and sealed in accordance with the specifications set out in regulations made under this Act. I would like to add that, “and shall include the expiry date of that seed” because the expiry date is so crucial that you want to carry the bag and when your seed does not germinate, you can go back and sue the person who has sold it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Chairman, the phrase “specifications set out in regulations” should take care of that concern that the member has raised. So, I suggest that it stays as it is.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are suggesting that the expiry date should be indicated where?

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, as much as the minister says that it shall do so, I know that the expiry of seeds is so crucial that a farmer can lose a whole season by planting bad seeds. It is more important to put that particular element. It does not do any harm to the minister’s Bill.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Sir. I do understand Prof. Latigo’s concern but I would like the experts in the field of seeds to tell us whether there are any circumstances when specifications will exclude the expiry date. And if that can happen, then probably we would be wise to legislate for it.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When seeds are labelled and specifications are given, the regulations or the requirement is that the Seed Certification Service should continue to inspect that seed because if it is sealed today and not properly kept within one week, it can lose it viability. So, the issue may not be the time only, but the way it is stored. It is important that even before it is given out for planting, it is tested. It must meet the requirements or the specifications because normally maize for example, they would say the percentage of germination should not be below say 80 percent. I think that is the most crucial part of it, and the lifespan may not be much of an issue. 

The issue is, can it meet your standards? I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR LOLEM: Mr Chairman, let us not confuse seed, which is a living material, with chemicals. I have never seen an expiry date written on seeds, but I have seen it written on chemicals. In any case labeling has specific requirements and this is a law. After the law there are regulations so I think it is an unnecessary detail.

MRS MUGYENYI: The term “regulations” includes even regulations on expiry dates so I think that the concern of hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo is taken care of under regulations made under this Act.

Clause 12

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 12 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

DR KASIRIVU: In clause 15(1) we propose that it should be redrafted and it should read as follows; “The Certification Service shall issue certificates authenticating the various certification classes of seeds as prescribed in the regulations under this Act”.

And 15(2); “The Certification Service shall issue to the Board periodical reports on its activities, as the circumstances require”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

DR KASIRIVU: Clause 16(1) should also be re-drafted and it reads as follows; “The Minister shall establish a Seeds and Plant Tribunal, which shall conduct business as need arises”.

And clause 16(2); “Any person aggrieved by the decision under this Act may appeal to the Seeds and Plant Tribunal in accordance with the regulations made under this Act”. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Chairman, I would like to amend clause 17 to read as follows: “The Minister, on the advice of the Board, by notice in the Gazette, may designate suitably qualified public officers to act as inspectors, seed analysts, and registrars of plant varieties for the purpose of this Act and any regulation made under this Act”.

The justification for this is that clause 9(5) of the Seed and Plant Bill, 2004 provides for the board granting plant breeders rights for a variety on the recommendation of the registrar.

Secondly, under clause 9(6), the Seed and Plant Bill provides for the National Seed Certification Service being responsible for undertaking variety testing as required for the granting of plant breeders’ rights in accordance with the Plant Variety Protection law. 

Clause 9(10) of the Seed and Plant Bill provides for the National Seed Certification Service registering public and private breeders among others. So, Mr Chairman, we need to insert registrars of plants. That is the amendment that I am moving. In other words, we had not included the position of registrar of plant varieties. I would like to amend the clause to include that.

DR KASIRIVU: The committee has no problem, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, before clause 18, we propose to insert another clause, which will be clause 18. It should read; “The certification service shall have power to maintain registers, rolls index or other official records for the execution of its functions under this Act”. The justification is to provide for an official index of certified seed companies. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 18(1). We should substitute the phrase “no person shall” with “a persons shall not”. And it is better drafting, according to our committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agree to.)

DR KASIRIVU: In clause 18(2), we also propose that it should be drafted as follows: “A person who contravenes sub-section (1) commits an offence”, and we also felt that it was better drafting.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, in clause 20 we propose that we delete the words “without lawful authority”. We thought if we delete it we would have better wording.

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought you should delete and substitute it, but when you just say this - I think the two should go together. Anyway, the policy is understood. I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, what was the amendment? Was he deleting “without lawful authority”?

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, also in clause 20(b), we propose to delete the word “otherwise”.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is asking you whether you are deleting “without lawful authority” because you can tamper with authority. So, are you deleting “lawful authority”? Okay, that was the case. I put the question that the clause as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

PROF. LATIGO: Mr chairman, just an insertion on 20(c) “which to his knowledge”. Is it his or her?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members this is what I have been saying many times and I said so especially with the Constitution that if any member who has got a copy of the Bill thinks he has an amendment to bring, he should first go to the committee, discuss with them the proposed amendment. You may convince the committee to adopt the amendment so that when the report is submitted, it includes your proposed amendment. 

But from this particular case I realize that Members are trying to bring amendments during this time when we are considering the Bill. Our rules do not allow that.  Our rules allow us to bring an amendment if it was rejected by the committee. I want to say this because I do expect it to be with the Constitution and that is why I want to take this occasion to remind you that whoever has an amendment and a proposed constitutional amendment, please go to the committee. I will permit you to move your amendment, but let this be the last time amendments are just brought at this stage.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr chairman. Actually some of the amendments that were brought by the chair were proposals that I submitted to the committee. This one is not an amendment; it is just an omission of “her” because it is written here, “his or her”. That was what I was adding, I was not amending.

THE CHAIRMAN: However small it is, it is an amendment, but I grant it. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, in clause 22, we propose that the words, “without lawful authority” also be deleted. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But what is the problem with, “Without lawful authority”? What does it offend?

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, the phrase “A person who without lawful authority alters or defaces”, did not make us comfortable.

THE CHAIRMAN: It makes, because I can alter if there is good cause. But you are saying I should not, unless I have been authorized to do so.  

DR KASIRIVU: We thought by saying a person who alters or defaces – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: “A person who without lawful authority -” If he has lawful authority he can alter, what is wrong with that? Suppose it is a mistake and I say this is a mistake so you are authorized, why would you delete “without lawful authority?” I think you want consistency in that you have deleted it before, but I think there is no policy behind.

DR KASIRIVU:  We can –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, if you charge me, I will say I had authority, but then your burden would be I had no lawful authority to alter. These are the elements you have to establish. It is not merely that I have altered, I keep quiet, then you have to proceed and say you have no lawful authority. But I think for consistency – (Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, I want to beg the indulgence of the committee and the Ministry of Agriculture to withhold this amendment because when you say without lawful authority there are certain things which even the law will not allow you to alter. For example, you have written an invoice wrongly and someone brings it to you and says, “That invoice is wrongly written, please make an alteration”. Surely that is a legitimate reason why it should be amended. Therefore, Sir, notwithstanding the amendment, which has already been made, I think in this case it may be in order to keep this phrase, “without lawful authority”.  Thank you, Sir.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr chairman, I support what the hon. Minister has just said; we maintain the clause as it is.

THE CHAIRMAN: If we accept that this has to be maintained, as a consequence I think we have to restore where lawful authority was not justifiably removed.  

DR KASIRIVU: Mr chairman, with your advice we can concede.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 22, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25 agreed to.

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I find clause 27(3)(c) bad in law and logic because it says, “require the court convicting an offender to forfeit the state or the distribution of anything involved in the conviction of offences”, I do not think that is proper. Conviction of the offences, I think they meant commission of the offences. Can we have that word “conviction” substituted with “commission” so that the clause makes sense?

THE CHAIRMAN: Say it, again, please.

MR RUHINDI: It reads, if you start from 3 up, “Regulations made under this Act may prescribe in respect of the contravention of the regulations –“ then (c), “require the court convicting an offender to forfeit to the state or the distribution of anything involved in the conviction –“ my question is on the word “conviction”. “…in the conviction of the offences’. No, it should be “… in the commission of the offences”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, the amendment is “commission”.  Can we dispose of this particular amendment? I put the question –(Interruption) 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, if you replace “conviction” here with “commission” there is confusion in the formulation in that convicting is in reference to the court.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you see honourable Prof. Ogenga Latigo, it is anything involved in conviction of the offence; the offence is not conviction, the offence is committed. So, he is saying here it should be “commission” rather than “conviction”. A conviction is what the court does; after hearing the evidence it convicts you. But when you commit an offence, it is a commission rather than a conviction; an offender never convicts.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, the problem is really the whole sentence; that time you said it does not flow because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, the first convicting is -(Interruption)

PROF. O LATIGO: Yes, I appreciate your explanation now. But still anything involved in the commission, if it is the seed, the seed was not involved in the commission of the offence.

THE CHAIRMAN: It will be a question of evidence, as to what he used to commit the offence. If the seeds have not been, then it would not be relevant. But it is question of evidence, what did you use to commit the offence; that is what they are talking about. But his concern was about the term “conviction’ or “commission” and therefore he suggests that it should be “commission”. Is it okay? I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Chairman, clause 28(3), insert the following words at the beginning of the sub-clause: “Subject to the provision of this Act,” so that it says, “Subject to the provision of this Act, any license…”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, have you internalised the amendment? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, I propose that, “and with the approval of the Cabinet” be deleted so that it remains that, “The Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, amend the Schedule to this Act.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, the other one is an internal matter.

PROF. KAGONYERA: You know, Sir, we must abide by history. When Cabinet takes a decision, even the Minister making the amendment is protected. We have had situations in the past where ministers have taken actions and there have been problems for them. Even those in the Executive and the Back Bench have said, “Did you make sufficient consultation?” The reason why including a Cabinet is done is to strengthen the authority of the amendment. Therefore, we on the Front Bench prefer that this be retained so that sufficient consultation is made and the due process is carried out.

THE CHAIRMAN: Granted, but this is a public law, which is going to affect members of the public.  How shall Ssekandi, who is outside Cabinet, a farmer somewhere else confronted by a Statutory Instrument know that this Statutory Instrument signed by the Minister was not approved by Cabinet.  Will the Minister of Cabinet be open to me to challenge this instrument? Don’t you see that if a Minister passes a Statutory Instrument when he should have consulted you, you have an internal mechanism of dealing with him or her rather than putting this provision where I will be handicapped that I will not have access to the Cabinet minutes to know that there was approval by the Cabinet?  
This is an internal mechanism, which you can use - if a Minister has passed an instrument when he should have first consulted you, you deal with her – with me rather than putting it in the Bill.  Well, there is -(Interruption)

DR KEZIMBIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think it is good to indicate Cabinet for the good of the Minister because you are dealing with a commodity that could affect the entire country.  Being an agricultural country, the Minister could unilaterally do something without adequate advice and cause a problem to the entire country. That is why it may be important for the Minister to know in black and white that he or she must consult.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it only in this particular trade, or you are saying that any law now we talk about that allows the Minister to make a Statutory Instrument we should always put a provision that with the approval of Cabinet. Is it the policy you want now?

MR WAMBUZI: Even in case of transport, the Minister of Transport is empowered by Statutory Instrument to do so many things without writing that extra article. So, I think if we do it for this as a special case, we may have to do it for all the laws, which empower the Minister to take action by Statutory Instrument. So I think it is not necessary, it is taken to mean that whatever the minister is doing, he/she is doing it on behalf of the Cabinet, and when the Minister is condemned, it means the whole Cabinet is condemned. I think it is not necessary to do this.

THE CHAIRMAN: I really think it is an internal administrative matter over which you can guide yourselves in your Cabinet.

PROF. KAGONYERA: You know, Mr Chairman, what you are saying is perfectly in order. But we are saying, and it is from experience, because until sometime ago - I cannot remember exactly when it was - actually Statutory Instruments could be made by ministers without any consultation. But it caused problems and I remember the reason why we decided that Ministers must consult was because of the problems we had. I cannot remember specifically which they were, but I was in this government when statutory instruments did not need any consultation. But we discovered that you could have problems if you did not consult. So, it is a safety measure.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay honourable members, I think the Cabinet is telling you that they need your protection, that you include this in the provision.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Chairman, I think about a year or so ago, a debate on this provision with the approval of Cabinet came and at one time, even Parliament wanted to approve. When we argued, we debated at length and the reasons were brought out so clearly. This is just assigning authority, who is going to issue that statutory instrument?  Obviously it is the Minister, and like the Chairman said, if your regulation requires that no statutory instrument will be issued without Cabinet approving it, it will not be issued. If you do that, you will contravene a Cabinet regulation. Put it in your regulation and implement it.

MR ANANG-ODUR: I have listened to the debate. But Mr Chairman, I think take into account events in this country and what the hon. Minister talked about, the importance of agriculture in this country, it is going to be imperative that we protect the ministers who are going to handle this debate and make them go through the Cabinet, because we are going to handle a very delicate and very important input in agriculture, seeds. 

And Sir, I want to bring to your attention that there are a lot of people who are going to be interested in this field. We have a lot of peasants who are going to get involved, we are going to have international players in this game to import seeds and so on, there will be a lot of requirements to be followed with a lot of stakes in terms of monetary terms and so on.  

I think if you want to protect our country and industry in particular, it is necessary that Cabinet on this important issue moves as one and we shall feel very comfortable. Leaving it to one minister to decide, a mistake can be made, which cannot be corrected when we are in trouble.

THE CHAIRMAN: So what you are saying is that this is a special case that this formulation is not going to be a general application, fine. People are asking you for protection; why don’t you give them protection? So there is a proposal by hon. Latigo to delete, I am putting a question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 29 agreed to.

The Schedule agreed to. 

The Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report there to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Seed and Plant Bill” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Speaker, there was a clause to be recommitted. I do not know whether at which I should have it recommitted. Is this the stage?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, you should know that before we adopt a report, that is when you say, let us recommit this and the other, because if we do, then we shall go to the third reading.  

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 8(1), the National Seeds Certification Service in the department responsible, you had put “for crop production”. But we have a Department of Crop Production and a Department of Crop Protection, and this particular function falls under the Department of Crop Protection. So I propose to amend that instead of “crop production”, it reads, “crop protection” as it is. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, I thought we agreed that it is the department of crop Protection, not production, from what I remember.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. The case has been explained, so the motion for re-committal does not arise.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I had moved that it be changed and it was approved. I think that is the basis on which he was recommitting.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, can we clear what is what. May be it may do not harm if what he is advocating is what we are going to do. I understand we passed Prof. Latigo’s amendment.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, my amendment was passed. When he rose to oppose it, it had been passed and he was advised that the procedure he –(Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: So he has a case to recommit then?

PROF. LATIGO: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So there is a proposal for re-committal. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SEED AND PLANT BILL, 2004

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Mr Chairman, I want to propose an amendment to Clause 8(1) that National Seed Certification Service department, instead of crop production, we put crop-protection. I propose to amend, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you say, you maintain what is –(Interruptions)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I propose that we maintain what was there originally.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8 agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL HUSBANDRY (Ms Mugyenyi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY (Ms Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has recommitted Clause 8(1) and has passed it.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SEED AND PLANT BILL, 2004

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY (Ms Mugyenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Seed and Plant Bill, 2004” be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Seed and Plant Bill, 2004” be read a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE SEED AND PLANT ACT, 2004.”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill is passed.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BROADCASTING 
CORPORATION BILL, 2004

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I met the chairperson of the committee. She is at Entebbe leading the Uganda delegation at that meeting. She requested me to stand over dealing with this particular Bill until tomorrow when she will be here to deal with the Bill.  

Honourable members, this brings us to the end of today’s business, the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.52 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)



