  
Tuesday, 27 February 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995


Clause 37, sub-clause 1

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman Sir, before we go to 37, we had to correct the head on this chapter part six.  There needs a correction in the heading itself so that it does not conflict with the rest of the provisions and that the correction is to replace the heading which appears as; representatives of women, replace it by district women representatives.  Mr Chairman, the reason is that this heading was wrongly written.  The people being talked about are not representatives of women but they are district women representatives.  In other words, they represent everybody in the district but they are women.  So the amendment I seek to make is to remove that error so that the heading -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I fully agree with the Minister but as it appears in the bill, is misleading.  They are not representatives of women.  But I still do not agree with his amendment that it should be district women representatives.  I would, therefore, like to move an amendment to his amendment by deleting the word district so that it remains as women representatives.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.  I was trying to move an amendment to his amendment.  I want to amend his amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have not passed his amendment first.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Yes, if mine is passed then his would have been so amended.  (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, that is provided by our rules of procedure and the amendment that comes last is treated first.  Mr Chairman, the reason I think his amendment is also misleading is that once you say district woman representative, it also portrays the meaning that the district is represented by a woman in Parliament.  Mr Chairman, that is alright on the surface but I would like to remind this House of the specific formulation, as it exists in the Constitution.  It is not formulated the way it appears by mistake.  It says that there shall be one woman representative for each district.  Now, this is because a district is not a constituency and I hope the House is aware that we have in section 11 approved that there shall be 214 constituencies and the district is not one of them.  The district therefore, should not be looked at as a constituency to be represented.  It is that we want women to be represented here and we chose that we shall have one woman coming from every district to be represented here to increase the number of women here.  

As you may remember, in fact the Odoki Commission had recommended that women shall be represented by only - was it 20 people or 15 people? Which we amended that they will be thirty something; one for each district.  Therefore, the women representatives are not representatives of constituencies.  They are representatives, one from each district to increase the number of women here and therefore, this is why I think that the amendment as proposed by the hon. Minister is also misleading and we should therefore, delete the word district and leave women representative.  Now who the woman represents is elaborated - this is the heading but below, you shall find that in 37(1), it says that there shall be one woman representative in Parliament for each district.  That is where the clarification of those women representatives fall but to say that they are district woman representatives is I think misleading also.  I, therefore, like to amend by deleting district so that it is in line with the provisions of the Constitution.  I beg to move Mr Chairman.

MR WAPAKABULO:  I think Mr Chairman, I can say that hon. Dr Kiiza Besigye has acquired the capacity to split hairs with regard to the language he used in these two documents.  The article in the constitution, he read it and it is quite clear and I therefore rise to oppose his motion.  Parliament shall consist of one woman representative for every district and Dr Kiiza Besigye is arguing that a district is not a constituency.  But the district is the unit that produces a representative who is a woman.  Now to say that it is not a constituency is splitting hairs.  The amendment by the Minister is to remove this representative of women to say that you are actually wording it in accordance with the provisions of 78(1)(b) i.e. one woman representing a district and therefore they are district women representatives.  I wish to oppose the motion Sir.  Thank you.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE: Point of information. Mr Chairman, it is a pity that I thought this would be seen by every Member and would not be a subject of controversy.  I am sorry that it is becoming. But I would like to inform the hon. Minister whom I respect very much on matters of constitution that we have already passed section 11 which says that subject to articles to 263 and 264 of the Constitution, for purposes of article 63 which we were reading, of the constitution: “Uganda shall be divided into 214 constituencies for election of Members of Parliament as specified in the Schedule.”  Now these are the only constituencies and this also refers to the provision that provides for the constituencies.  This is why I did not think that this was - but if it is a subject of controvery, we can leave it.

HON. MEMBERS:  He has abandoned.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kavuma please.  He has abandoned.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman Sir, I want to understand whether hon. Kiiza Besigye has withdrawn the amendment.  Okay.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed by hon. Mover of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37(2):

MR KAVUMA:  This could be a consequential amendment.  But otherwise, the language should also be syncronised with the rest of the constitution.  Mr Chairman, Sir, my next amendment will be on 37(2).

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on 37 sub-section one to introduce a new sub-clause to be numbered as 1(b) of section 37(1).  This is to read that; a person shall not be eligible for election as a woman representative more than once.  (Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, as you know the purpose of the women representatives was an innovation to uplift the participation of women in national politics and this amendment is moved to enhance that participation of women in national politics.  (Applause)  Mr Chairman, it is moved against the background whereby we would like to create as many avenues for women out there in the villages to come to national politics.  Now, once you have come into national politics and you have been here for five years and you have been exposed and participating in debates for five years, the idea is that you should now graduate and go to the county and the fresh woman comes and takes over with affirmative action seat.  (Applause)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman Sir, with greatest respect to hon. Dr Besigye, is he in order to move an amendment which is unconstitutional?  Mr Chairman Sir, the constitution only prohibits one person from standing for more than two terms and that is the President.  But otherwise the constitution allows everybody to stand in any election whatsoever.  Therefore, to prohibit a woman representative from standing again will be unconstitutional.  Is he in order.

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order to move that amendment.  Proceed please.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I am surprised by the Constitutional lawyer hon. Kanyeihamba who made the provisions in this constitution to provide for how the constitution will be interpreted to require of to interprete the Constitution.  (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, the Constitution is very clear on the elections of these special groups in Parliament and allows Parliament to make all laws relating to the election of these Members and Mr Chairman, it is, therefore, within that ambit that I am moving this motion.  But if there is any question of the constitutionality, I believe hon. Kanyeihamba knows who is charged with that responsibility of interpreting the constitution.  Now, Mr Chairman, I was –(Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor that is his amendment affecting only the women representatives or it should affect everybody on the marginalised groups?  Thank you.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I got -(Interruption)

COL. KAHINDA OTAFIRE:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the speaker to continue speaking while hon. Kanyeihamba raised a point of order and you made your ruling Mr Chairman.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I hope I will not get interruptions like those of hon. Otafire.  (Laughter)  Mr Chairman, on clarification from hon. Kiryapawo, we are dealing with section 37 sub-section one.  You have already had the heading of this provision.  I do not know whether you like me now to address the disabled under women!  (Laughter)  We are dealing with women now.  

Mr Chairman, this amendment should not be looked at as if I have not moved it with a lot of seriousness. This motion is moved with maximum seriousness because we have here in the discussion in the general debate already recognised that the disadvantaged women out there cannot manage to compete at the same level as others because they are marginalised.  Now what we are saying, if we do not make such provisions, is that those who are now advantaged by being elected first and therefore being more facilitated will become life representatives of women therefore blocking this avenue for women to come up into national politics.  (Interruptions)

MRS SEBAGEREKA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to try to remove the fundamental human rights from women who want to choose or elect their own leader?  Is he in order Mr Chairman, to limit the life of the representative when the woman wants -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not what he said.  Proceed hon. Besigye.

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, may I advise my hon. Colleagues that you may disagree with my point of view and if you do, please wait for your time and raise a disagreement in a contribution rather than trying to raise a disagreement by point of order.  Mr Chairman, I was just saying that the purpose of this seat and maybe to answer hon. Ssebagereka, the fundamental human right is to participate in representation at the county.   Unless we understand this primary tenet, then we are lost.  The fundamental human rights is to go and represent your people in the county or in the constituency.  Once they have demarcated constituencies, it is your fundamental right to go the constituency and compete.  These are special seats created to enhance the participation of women in national politics.  It is an affirmative action thing.  We have said in this constitution Mr Chairman, that after ten years -(Interruptions)-

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I am grateful to hon. Lt. Col. Kiiza Besigye for giving way at a time when it is a bit acrimonious.  I wanted to assist the House and to assist him in his argument by citing article 21 of our constitution which reads, if he looked at it, “All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural rights and in every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law. Without prejudice to clause one of this article, a person shall not be discriminated against on grounds of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth. Three, “for the purpose of this article, discriminate means to give different treatment to different persons attributable only or mainly to their respective description of sex, race, etc.”  

However, inspite of that, if you read four, you will find that hon. Besigye makes a point because in four, it says, “Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from enacting laws that are necessary for implementing policies and programmes aimed at redressing, social, economic or educational or other imbalances in society. (b), making such a provision as is required or authorised to be made under this constitution. (c), providing for any matter acceptable and demonstratively justifiable in free and democratic society.”  Having said that, hon. Kiiza Besigye is in full right in my view to present his motion whether it is going to be accepted or not.  It should be only judged on its own merit.  Hon. Kiiza Besigye had brought this motion in the Constituent Assembly and he lost it.  He is now making another luck attempt and I wish him the best.  (Laughter)

DR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, and hon. Colleagues, please allow me to wind up and then you can debate.  Mr Chairman, I must of course add on to what hon. Karuhanga has been saying by saying that I have really made wide consultations in legal circles about the legality and constitutionality and otherwise of this motion and I am satisfied that it is very good in law.  Now Mr Chairman, I was talking about the seriousness of this matter.  I do not expect a lot of sympathy from many of the women representatives and I really apologise because some of them have approached me in confidence.  But Mr Chairman, I have really a duty to this country, I have a duty to the women out there to really make a law that is going to serve the purpose of enhancing democracy, the purpose of enhancing social equality in this country and whereas, therefore, I may fraternise and sympathize with the Members who are here already, I think they should look at this in a very disinterested way and in the most objective way they can marshal and support this motion.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.  (Applause)

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I stand to oppose the motion.  In opposing this motion, I want to explain the purpose of this affirmative action especially in relation to this provision; because it is clear Mr Chairman and hon. Members that some hon. Members do not seem to apprehend the purpose of affirmative action and therefore, it has been subject to misinterpretation.  One of the purposes of this action in relation to this House in particular is that women were given this seat to take it and demonstrate that they can do something and this was supposed to be a catalyst to the society of this country to be able to know that women are able and can also make it.  Now the impact of that as a catalyst society was to motivate other women in the country and to motivate society to know that women can make it so that these women all over Uganda can also go through the constituency at the counties.  After those years, this demonstration was achieved because women during the Constituent Assembly, women who had never sat in this House together with women who had been in this House went into the field on county level and I can assure you, many more women who had not been here won election through the county seat.  (Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, if the Members could really listen so that I advance this argument because it is very crucial.  Whereas hon. Besigye is saying that if one woman sits on that seat she is more able and she can do better and she should go down to the county.  Evidence has established that in fact very capable women, hon. Kadaga, hon. Rwabyomere, hon. Mpanga, they are very capable women, they have been on that seat, they went to the county but they could not come back and yet women who were motivated around when affirmative action acted as a catalyst, many women -(Interruption).

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.

MRS MATEMBE:  I am not allowing it Mr Chairman because I want to advance my argument very clearly.  Many women, in fact they were 27 and nine of them who had not been to this House managed to go through.  So that means that women were motivated, the affirmative action acted as a catalyst and many more women came to take up the other avenue.  Therefore, it is not a guarantee that this woman who is at the district is there to be educated and learn and become better and go down so that others can come in.  It is there that she continues to spearhead the struggle while other more women are coming.  (Laughter)  

Mr Chairman, this argument which hon. Besigye is advancing that women are supposed to go in these seats and do better and quit for others; in fact in CA, it denied us very capable and potential contribution from the people I talked about here.  The article here which says there should be no discrimination on grounds of sex.  Now, through affirmative action, there is a seat for women and when the procedures show that contention on this seat, there is discrimination because you have got to be limited in town whereas in general seats, you cannot be limited.  That is discrimination and it is against the Constitution.  Therefore I beg to oppose and insist that this seat be treated like any other seat for bringing people here in this House.  Otherwise, it will be unconstitutional Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I want to refresh our memory Sir, with the provisions of the constitution relevant to this area; so that we can see the true spirit of this constitution with regard to this matter.  Sir, in our objective one, the constitution provides, the following objectives and principles -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Mention the clause.

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, it is page two of our constitution and it is the first -(Interruption)

DR ADONIA TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman Sir, in your capacity as Chairman of this House, you have already ruled on the constitutionality of this amendment when responding to hon. Kanyeihamba’s point of order.  You said that on the question of constitution, hon. Kiiza Besigye was in order.  Is it in order therefore for the Minister to raise the same question on which you have already ruled?

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not what he said.  Proceed please.  Why do you not listen carefully?

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman Sir, on page two under the national objectives and directive principles of State policy, the first objective provides like this, “The following objectives and principles shall guide all organs and agencies of the State, all citizens, organisations and other bodies and persons in applying or interpreting the constitution or any other law and in taking and implementing any policy, decisions for the establishment and promotion for just free and democratic society.”  That is one.  

Mr Chairman, Sir, in principle number two Roman one, it provides: “The State shall be based on democratic principles which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizens at all levels in their own governance.”  

Number two sub-article two says, “All the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels subject to the constitution.”  Mr Chairman, Sir, the Constitution as hon. Kanyeihamba was saying only barred one political officer from standing more than twice and that was the President.  So Sir, we are now required to be guided by these provisions in making this law if we are going to go with the spirit of our constitution. This is in addition to the very able exposure made by hon. Karuhanga under article 21.  Having said that Sir, I want to say that if we follow hon. Besigye’s amendment which as somebody pointed was lost in the CA, it was also lost in the committee when we discussed this.  We run the risk of appearing to do something that we should be doing about ten years from now; reviewing the matters affecting representation of these special groups.  

MR MAYENGO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the law we are trying to set up is interim.  I would be good if the Minister would explain to this House to what extent this interim law will go because the measure which is being proposed looks more than temporary, looks permanent.  So it could be useful if the Minister could explain whether this really is the right law in which this thing should be or not.  Besides that Mr Chairman, I have all the sympathy and all the admiration and all the support for what Kiiza Besigye is supporting.  (Laughter)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, Sir, hon. Mayengo was just one step ahead because my second point was to say that hon. Besigye’s amendment could as well classified as academic.  We are making a law which is interim to administer this election and the next Parliament is going to make a more permanent law for general elections for this country.  And, I do not think we should now waste time on this because it has no permanency.  It is only relevant for this first election.  

Thirdly Sir and lastly, I do not think we should underrate the capacity of our electorate to take proper judgement at any particular time.  If a woman representative has overstayed and she is not performing, our people have the capacity to remove her through the elections. With those Sir, I strongly oppose the motion by hon. Kiiza Besigye.  It goes against the spirit of the constitution, it undermines the capacity of our people to take decisions correct for them and it is more academic than real.  I beg to oppose Sir.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose hon. Kiiza Besigye’s motion.  Mr Chairman, I am opposing this motion on basically one important ground namely that this is the new constitution of Uganda.  The Parliament we are talking about is the Parliament which will come and therefore you cannot use previous performances to the new Parliament.  It would also go towards stopping for example, the President from standing because he has been working as President.  So if hon. Kiiza Besigye’s motion is for Parliament after the five years, then it is constitutionally correct.  But if it is to stop any Ugandan now from enjoying the rights which have been enshrined in our new constitution, such an argument cannot be entertained either as a fair argument or even as a legal argument.  This Parliament will be making a great error to allow hon. Besigye’s motion to go through because it would immediately be discriminating certain Ugandans, women for that matter from enjoying the rights which have been brought in the new Constitution.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification when the hon. Member is says there is going to be discrimination against a section of our society, yet in hon. Kiiza Besigye’s amendment he did not say that women will be stopped from standing in any other capacity.  They are allowed to stand in any other capacity as any other citizen.  Now the clarification I am seeking Mr Chairman from the hon. Member holding the Floor is to tell me where the discrimination is.  I thought the ladies were going to be open like any other citizens. They can go and stand in the constituency even stand for the Presidency, stand for any other appointing job.  All that hon. Kiiza Besigye’s amendment entails is that he wants the affirmative action to be seen to be affirmative in that it is exposing and reducing bias in our own society by bring in more women.  

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, the next point which I would like to draw your attention to which would be taking this matter too far if we accept hon. Besigye’s point, if we take this affirmative action another step further- because we have already said we want affirmative action for the disadvantaged groups namely women and then we go further and say, certain women must not be allowed to participate in certain women activities and and representation.  (Interruptions) That is taking the matter too far and extending and pulling the rights which have been given to Parliament too far.  

Lastly Mr Chairman, as hon. Matembe, only the problem is that there was a bit of excitement.  The thing is that it is not correct to assume that affirmative action is to be carried out in turns.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I want to give to the last speaker is that hon. Besigye made a very clear point which is in the provisions of the constitution.  We are saying we need affirmative action which is a favour to women community.  It is in itself discrimination. We provide special privilege to women class.  He has said, instead of providing for few women to enjoy the privilege, let us widen it.  How do we widen it?  By giving you a chance, exposing rural women in this Parliament so that the whole Uganda is more exposed.  (Laughter)

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, it would be gross injustice for this House to assume the powers of the population and deny the population a choice of representation.  (Interruptions).  Mr Chairman, article one of our constitution is very clear and it says, “all power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignity in accordance ....”  What do you want to take this power from the people for?  Let the people be given a choice in the matter.  Supposing the person you want to impose on them is not adequate enough -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.  Hon. Members, I think it seems you do not want to proceed.  So, I am going to adjourn the Council now.  How can you go on like this?

MR KARUHANGA:  We appeal to you Sir, to allow us to continue.  We are going to be calm.  Mr Chairman Sir, one last point upon which I appeal to my hon. Colleagues, it is the first time we are testing our constitution.  It would be injustice untold and unheard of to deny and kill political lives of some of the people of Uganda from stopping them, from enjoying the rights which have been enshrined in our new constitution.  None of us has such an inalienable right to do so.  The argument of hon. Kiiza Besigye may be good, it may be sounding fair in some cases but it will be right for him to bring it after five years, not now and I appeal to him to see this sense and this logic and I ask him to withdraw his motion.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I want to start by making an appeal that the art of being a good politician is to be a good listener.  Therefore, I appeal to my Colleagues that however much you agree with somebody with somebody’s views, I think it is only courteous to listen and get up and oppose.  Sir, I want to find out from hon. Kiiza Besigye whether indeed he has circulated some other amendments which will affect the other interest groups.  So far I have seen only one affecting the women and therefore for him to have argued that hon. Kiryapawo was bringing an issue under the wrong place I think was wrong.  

The argument also that it is necessary to limit the women who have already been in Parliament, their political life is fallacious if it is going to be based on the fact that you are going to bring more women into Parliament.  May I inform him that out of the 39 women who came to this House, I think in 1989 on affirmative action and who went back and stood in the CA, only 13 of them went through in the CA.  Many of them were new comers like myself.  How does he explain that?  Is it because I was advantaged at that time?  If anything Mr Chairman and Members, to be an incumbent NRC Woman, district woman is a clear disadvantage.  Why is it a disadvantage?  Because Mr Chairman, the work of a district woman is difficult simply because the area is just too large.  Therefore, the populace is going to think you have not been performing because they have not been seeing you often enough.  So I think that is not a fair argument to say, once you are here, you are advantaged.  In fact you are disadvantaged if anything.  

Mr Chairman Sir, I also want to go ahead and argue that hon. Kiiza Besigye’s amendment seeks to disorganise the women of this country.  Why?  It is seeking to disorganise the women making a career of politics for the simple reason that he is saying you come for five years and you are thrown out.  

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, if you read article 78 (1)(b) provides for the representation of women, (c) provides for representation of the army, youths, workers, persons of disabilities any other group Parliament may approve and (2) reads: “upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter every five years, Parliament shall review the implementation under paragraph (b) and (c) of clause 1 of this article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental thereto.”  So Mr Chairman, in light of this provision, if you provide that women shall be there for only once a term and the next Parliament resolves to abolish it, this amendment is superfluous.  Thank you Sir.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you for the information.  Mr Chairman, Sir, my argument has been supported by his information.  I think we would be taking too much upon ourselves to start pre-empting the constitution before it has even worked.  I think we should give it time for the right Parliament to review this affirmative action.  In fact that amendment which is saying that after five years, the woman must go to the open seat, he is telling us that in his view, he is saying that discrimination which has been against the woman for the last 2000 years or so can be redressed in five years of sitting here.  

Sir, I want hon. Members to think of some of the experiences of the women who stood in the open seat.  But they were victims of the many years of discrimination against women.  I know a capable woman who stood in Gulu Municipality but when she was campaigning the fellow candidate men would ask the crowd, who has ever heard of a hen crowing?  Then they would say, no, we have not heard.  When a hen crows, what do you do?  You kill it.  (Laughter)  

Now Sir, do you not agree that to think that five years will have addressed all the discrimination is unfair?  I think let us leave these women to compete fairly with each other and I want this Parliament to listen to this, article 78(4) says it very clearly. It says, “Parliament shall be law prescribe the procedure for elections of representatives referred to.”  Parliament is supposed to prescribe the procedure, not to change the substance in the constitution.  I thank you Sir.

MR WAPAKABULO:  I thank you Mr Chairman for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution.  Sir, my reading of the provisions of the Constitution particularly those relating to affirmative action is that it intended to cure a cultural and historical disability about the women by our society.  Because we are arguing about women, we do not have to argue about other people.  The point Sir, is this, that scheme of the Constitution is saying that women as a group in our society have not been able to access to political positions, because of cultural and social discrimination and, therefore, the Constitution is trying to create a cadre of experienced and able political women to fill the vacancies and also void.  But in doing so, it is saying that probably after ten years, we shall have had enough women experienced, able and financially okay to tussle with men in every constituency and therefore, after ten years, Parliament can begin looking at the question.  If Parliament discovers that they are not ready, then Parliament will continue to look every five years until we reach a situation when they may actually abolish that particular provision. 

Therefore, if we take the amendment being proposed, we are actually saying that we should perpetuate the disability.  Why do I say this?  It is because we shall not be able to develop a cadre of experienced and able women who will be able to take seats and fight with men in open constituencies.  That would actually be doing - the men will be free to develop a cadre of experienced men free of disability, free of limitation to fight for Parliamentary seats.  But women will be discriminated against.  My submission, therefore, Sir is that if we adopt the amendment as being proposed, we are in fact going contrary to not only the scheme in the constitution but also the spirit of the constitution.  It was intended to create a cadre of experienced political women and who coupled with economic power and recognition by society will be able to reach a stage probably into any other time but even more so probably when Parliament has reviewed maybe 30 years during which time then, they will be able to compete freely with all of us in the open constituencies.  Sir, I oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 37 (1)(b) be amended as proposed by hon. Kiiza Besigye.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived.)

Clause 32(2)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman Sir, I beg to move an amendment on clause 2(b) sub-clause (b) by inserting the figure of three in place of the figure two which appears in that Clause.  The reason, Sir, is that, up to now, the workers of this country have been enjoying a status of enjoying three representatives. By a typing error, that number of representatives was reduced to two, I only wish to correct that error so that the workers like many other people who are represented in this House keep their status quo; otherwise, it could be an injustice to the working people of this country.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that sub-clause 2 (b) be deleted and a new sub-clause be inserted therein reading as follows;

For the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda there shall be five representatives one of whom shall be a woman.  Mr Chairman, I move this Amendment in recognition of the very -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I move this Amendment in recognition of the fact that people with disability are over l0 per cent of our population.  Mr Chairman, many of these people have extreme disabilities that make their mobility a very, very big problem. It is therefore, difficult for if we want to have them to be effectively represented, they deserve to have a slightly bigger number than those of us who do not suffer from these disabilities.  

Mr Chairman, about the women, there is a problem that sometimes people of disabilities of women decide to have peculiar problems which may not be attended to adequately by the men.  I therefore, propose that one of those five representatives should be a woman to help the women who suffer from disabilities.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, it is with deep regret that I have to stand and oppose this Amendment. I shall give my reasons if the House will be so kind as to give me a hearing.

Mr Chairman, in the first place, the Constitution has not provided for the representation of the National Union of Disabled Persons as such.  The Constitution had provided for the representation of persons with disabilities and the two are not the same.  In Busujju, there are many disabled persons, there is no National Association of Disabled persons. Mr Chairman, therefore, to give this Organisation which is one NGO to be represented in Parliament by five members is to give it a power of determining even sometimes the shape of Government and this is not warranted.  To give the Disabled persons five representatives while you are giving the workers two, when you are giving the youth, - it is most unfair; it has not be sought out clearly and it is going to land us in problems.

Therefore, Mr Chairman, consider this.  This House has not made any provision to ensure that the processes in that are democratic, we do not know whether my Colleague who was sitting next to me in the CA there, we do not whether he is elected.  You are going to give a clique of people who are manipulatable, this is really a stagnatious provision for enabling a tiny, manipulatable group of men to control such a large number of seats and that is not fair.  

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like to say to the House, first of all, that this Clause along with all the other clauses should be written in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.  In other words, we should provide for representatives of the disabled persons, that is what the Constitution requires.  Having provided for that, then we shall give the number.  At the moment, I am not satisfied that NUDIPU does really represent the disabled persons in Uganda and I am not satisfied that they should be given five representatives.  I am not aware of the immense contribution being made by the disabled persons compared with workers, the youth, women and others.  Therefore, all that we need in Parliament is to have the view of the disabled persons represented and that can be done if they have one member or two members not five, that is clearly wrong, that is getting on to rigging.  

So, Mr Chairman, I beg very clearly and with a good conscious to oppose the Motion.  The Motion is that it should remain two, which they have stated - one man, one woman, even that is too much, Mr Chairman -(Laughter)

MR MWANDHA:  Well, thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to strongly obviously to support the Minister. The comments by my Colleague, the hon. Mayanja are very clear in the sense that I do not think hon. Mayanja knows what is happening in Busujju in as far as disability is concerned; because he is not disabled.  So, he is not aware, but as the Minister has already stated, disabled people represent 10 per cent of the population and 10 per cent is spread throughout this country; disability of all types and the 10 per cent is the figure which is used by the World Health Organisation to describe disability in countries like ours, but when you come to Uganda, the number is estimated to be as many as 2 million people and why has this happened?  It has happened because of the recent history that this country has gone through.  Immunisation against the killer diseases had collapsed and therefore, things like polio myelitis which is not known in some countries of the world is rampant in this country and more and more disabled people are becoming as a result of polio myelitis, not to mention other killer diseases.  Apart from that, because of the wars we have suffered; the wars we have suffered over the years in Uganda, especially in the North, many many people have been maimed, they have suffered, - (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I ask the speaker on the Floor, to clarify to me as to whether hon. Mayanja represents or in Busujju represents everybody in Busujju County or it is just a section.  The point over here, Mr Chairman, is that unless it is a matter of diluting democracy, we might find ourselves may be getting university professors to be represented, students to be represented, the grandmothers to be represented, - (Laughter) 

So, where are we going to get - because, the seriousness of the matter is that, while hon. Matembe was talking of an election - the clarification is that, the Member of Parliament is supposed to represent everybody in that constituency and therefore, we would be diluting our independence, our democracy, if we just go on getting every group and if we display that students population is one million, so we should get a student represented.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay understood, proceed hon. Mwandha.  Order please.

MR MWANDHA:  I am not sure whether hon. Wanendeya believes in the Constitution for which he was part in passing, because, the Constitution very clearly has made provisions with regard to representation of disabled people among other interest groups. I will not try to cite all the parts of the Constitution but I am sure that he is aware that actually, the Constituent Assembly did pass those various provisions, but the point here is, the matter of representation of disabled people in Parliament is settled by the Constitution and this Parliament was empowered by the Constitution to decide on the number to represent the disabled people in Parliament.  Now, what we are doing today is to decide on the number; it is not even to decide on issues of who or what, but to decide on the numbers.

In Uganda, because of the history we have gone through, the only organisation that speaks on behalf of the disabled people is the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda which has member organisations from all parts of the country and it is these people who are going to elect through an electoral college, the people who are going to represent the disabled people in Parliament.  That is why National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda and actually he mentioned in the Statute.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.  Wind up please.

MR MWANDHA:  Therefore, Mr Chairman, as I wind up, the only way we can actually get people elected under disability ticket is to go through an organisation which is a national organisation which is represented throughout the country, which will elect members at District levels and then elect people in all regions of Uganda including electing one person for women.  So, really, Mr Chairman, - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up, wind up.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I wind up by strongly supporting the disabled people deserve the small figure of five representatives in this Parliament.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, in the interest of saving time, I want to concede to hon. Mayanja’s contribution on one point, that is the point of terminology.  The Constitution talks about persons with disabilities.  I am, therefore, willing to have my Amendment read, that the persons of disabilities shall be represented by five, then the mode and the organ, remain an administrative matter; one of whom must be a woman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37 (iii)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I wish to move that No. (c) be amended to read or to delete the word ‘five’ and replace it with nine.  Originally when the youth of Uganda from all sectors met, they had considered it to (c), but on realising on the education from the country and also realising the magnitude of the work of representation, we thought it appropriate to put the number nine.  Representation is not just a matter of coming and shouting in the House, you must have a means and a way of approaching and consulting and mobilising your constituency and therefore, the constituencies of the units are varied as I had talked when I was contributing to the general debate.  

To cite an example of my Colleague from the West, have to travel from Kisoro up to Lake Albert and I have to travel from Lake Albert up to Kenya and this is a very wide constituency.  Above all, there is need for a deliberate policy for the Government to develop the youth towards national aspirations and national goals and that can only be achieved by having interaction of the youths with elders with mature people and the youth of Uganda believe that having a certain number of the youth for interacting with the elders in a place like the Parliament will give them a correct guideline, so that Uganda cannot leave a trend which is already gaining stability, it is for these reasons that Mr Chairman, we have moved the number to be nine.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Amendment. Mr Chairman, putting into consideration that the youth are there, energetic and they should really plan for themselves, I feel, Mr Chairman, that if all these youths are supposed to be looked at and be mobilised into productive activities and into policy making bodies, the number must be raised at least nine.  My region consist of 12 districts and it becomes difficult for a representative of Western region, even Northern region to reach all these regions and putting into consideration that the youth constitute 65 per cent in the population of Uganda.  

Really, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, trying to look behind that the disabled constitute 10 per cent and the number has been raised to five whereas the number of the youths has been left to five, I feel that we are cheating certain groups. So, Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Amendment.  Thank you very much.

MR TIVU:  I want to give information to the House, the number of youths is 75 per cent not 65 per cent, then he says, therefore, having said that, Mr Chairman, I would like to say that I support the Motion for youths to be presented by number nine.  Thank you.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Thank you Mr Chairman, I reluctantly stand up to oppose the Amendment.  I think much as we would like the youths to be represented in larger numbers, I think we should at the same bear in mind the overall number of Members of Parliament who will be here.  We should also have a sense of proportion, Mr Chairman.  

The youths, if they so wish, can contest openly with other people; they are so many. So, this is just a special privilege, a special concession, so that, Mr Chairman -(Interjection)- what I was saying is that, the youths are not barred from contesting like any other person, but we have in this spirit of affirmative action proposed five members to represent the youth and I think Mr Chairman, if we now depart from this principle, then we shall not have, as I said, a reasonable House, which can transact business.  So, bearing that in mind and especially, the fact that the youths can still contest like any other person, I think we should maintain the number of five, as presently represented.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I am very sympathetic to the cause of the youth, but I am also aware of the fact on the ground in our politics and our economy.  Therefore, Sir, I reluctantly oppose the Amendment, because, the youth have demonstrated the capacity to contest and come by their own right in this House.  Whenever we have had bi-elections, their performance has been very excellent, I encourage them to keep up the spirit, go in the open arena, after getting this small Entandikwa, so that we can move and have a House that we can contain, so that it is not too large and yet all these interests will be effectively represented.

THE VICE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 37 (ii) (c) be amended as proposed by hon. Mark Tivu.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 37 (iii)

MR KAVUMA:  Sub-clause (iii) be deleted and the following sub-clause be inserted in its place.  The following provisions shall apply to the election of District Women Representatives and Special Interest Groups referred to in sub-section (ii).  Mr Chairman, the second is -(Interruption)

MR ABU BAKER MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I do have an Amendment which has come on 37 Clause 2, I wanted to add -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  We have finished that one.

MR ABU BAKER MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I requested you and you said, I would move that Amendment after the Minister had moved his.

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is what I said, but when the Minister finished, you were talking and you kept on talking, so what do you want?

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a new paragraph (e) and (f) be added to Clause 37 sub-clause (ii) to read as follows:

For the Uganda Teachers Association, there shall be two representatives – 

(f) For the Uganda Medical Association, the Federation of Women University Women, the Uganda Law Society, the Uganda Cooperative Alliance, there shall be one representative each. These representatives shall be elected by the executive thereof.

Mr Chairman, I move this Amendment by virtue of Article 78 of the Constitution.  Article 78 (i) (c) says, Parliament shall consist of: (c) such numbers of representatives of the Army, youths, workers, persons with disability and other groups as Parliament may determine. 

Under other groups, I am proposing that this House consider the very justifiable claim of the educators of this nation, Uganda Teachers Association, by giving them two representatives in the House, that this House recognises the noble contribution made by doctors and other medical - the organisations I have read are making very important contributions for the development of this country and this contribution - this particular point in time of our development should be recognised by granting them special representatives, especially after the House has given unjustified representation as I have already said to some such people.  So, Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAVUMA:  Sub-clause (iii) by deleting the current sub-clause and inserting the following clause therein.  The following provision shall apply to the election of District Women Representatives and Special Interest Groups referred to in sub-section (ii).  This is what we are called upon to do by the Constitution.  In these provisions, we are now prescribing the procedure of elections of these various interested or special groups and in (a), we are proposing that the first Schedule of this Statute, shall apply to the elections of the District Women Representative and in (b), we are proposing Sir, that representatives of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces shall be elected in a manner prescribed by regulations made by the Minister under Section 122 of this Statute. 

Mr Chairman, in (c), we are proposing that the representatives of the youths shall be elected by the Youth Council in accordance with regulations made under Section 122 of this Statute.
  
In (d), we propose that the representatives of the Workers be elected in accordance with the Constitution of the National Organisation of Trade Unions and in accordance with regulations made under Clause 122. 

In (e), we are proposing that representatives of the persons with disabilities shall be elected in accordance with regulations made under Clause 122 of this Statute.  

As I said, this is really giving the procedure of electing these people, consultations are going on and Clause 122 which I referred to Sir, is the Clause which empowers the Minister to make regulations with the approval of the legislature which is this hon. Council. I beg to move, Sir.

DR MAGEZI:  Mr Chairman, I have a substantive Amendment to the method of election of the Woman District Representative.  Do you not think that I should move my Amendment first, before the Minister, so that if it is carried, then the Minister will exclude the category of women under his proposed Amendment, Sir? I think you are rolling on that matter.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, you can move yours first.

DR MAGEZI:  Mr Chairman, I wish to move an Amendment by passing a new 37 (iii) to read as follows:

The woman Representative of the District shall be elected on the basis on universal adult suffrage and by secret ballot.  Thank you Mr Chairman. 

Mr Chairman, this Amendment embodies a principle I have held for a very long time and I have ably discussed it with my constituency during the days of the CA and even in the past days and it has over whelming support in Jinja Municipality East. But for avoidance of wild allegations for transparency, the affirmative action is greatly supported by every body in Jinja East, but they have some reservations about procedures and this afternoon, you may recall, that probably if we had adopted this method of election, the Amendment of hon. Kiiza Besigye would not need to have been so contentious.  

The procedure we have over electoral colleges is very good; in fact, we are here, all of us, having been elected, through electoral colleges.  But I think as we move on, as politics of this country become more democratic and more transparent, it is important that the legacy of people alleging that there was rigging in elections be deliberately put against and people saying representatives are here in numbers, but they represent a minority, because, they were elected by electoral colleges; will also be squashed forth with.  I am not moving this Amendment because I have any particular leanings to any particular political system, it is on personal merit and believing in the principle and I would like to call upon hon. Members of this House, to desist from turning this Amendment on either one leaning of the inter-party or the Movement, because, that merely miscarriages the message.  The moment we go into adult suffrage for women, we shall be letting our electorates know that in fact, they can elect a woman to represent them freely and ably in future elections; to sensitize the electorate himself, because, they feel that except in a few circumstances, it is used through electoral colleges.  A lot of fireworks has already erupted on this Amendment last week, I hope we shall be degenerating into that position and I am moving this Amendment therefore, hoping that the majority of the Members of this House are with me and that, we shall allow this Amendment to be carried, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose that Amendment. But I would have supported it if we had gone a step further and proposed that the election for women at the district level stands to be provided for, perhaps, I would have supported.  I am therefore, opposing because, Mr Chairman, as we have argued before, it is simply impossible for a Ugandan woman at this particular moment to be able to make a network of campaigners who are the district because of the numbers.

Hon. Magezi will bear with me that in the last CA elections, we were standing in Jinja Municipality, but I remember a man who stood against him, he had to sell his property in order to campaign.  How does hon. Magezi expect me a woman, who has no property to make a network to cover a whole district?   I would like to know.

The proposal which is in the Bill, I find quite sufficient, because, if you look at it properly, you will find that the number of people who are to elect the woman in a district is so large and it is nearly equivalent to a constituency.  I will give you an example, in Apac district, in Minakul sub-county; we have 3l local Council I, 3l of them.  Now, in that place, if you Local Councils will have five woman Councillors and nine RCs, if you multiply 3l by 14 in my one sub-county, you come up with a number 434, I want you to multiply that number by a number of sub-counties I have in Apac which is 21, we are talking about RC II Council alone, not to mention III and up to V, wherever it is. Now, why should I be elected by 200,000 while we are being elected by 15, by 20 or less.  Is there fairness in that, Mr Chairman.  I beg hon. Members that please, do not make the life of the women more than difficult; you have property, you have a smaller area, yet, you are saying, I am must do the impossible; unless you want to kill us prematurely.  I thank you.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that sub-Clause (iii) and a new clause be inserted.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Cries of order.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, before hon. Magezi’s Amendment was moved, I had informed the hon. House through you Sir, that the provision in the Clause 3 we are intending to insert in the place of the current clause 3 are intended to enable this House to fulfill its obligations to prescribe the modalities of all the procedures by which all these Members of Parliament who are going to be elected in accordance with Article 37 should be appointed. Mr Chairman, in the interest of time, I will only say, -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is better to listen, if you do not listen, you are going to loose.  Proceed, please.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, in the interest of saving time, I will not recede the arguments I made, but I only want to assure the hon. Members, that Clause 122 which is being referred to here, is the Clause which enables the Minister to come out with regulations on recommendation by the Commission, which did not become regulations unless and until they have been approved by this hon. House.  I beg to move Sir, that we accept this Amendment, so that we can proceed with the business we have after laying the broad principles of how the people mentioned in this clause are going to be elected.  I beg to move, Sir.

MR WANENDEYA:  Hon. Chairman, I beg to request that what was ruled in the other Section by hon. Magezi’s Amendment should be repeated when every body is quiet in the national interest, because, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  You are supposed to keep quiet when other members are contributing.  Take your seat; it is not something new which I have got to teach you here.  Proceed please.

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, I wish to amend the Minister’s Amendment of (c) which says, the representative of the National Youth Council shall be elected by the Council.  Mr Chairman, the experience we have, is that, when we went for the elections for the NRC Members, we discovered that the National Youth Council is too small and yet therefore, we have to go on democratic principles, I will move that the representatives of the youth be elected by the National Youth Conference which will consist of counties, Council Chairmen and it will bring the number large so that we find able and capable nationalistic leaders. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I would be very sympathetic again to the cause of my hon. Colleague, but Sir, we are legislating in a very, very awkward situation, we are legislating when we have a time frame to beat, we are legislating when we have an economic situation to take into account.  Now, the National Youth Assembly as being proposed, is a body that is going to over stretch, in fact, which is outside the budget approved for these elections, because, this item was not budgeted for; we do not have the funds, since this is an interim provision, I would request hon. Members, to go with the provision in the Statute, so that we do this to at least this Parliament, then in a more permanent arrangement, we can legislate for the ideal. I thank you, Sir.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I do sympathise with the Minister’s statement, but I have absolute difficulty in appreciating it.  First of all, we all know and we participated and took part and listened to how the Youth Council finally came to elect delegates for CA and NRC.  The youth left when they were disgruntled and felt very unhappy about the whole exercise; it is three years ago when they last met, the Chairman of the youths has been made their Permanent Secretary and at the moment as we speak, the youths are frustrated, they have no leadership.  It is wrong for them to spend five years being led by people who do not enjoy the mandate of the youth any more; it is important that money be found to call the meeting of the youth, the Chairmen at County level and they get proper representation to represent them for five years in Parliament.  Whatever the case, this should be done, if we are not having this as a token and we should not make it a token one, we should really get the youths sort out their house and put it in order once and for all; the youth, it is very important, during election time, even politically it is very important for the Minister to make sure that the youths are properly mobilised at this time in the national interest and in other interests.

MR ELYAU:  I also sympathise with the youths, because, areas which are remote from town cannot really have the privilege but if it is taken to counties, they will at least the advantage.   What is wrong in organising this thing; these are the people of tomorrow.  So, I think they should be given fully counties as the hon. Member has proposed.  I support it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 37 (iii) (c) be amended as proposed by hon. Mark Tivu.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I want to amend the Minister’s Amendment regarding the Electoral College for electing women.  I want to move an Amendment to improve on the Minister’s Amendment regarding the electoral college for electing women.  Mr Chairman, for the very reasons that hon. Karuhanga has just advanced, the present RC -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  What clause are you amending?

MR TIBERONDWA:  37 (iii), what I want to add on is that, the electoral college of the LCs should be freshly elected.  Mr Chairman, I am saying this, because, the existing LCs their mandate has generally expired.  The legitimacy of these LCs is therefore in question.  While I do agree with the Minister where I have now reached that we can use Electoral College for electing women, I would like to propose that the electoral colleges be freshly elected instead of using those ones which were elected more than five years ago, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  Point of order.  I wanted to know whether the Amendment moved by hon. Tiberondwa should not be discussed when we are discussing the Schedule where the regulations are.

Clause 37 (iii)

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37 (iv)

Clause 37 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Clause 38 be amended in the following manner;

(i) That immediately after sub-clause (i) we insert the following new sub-clause; the Commission shall request such evidence as it thinks necessary of the qualifications specified in sub-section 1.

(ii) That immediately after sub-clause (v), we insert the following new sub-clause; that will be a new section, coming in after Section 38.  

I moved that the Commission shall request such evidence of the qualifications required by sub-section (i). This was in response to be in the argument expressed by members when we were discussing these provisions in the general debate that the Commission should definitely require of the qualification and this provision is intended to take care of that situation, Sir. 

 Then Sir, after sub-clause (v) I propose to move and we insert a new sub-clause (vi) which shall read; that a person holding a public office who wishes to be a candidate, shall apply for leave of absence at least l4 days before the commencement of the nomination day or days.  Then I want to add a (vii) which says that where any person intends to stand for election, he or she shall not accept office as an election officer.

I propose to move an Amendment to add an (viii), which says that where a person holding a public office is a candidate, he or she shall before proceeding on leave, relinquish any vehicle or office, equipment in his or her custody belonging to his or her employer.

Mr Chairman, I also seek to add a (ix) which says, that every employer whom sub-section (vi) relates, shall upon receiving an application by an employee, grant the employee leave of absence with pay or where the person has no earned leave without pay, to seek nomination as a candidate and to be a candidate for election and for such period as may be requested by the employee.

I also beg to move an Amendment to add a (x) which says, Sir, that in this Section, Public Service and Public officer have the meanings assigned to them by Article 257 of the Constitution, except that public officer shall include an employee of a Statutory Corporation or of a company in which the Government owns a controlling share interest.

Mr Chairman, in these provisions, for instance in (vi), we are trying to protect the Public Service, so that when public officers want to go to contest the elections, they should not bring to a halt Government machinery or the machinery of Public Service.  They would therefore, be required to go on leave 14 days before the date of nomination.

In (vii), we want to legislate again a temptation which could accrue to a public officer to misuse his office while anticipating going for an election; so that he can unfair advantage to himself.

In (viii), we are accommodating the now very popular notion of leveling the ground.  First of all, Sir, official duties in the public officer’s office will have to continue and, therefore, the motor vehicle and the office equipment should be left for those officers who come to take over the duties of the officers who go on leave in order to contest an election.  Mr Chairman, we are not  requiring that the office officer should also leave the  house and the domestic equipment in the house, because to do so would amount to trying to punish him or interfere with his constitutionally regarded right to be able to participate in positions of leadership at all levels.

Mr Chairman, in (ix) 6, to avoid a situation where a candidate who is a public servant and wants to go and contest election may think that he is being frustrated by his employer and, therefore, we are requiring that he goes on leave in terms of that Clause.

Clause 10, Sir, is a mere description of public officer and it is bringing it in line with the provision in the Constitution and it also seeks now to include officers employed in parastatals and companies has the majority shareholding.  I beg to move, Sir.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to support the hon. Minister’s Amendment in principle.  However, I would like to propose slight improvement on the proposed sub-clause No. (vi) and add the words, ‘and obtain’ between the words, ‘for and leave’ in the second line of that proposed sub-clause; so that the clause reads and says, a person holding a public office who wishes to be a candidate, shall apply for and obtain leave of absence and at least and so forth and so on.  Mr Chairman, I hope people will not accuse me of being superfluous, I am aware that under the proposed sub-clause No. (ix), the employer will be required by law to grant leave to the public officer who wants to stand for election, but we should not leave the duty of obtaining leave or granting leave only to the employer, it is in the interest of the candidate to push his inefficient or reluctant employer to ensure that he or she grants the employee leave in order to enable him or her to stand for elections.  This would strengthen the candidates interest in the event of a reluctant employer, because, if we say in the law, that the candidate is required and obtain this permission, it will very difficult for a reluctant employer to be legally or refuse to grant the required leave of absence.  So, I beg to move that slight addition.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Mr Chairman, I rise to oppose the Motion as moved by hon. Ntimba.  The provisions of (vi) are actually, in spirit and strictly so in compliance with the Constitution, the Constitution says, every Ugandan who is eligible should be free to stand for political office.  Now, you do not want to put so many clogs in the way; someone could make up his mind on the day of nomination, that he would like to stand for Parliament.  Now, what does he do?  He puts in an application and what (vi) now does, is say, you show evidence of having applied for leave, so that even at the last minute, you can dash and nominate and show evidence of having put in application for leave and then, under (ix) they are saying, should a person nominate and show evidence of having put in application for leave, then, you are under a duty to give that person a leave, so that you do not make it too difficult and this person begins chasing the employer as if it is a rat chase.  It is a question of saying, the Constitution gives you the right to stand for public office, for Parliament, they give you the opportunity until the last minute.  I oppose, Sir.

(Question put and negatived.)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I do support the Amendment as presented by the Minister. But I would like to make an improvement on Clause 7.  There, I think we wanted to stop an officer from misusing his position as the Minister put it, but then, the question is, how does the Commission establish that such an officer is likely to stand or not.  In that regard therefore, Mr Chairman, I want to introduce an Amendment here, that for avoidance of doubt, the Commission shall cause any person who is going to be appointed an election officer to declare in writing his intention to stand, because, if it is not done, then, how do we know that he is going to stand, Mr Chairman?  This is a very important point, Mr Chairman.

MR ABUBAKER MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I have some slight difficulty, I hope my Hon. and Learned Friend can assist on the proposed addition of (ii).  It said, Commission ‘shall’ - and the word used is ‘request’. The Commission shall request such evidence as it deems necessary of the qualifications specified in the sub-section.  Now, Mr Chairman, it is usually he who alleges, must prove.  If I go and say I am a citizen of Uganda and they have doubt, then, it is in my interest to produce every kind of evidence that I am capable of to convince the Commission that I am a citizen -(Laughter)

MR KIDAGA????: Mr Chairman, my amendment reads that for avoidance of doubt, the Commission before appointing any person to be an Electoral Officer to declare in writing his intention to contest the election.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question as read above.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, the point is this, for a person to be elected a Member of Parliament you must have the qualifications specified in the Constitution and repeated in this Bill 38.  Now, the Minister is saying that the Commission shall request such evidence.  My worry about that is that if I have evidence of type A, of my citizenship for instance, and the Commission says, produce a birth certificate and I say there were no birth certificate where I was born; say on a banana tree.  The point is that it is for the candidate to adduce sufficient evidence to satisfy the commission that he is qualified.  We should not let down that they should ask any particular kind of request.  But with all great respect, this Provision seems to me to be otiose.  It is unnecessary and it should not be introduced at this stage.  

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, I thank you.  I hope that my Colleague the Minister will see the point as I am going to develop beyond the point made by hon. Abu Mayanja.  

In my view this provision is really misconceived although it was pushed by Members and the Minister was kindly agreeing to it.  In real practice it will actually be delaying the process of nominating people.  What all that you require on the nomination day is an affidavit.  An affidavit is evidence presented to the Commission upon oath before a Commissioner saying, I am a citizen of Uganda.  I have the following qualifications and so on and so forth.  In other words, you open yourself to a charge of perjury if it is later established that actually you told a lie.  Secondly, it forms the subsequent ground for annulling the election, should it be found that actually you did tell a lie in the affidavit.  What we need is maybe a form indicating the form of affidavit which the Commission will require that you produce together with your nomination paper and you bound yourself that when I am elected or along the way, before election, someone can challenge.  But otherwise to say that the Commission can refuse your nomination merely because they think that you are not qualified is in fact to bring confusion in the process of nomination.  I would suggest that we leave it out and leave it to a form if the Minister has not made it as a means of insuring that we check and confirm.  I beg my Colleague to concede if he so concedes.  I concede Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you conceded on the amendment?

MR KAVUMA: Sir, I conceded on leaving out the propose 2.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 38 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move to make a small amendment in Clause 39, sub-Clause 2 by deleting the word, ‘most’ and replace it with the word, ‘a’.  Mr Chairman, this is a matter of improving on the English and it should not cause any difficulties. 

I have another small amendment in sub-Clause 3, to delete the words, ‘between 10 o’clock in the forenoon’ and insert, ‘from 10 O’clock in the forenoon to’.  Mr Chairman, the idea here was expressed by Members on the Floor here that they did not want to leave a lot of flexibility to the officers administering the election.  They wanted these people to come at a given time; known time and be there so that there is -(Interrruption)- in law and proxy of organising and administering the election.  I beg to move, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 40, in sub-Clause 1 (a), immediately after the words, ‘nomination paper’, we insert the words, ‘in duplicate’.  

Mr Chairman, I also beg to move that in sub-Clause 4, (a) we delete all the words appearing after the word, ‘suffix’.  

Mr Chairman, in sub-Clause 4(b), I beg to propose that we delete all the words after briefly to the end of that Paragraph and immediately after sub-Clause 4, we insert the following new sub-Clause: and it will be 5 and reading - ‘a duplicate copy of the nomination paper certified by the returning officer shall be given to the candidate.’  Mr Chairman, this again is accommodating views expressed by hon. Members as we were in the general debate on this Bill including hon. Wanendeya and hon. Lubega so that these documents are in duplicate and then the candidate can also keep a copy of these important documents.  The words I oppose to delete are superfluous and not necessary to continue to move Sir.  

LT COL BESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment on 40, Clause 2.  I do not know whether I will be able to move it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Move it now.

LT COL BESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I wish to move that Clause 40, Sub-Clause 2, be deleted.  Mr Chairman, I had already given reasons for this proposal which is that it is my hope that the Minister will like to be consistent in this area just like all of us with the constitutional requirements which stipulate what one needs to be a candidate.  I consider that Clause 42 introduces a new impediment not provided by the Constitution to becoming a candidate.  I therefore propose that it be deleted, Mr Chairman.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support hon. Besigye but I think it is necessary and normal to provide for a refundable deposit if a candidate does not poll a certain percentage of the votes in order to eliminate a number of candidates.  Therefore, I would not object to their being a fee provided it was refundable if the candidate polled more than a given proposal.  But certainly if it is now put as it is, it seems to me to be unconstitutional because it is introducing an additional qualification to those already provided by the Constitution.  It is not really a procedural matter.  Here we have got power only to lay down the procedure not to introduce additional qualifications.

AN HON. MEMBER: I wish to oppose the amendment by hon. Besigye on the ground that, Mr Chairman, when we were debating Presidential Electoral Bill, we have already taxed them UShs 8m.  Now when they come to our turn, and then we put a new standard, this will not be good for the integrity of this House.  So, I oppose the amendment. 

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I thank you.  I do oppose the amendment.  There is nothing unconstitutional about this provision.  It is normal as a matter of procedure that when you go to elections, it is universally accepted you are required make a deposit or put a fee.  For us we have opted for a fee; non-refundable as cost-sharing to this expensive exercise of elections and I think we should go by the standards we have set ourselves in the Presidential Elections Statute and we retain this Provision, Sir. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 40 be amended as proposed by hon. Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 41 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we amend Clause 42 by deleting Paragraph (a).  Mr Chairman, the contents of Paragraph (a) are obsolete; they are superfluous and they should be removed.  That is why I move that we delete it and I so move, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 43 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 44 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 45 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46
MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 46 be amended in sub-Clause 2 by deleting that sub-Clause and inserting the following sub-Clause:

‘The polling day appointed under sub-section one shall be not later than 45 days after nomination days, except that where nomination days have been appointed before the date on which Presidential election is required to be held under the Constitution and the Presidential elections Interim Provisions Statute 1996, the Commission shall, whether or not, the polling day has been appointed under this section, postpone the Parliamentary election and appoint a new polling day for the purpose so that all steps shall be taken for completing the Presidential election before the date of the Parliamentary election.’ 

Mr Chairman, this amendment is intended to accommodate the spirit of the amendment we already passed where we require the Presidential election to take place before Parliamentary elections and since their possibility that they could be a repeat, that position should be sustained through this kind of amendment.  

Mr Chairman, about the number of 45 days, this is intended to give flexibility to the Commission while organising these elections.  I beg to move so, Sir.

Mr Chairman, I have another amendment on Sub-Clause 3, on the same Clause 46 and I beg to move that immediately after the word, ‘office’  in sub-Clause 3, we insert ‘and in each Constituency within the District’.   Mr Chairman, this is intended to facilitate wider circulation of the information so that it is not only at the District Headquarters, but it also goes down to the Constituency level.  I beg to move.  

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I simply want to seek clarification from the hon. Minister.  Since we have already passed previously that the election of the President should take place before the election of Members of Parliament.  I would like the Minister to clarify this matter as to whether the nomination day for the Members of Parliament will take place before the election of the President.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, my reading of the proposed amendment is to cater for that kind of situation because it says, ‘it shall be insured that all the necessary steps affecting the completing of a Presidential election shall be taken before the date of Parliamentary elections.’   Now, nomination is part of the preparations and I think administratively the Commission will now see the good sense of making sure that these elections are as separate as possible.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 46, sub-section 2 be amended as proposed by the Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Clause 46 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 47 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, before we go to Clause 48, I beg to amend the heading.  Part 6 - campaigning.  The number their should be ‘7’; it should be ‘Part 7’ on campaigning.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 48, sub-Clause 2, be amended by inserting the word, ‘after consultations with the candidates’  after the word, ‘shall’. The rationale here, Sir, is simple, that when amendments are being made, the candidates should also have an opportunity to be consulted on that matter since they are directly interested parties.  

Then in sub-Clause 7, I beg to move that we delete the words, ‘a person other than an election officer’ and insert the words, ‘an election officer or other person.’  Mr Chairman, that was by mistake.  Election officers were supposed to carry out election duties.  So, we only correct that mistake.  
Mr Chairman, in sub-Clause 14, I beg to move that we delete the words, ‘or other public meeting’, as a way of improving on the drafting of that sub-Clause, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR SEBAANA KIZITO:  Mr Chairman, my amendment is already submitted; calls for deletion of the entire sub-Clause 14.  Therefore, it goes furthest I think.  May I move it?

THE CHAIRMAN: Go on.

MR SEBAANA KIZITO: Mr Chairman, I move for the deletion of the entire Clause 48, sub-Clause 14 and to re-write it as follows:

‘Candidates may hold any rally or other public meetings intended to solicit votes’.  Mr Chairman, although it is provided that candidates shall have joint meetings, it is possible that due to a number of candidates, the time allotted to each candidate may not be sufficient for that candidate to explain his position in that area.  More so, as this election which we are going to hold will be on personal merit.  Therefore, I want candidates to have the opportunity to go back to an area which they think their views did not come out very clearly.  I want them to be able to go back there and explain so that people should know what to elect because it is on personal merit. Therefore, Mr Chairman, I move for the deletion of the entire Clause 48, sub-Clause 14 and re-write it as I propose Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I oppose the amendment by hon. Sebaana Kizito, first on the ground that it goes contrary to the provisions with regard to the organisation of our election meetings.  It is against the spirit of Article 269; it is liable to abuse.  It is also likely to give a lot of problems administratively to the Commission.  When you have over 1,000 candidates and you want to organise candidates’ meetings and then each one of the 1,000 is also trying to organise in his own way, a lot of chaos can result from this kind of exercise.  Mr Chairman, hon. Sebana Kizito -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in a very country in the world that I know of, candidates organise their meetings and this does not cause chaos.  The innovation of a joint candidates’ meeting was sought out during the C.A because we were all debating one draft, and every candidate was required to give his views on the draft.  Why should you prevent a man who has his freedom, who has been nominated properly to go and talk to the people from whom he is soliciting votes?  Then you say, when he does so, it causes chaos?

CAPT. GASATURA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to inform the whole House, through you, that in all the countries that he knows there are those, such Iraq, Kuwait, Iran, Saudi Arabia where candidates certainly do not have that opportunity.  I just wanted to be sure that the information the hon. Member had given us was very sincere and thorough.  But further to that, we have our society here which can be easily incited and excited by the different candidates holding their own meetings where they cannot be queried. Even where lies have been given and I know hon. Mayanja has suffered a lot from the Press and he has accused them of lying against him.  Even where they say apologies, damages already done.  Surely we do not want damage done to our population and that is why meetings held together; joint candidates meetings are valuable that everyone can explain all his merits.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS MATEMBE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, my information is actually related to what hon. Mayanja said that the innovation was just for CA for candidates meeting.  I wanted to inform him and this House, that in fact as a Commissioner on Uganda Constitutional Commission, the cry of the people around the whole country were that they wanted this joint candidates meeting because they were so tired about the abusive and all this nonsense that goes on when we go alone.  They wanted to see us their together and we talk while everybody is there.  If you tell lies about your friend, they tell you and they actually demanded it for even the Parliamentarians that were coming forward.  Therefore, it is not true that it was only an innovation for just C.A; it was an innovation from the population against an experience that they have suffered and they do not want to see any longer, Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA: I thank the hon. Members who have given the information.  I want to remind hon. Abu Mayanja that under the Movement type of politics, which the Ugandans have opted for, and they have been moving for the last ten years, public campaign is by joint candidate meetings and since we agreed that under 271 we should be governed by the Movement Political System, it is only fair and fit that -(Interruption)

MR TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I do agree that we used the joint meetings for the CA.  Mr Chairman, it is not a long time ago, since in this very House we passed a Law that the Presidential candidates need not have joint candidates meetings.  I would like to inform the Minister that I think we are going too far that the electoral system is not a matter for Government alone.  The population must have faith in the pre-electoral process if we are going to respect the result of this election.  I do not think that it is too much for the Minister to concede this very noble amendment for the stability of this country.  

All competing groups must fill in advance that the ground is level not just on the voting day.  But the pre-electoral processes must be seen to be fair.  I think the Government is pushing the population too far on this particular one.  It is a very noble amendment and I would like to appeal to the Minister to concede to this for the sake of stability of this country.  Otherwise, very few people will have faith in this electoral process.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I regard hon. Tiberondwa’s intervention as a contribution certainly not to giving me information.  But I must say, I am not conceding to his request.  

It is true when we were going to the CA there was a document, but it is also true that our people even in the forth coming election will want to hear what views their candidates have on particular issues.  In any elections they are issues, and all this provision is saying, come together, put your case to the electorate together on those issues so that they can determine who should be their representative.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 48 be deleted as proposed by hon. Sebaana Kizito.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we amend Clause 15 by deleting the sub-Clause and inserting thereto the following Clause: ‘Nothing in sub-section 14 prohibits a candidate or a candidate’s agent from holding a consultative meeting with the candidates campaign agents in a place other than a public place for the purpose of planning and organising the candidate’s election campaign.’ 

Those who were involved in elections last time, would know the value of this kind of consultative meeting when you sit with your agents to review the progress of your campaigning.  It is also intended to ally any fears from any Members that the Law is being too restrictive, they cannot organise their election programme with some flexibility.  I beg to move, that that amendment be adopted so that it becomes easier for those involved in the election campaigns to go about their business without undue interference from any quarters.

Mr Chairman, in sub-Clause 19, I beg to move that that sub-Clause be withdrawn.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 48 be amended as proposed by the Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 49, sub-Clause 1, be amended by deleting the words, ‘in dealing with them’ which appear therein.  I beg to remove those words, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 50 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 51 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, in Clause 52, sub-Clause 2, I beg to move that we delete the words, ‘or public officer’ appearing therein and this is in the spirit of accepting proposals from hon. Members and this one came from hon. Lt Col Kizza Besigye.  Mr Chairman, after Clause 52, I beg to move that we add a new Clause 53.

The new Clause 53 will read, ‘subject to this section, a candidate or a candidate’s agent may raise any assistance for the candidate’s campaign through lawful means.’  In 2, that ‘a candidate or candidate’s agent shall not obtain, solicit or receive any financial or other assistance for the purpose of the candidate’s campaign from any foreign Government institution, body or person which or who has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the lawfully established Government of Uganda or to endanger security of Uganda.’  

(b) ‘Employ for the purposes of the candidate’s campaign, any financial or other assistance from any Government Institution, body or person described in Paragraph (a) of this sub-section, whether the assistance was obtained before or after the commencement of this Statute.  For the purposes of this section, a candidate may obtain the necessary information as to the prohibited foreign Governments, Institutions, bodies or persons from the Commission.’  Then sub-Clause 3, reads that ‘every candidate shall maintain a record of all assistance obtained or solicited for the purposes of his or her campaign’, and sub-Clause 4, ‘the Commission shall have the right at any time to demand the production of any record required to be maintained under sub-section 3 or any information relating to it.’

Sub-Clause 5, ‘a candidate or candidate’s agent who contravenes sub-section 2 of this section or a candidate who contravenes sub-section 3 of this section or refuses or neglects without lawful excuse to produce any record or any information demanded by the Commission under sub-section 4 or for the purposes of sub-section 4 of this section makes a statement which he or she knows to be false in any material particular an offence.’

Sub-Clause 6, ‘a person who commits an offence under sub-section 5 of this section is liable on conviction. (a) in the case of an offence under sub-section 2, of this section to a fine not exceeding Shs.10m/= or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both. (b) In any other case to a fine not exceeding Shs.3m/= or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both.’ 

Mr Chairman, this Clause is very similar to the clause we passed in the Presidential Elections Statute and it is intended to safeguard the security and stability of this country.  No Ugandan would be interested in seeing that anybody aspiring for leadership would get the temptation to raise funds or even to use funds which come from sources that are aiming at destabilising this country.  

Mr Chairman, as far as the penalties are concerned, I want to clarify that we are talking about the maximum.  We are leaving it at the discretion of the Court which tries any offence under this Statute to see what amount money or what term of imprisonment it would fix judging on the facts of the case and circumstances surrounding the case.  These are harmless; the Court will have jurisdiction to determine an appropriate sentence.  I beg to move.

LT COL BESIGYE: Mr Chairman, my views on this kind of provision are well known to this House.  When we were discussing the Presidential Elections Bill, As a matter of fact I had already circulated an amendment in anticipation of this introduction based on the report of Committee of the Sectoral Committee which was not considered.  I opposed this kind of provision in the Presidential elections because I firmly believe that it is a Legal Provision that encourages or legalises our nation to be compromised.  

Whereas the stronger argument in the case of election of the President, was that the Presidential candidate needs a lot of money to cover the whole of Uganda and that in any case that money may not be available from amongst ourselves.  I really do not think that we should go as far as putting in our Law that all Members aspiring to lead counties should also go abroad asking for money and that we should publish people who are our enemies so that they do not raise money from them.  In fact I think this is even going to compromise national security because as soon as you publish to all aspiring candidates a list of persons whom we consider to be our enemies, the tendency maybe knowing ourselves to actually go to those persons and say you see, our Government does not like, you support me so that I get elected and you get away from these bad books.  This can end up compromising our security.  

I would beg this House that at least if we have already allowed the President legally; of course even if it is not within the Law, people can go and solicit and nobody will ever know.  But I think to put it in the Law that people should go and solicit is really something that is disturbing.  

Therefore, I think we can do well to leave this one out of our Law.  If some people want to go and quietly solicit, let them go and do it, but providing for them to go and do so.  I believe that even if there is no solicitation from outside, our people really can support a campaign in a county where a Member is going to stand.  Therefore, I do not think that this is really a useful introduction into our Law for elections into Parliament.  If the President is compromised, at least, let us have a Parliament which is free from that compromise which can moderate that kind of situation.  So, Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose this introduction.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I rise to oppose this Clause and propose that it be deleted completely from the Rules.  The reason is that this Law is not obeyable.  It is not possible for the Minister or anybody to know how you have got money.  Secondly, there are people who give some assistance and who do not want their names to be revealed.  I do not think it is fair to these people.  While the matter touching foreign countries was relevant in the case of Presidential candidates, I think we are trying to kill a fly with a hammer.  I do not think that a Parliamentary candidate needs to go out of this country to win a Constituency election.  

Mr Chairman, the thing sounds unnecessarily draconian and yet, I think it will affect very few people.  I would like to propose that we remove this Law.  Even the penalties put there are harsh for nothing.  I would like to propose that we delete it, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, may I request that the Minister deletes that proposal from the Law.  Mr Chairman, the point over here is that one could go to the border countries or neighbouring countries and can get the money and change it and nobody will ever know where that money came from.  Therefore, since we liberalised foreign exchange, I do not think that with the best of accountants in Uganda, it will possible to cross check that information whatsoever.  It is only a matter of trying to think that if it can be done, well and good.  But it is almost impossible.  So, I request that the Minister deletes the whole thing from our Law and it is not in our best interest.  I thank you.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I have listened to the arguments against this provision.  But I think the security of any country is priority number one to any of its leaders and legislators.  If we feared that one person could be used by money from dangerous sources, the mischief still remains when a multiplicity of 300 people or a good number of them could still fall in the same trap.  In this Constitution we have made, we have given a lot of power to Parliament, and anybody who wants to cause a bit of chaos will no longer look at one office, but he will really put his attention to this Parliament.  As long as there is a mischief which must cure as legislators, we should not abdicate to our responsibility.  One of the very important values of any law, is its deterrent effect.  If anybody is going to refrain from doing any act because there is a law, the law will have achieved its purpose, and the society will have been saved from the mischief -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order, to say whether the Minister is in order to argue that we should provide provisions in this electoral law which are already covered in the Constitution about treason and penal code.  Mr Chairman, the activities described in the amendment moved by the Minister, are treasonable or penal provisions which are adequately covered by the laws already existing in Uganda.  Therefore, I am asking whether it is in order that the Minister should give views which support our provisional Constitution and the Law for treasonable acts as if to justify this action.  Is he in order, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Minister is in order.  Proceed please.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I thank you for your wise ruling on the point of order and I will not spend any more energies on it.  It is a policy we agreed to adopt and I am only reminding Members that as long as we see, there is a possibility of a mischief which can be dangerous to the security of this country.  It is our responsibility which we should not abdicate to legislate against that mischief.  

This kind of thing is very, very usual.  I know of states which go even further and by Statute black-list states which are known to be dangerous to their own security.  But in our case we are saying, we are not going to antagonise anybody.  If you want information about these areas, go to the Commission.  The Commission will have it.  It will be treated as confidential between you and the Commission to guide you so that you do not burn your hands.  I therefore, Mr Chairman, request hon. Members to use the same spirit they used when we debated the Presidential Elections Statute so that we have consistent in our Law dealing with this very important aspect of our management of public life; the elections.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 53

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 53 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 54 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I beg that through you, the hon. Members would allow the insertion of 55, sub-section 4; 55, sub-section 5, as additional to Clause 55.  Mr Chairman, sub-section 55, 4, which should be added should read as follows:

‘Ballot papers shall be printed in duplicate with the same serial numbers while gummed at the back.’  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, what I have in mind is this, currently we have only one ballot paper which is given to us and we throw it in the ballot box and that will be the end of it and if those ballot papers are lost, that is the end of it.  Therefore, if you have one ballot paper, printed with the same numbers, you can tear off this to put in a ballot box.  It goes into the ballot box.  

MR TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Is it in order for us to continue debating this very important Clause when we do not have a quorum in the House?

THE CHAIRMAN: Let the Minister move a Motion to adjourn.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that as a result of lack of a quorum, we adjourn the Council. 
 
THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has considered certain provisions of the Bill entitled, ‘The Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Bill, 1996,’ and has not completed the entire Bill, Sir.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION FOR THE REPORT FROM COMMITTEE OF 
THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.05 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 February 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)




