

Thursday, 23 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I want to ask the clerk to place the debate on nodding disease for Tuesday next week. It was presented but could not be debated as members from the affected region had gone there to evaluate the situation. It should be early on Tuesday, so that we can discuss it.

I think there are only two members who have issues of national importance. I will ask Dr Bayigga to use only two minutes.

2.34
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the time. I am presenting major concerns from the people of Kome Island. I do not represent this constituency but fortunately, I have compared notes with my brother on the other side, hon. Peter Bakaluba Mukasa, who is going to support this submission.

Over 460 persons are at a risk of losing their jobs. These have been fishermen in Lake Victoria and they have been sustaining their families with income generated out of fishing. The fisheries department established an interlacustrine region within the lake and it has been called the breeding area. This breeding area touches the sub counties of Mpata, Ntenjeru and Kome all found in Mukono District. It also touches Wakiso and Katabi, which are in Wakiso District. 

The affected communities on Kome Island, where the main activity is fishing, include Myende, Zingoola, Kisu and Kimi. On Gamba Island of Kome Sub County, again the affected communities include Kalyambuzi, Kisu, Nyanama and Mala. Others include Ggaba in Kampala, Mulungu in Makindye Division, Zindere and Bugiri.

The impeccable information that we have got is that this area which has been earmarked for breeding of fish surrounds an island, and that island is owned by a white man called Cooper. The island is called Bulago. This is where the white man has established a leisure space which is being used. This area is surrounded by security personnel of marine police and no other people in the area can pass there even if they are simply ferrying passengers. 

We have been informed that whereas there has been compliance that no fishing is going to take place within those areas, even the areas outside this interlacustrine area which has mapped cannot be crossed to by someone going to fish outside. We have information that there has been ruthlessness visited onto the fishing folk who are found within the lake. Their engines are being confiscated and taken to Bulago Island. When somebody is to retrieve his engine, which has been confiscated in the middle of the lake, they have to pay between Shs 100,000 and Shs 200,000 in order to get back their engine.

We have also been informed that within that area, there are fishermen who are being protected by some security forces in order to continue fishing in there while it has been gazetted as a breeding ground. One wonders whether the area is protected for certain people to fish while preventing the rest of the fishing community to fish in there.

The confiscation, beating up and killing of people who are fishing in those areas raises a strong matter of national importance. We think that the Department of Fisheries and the minister responsible for the fisheries sector needs to explain this situation. No leader has come up to explain the gazetting of certain areas as no-go zones for the fishing communities while some continue to use them from Bulago Island.

Madam Speaker, I would also request that my brother from the other side, Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa, be granted some time in order to expound on this important matter.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you want the Government to respond. You are now asking for a debate to only be told about the issue.

2.40
MR PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter he is raising is very important and it entirely affects my constituency, which is along Lake Victoria.

I have received communication from the chairmen of the affected sub counties, which I would like to lay on the Table. I want to lay on the Table this interlacustrine protected area map for investigation. It affects a number of islands. This has become a problem because it affects most of our fishermen. It also affects our sub counties in terms of generating revenue because they entirely base on fishing.

We would like Government to intervene in this matter. I was very disturbed when my RDC convened a rally in Katosi Landing Site and he was blaming Parliament because it had sold the waters by gazetting them. He said investors were free to come and take over the waters and the fishermen would not be allowed to fish in those gazetted areas, which was very unfortunate. He was heaping all the blame on me as a Member of Parliament and Parliament at large. I want to lay these papers on the Table for an investigation to start.

THE SPEAKER: Is the minister for fisheries here? Prime Minister, there is an issue of grave concern from Kome Island which has been raised.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA: The papers I am laying on the Table indicate the interlacustrine protected area on Lake Victoria, which covers Mukusu Island, Ssanga Island, Kawaga light house, Tavu Island, Kimi Island, Kizima Island, Miru Island, and under supervision of Mr Cooper, the white settler on Bulago Island. He does not allow anybody to pass through those waters. He has put a prison and everything. I lay it on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have an undertaking from the Government because this is a serious matter?

2.43
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I will ask the minister responsible to look into these problems and come back to this House.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have it next week, because the livelihoods of fishermen are in danger? Since they accuse Parliament, I also want to know whether we sold the lake.

2.44
MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since I have been given two minutes I will start at the tail end to request the minister responsible for infrastructure, hon. Byandala, and the minister in charge of Kampala to bring to this House the Kampala District master plan on drainage. It has only rained twice and we have recorded four deaths in Kampala because of flooding.

We passed a loan request here in the Eighth Parliament. It was supposed to help Kampala drainage systems particularly Kawempe. Ever since we passed that loan request, I have lost three villages. All the people in those villages have abandoned their houses. This is a pertinent issue for Kampala. The wetlands have been encroached on and they are continuing to be encroached on. We want to know how far this master plan has gone in addressing issues in Kampala, particularly in Kawempe division.

So much has happened; people have lost their businesses, they have lost lives and they have lost virtually everything. Next week, the two ministers should present that master plan and even the money we passed here in the Eighth Parliament regarding the drainage system should be talked about.

2.46
MS BETTY ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We have a lot of problems in Kitgum District. Recently, the acting CAO was indicted because of abuse, together with the former RDC, and as such he was relieved from duty. That is Mr Charles Otai. However, the minister, hon. Adolf Mwesige, made an appropriate administration move and posted Mr Kawoya whom the current LCV chairman, Mr Nyeko Luka, has refused to enter the office.

He would want to work with the former indicted member or a friend of the former. This has caused us problems as a district because the indicted former CAO can no longer access the district funds and the current one, who is entitled to it, does not have access to the office. As I talk, the accounts are now closed. There is no business in Kitgum because the district account is already closed. The LCV chairman has not allowed the posted CAO from the ministry to take charge and transact business.

I would want immediate intervention from the Minister of Local Government to streamline this and probably even bring the LCV chairman to order. The people who are suffering are the people of Kitgum and we have a very serious problem going on with the nodding disease. He is adding salt into the wound. That is my case, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

2.49
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): I rise on matter of national importance concerning our senior citizens, particularly the retired teachers in Arua and probably the greater West Nile. You are aware we had a break and this was supposed to help us to consult with voters. I had an interface with retired teachers and the issues they raised to me were concerning their pension or their packages that they were supposed to be getting monthly.

Some deductions are being made since last year around August up to today. The Pensions Act, chapter 286 is very clear about pensions of teachers. I would like to put this question to the minister in charge of public service: is he aware of these deductions that are being made on teachers’ packages, which are not supposed to be touched according to the law? Subsection II is very clear that as years go by, these teachers are supposed to get higher figures. The opposite is happening. This is a substantial amount of money, looking at the number of retired senior citizens in Arua and West Nile as a region. This is an important matter that the minister needs to respond to on the Floor of the House.

Secondly, I also came across a situation where a retired civil servant gets his gratuity and he is put on hold before accessing his monthly pension package. What I know is that when somebody is in civil service, he is on the payroll and Ministry of Public Service uses that information. As soon as somebody is retired, this information should be transferred to the pensionable payroll. The question is: why should somebody get his gratuity and then wait for four or five years to begin accessing his pension? 

Many of them have died without accessing their money, and I am sure this matter has been raised on the Floor of Parliament several times before. I think it is the right time to correct this anomaly. So, with your support, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to put this matter to the Minister of Public Service to give us a satisfactory answer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Leader of Government Business has taken note of that request for the Minister of Public Service to come and respond to the queries raised from Ayivu. 

2.54
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present a petition from the people of Zeu, which includes 10 clans in Zeu Sub County, Zombo District. The clans include: Abanga, Pakia, Andwasi, Papoga, Awora, Pader, Alisi, Pagei, Palei and Aringa.

The problem there is that in 1969, 500 hectares of land was given to the Government of Uganda for agricultural experiments. However, down the road, during Amin’s regime, this particular farm was ruined and rendered dysfunctional. In 2008, it was discovered that this land had been leased to one James Finley, a UK resident, and soon after sold to Mukwano Group of Companies.  

Since 2008 this land, which is now claimed to be 3,000 acres or 1,285 hectares, is neither being used by Mukwano Group of Companies nor by the local people. This has rendered the people useless as far as productivity is concerned and left them in abject poverty. They cannot produce food and cannot even raise an income to take their children to school, which has caused a lot of suffering for the last four years. 

Mukwano claims that this is his land because he has the title but nobody can verify whether he has the title or not. The clans I have read out would like to be productive and so they have prayed to you, Madam Speaker, that Parliament resolves that this land belongs to them and not Mukwano Group of Companies. 

They have also prayed that the 500 hectares, and not 1200 hectares as perceived by Mukwano, should be theirs and not Mukwano’s. 

They pray that Mukwano Group of Companies should compensate the 274 families whose property they found and destroyed in that place. 

The petitioners would like to have an investor of their own choice and not Mukwano because he has not talked to them. He has not explained to them what he is going to do on that land. Generally, there is a poor relationship between the community and Mukwano Group of Companies.

Lastly, the community prays that Government should assist them fight poverty. 

I would like to lay this on the Table. The documents I am laying on the Table, Madam Speaker, include a petition from the clans that I have read out from Zombo District; signatures of 6,900 people who have been displaced and the 274 families whose property has been destroyed.  I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will send it to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to study and give us a report. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There was a matter of national importance raised from Kitgum but we did not get it directed.

THE SPEAKER: But you are jumping the gun. Yes, Prime Minister, there was the issue of the Chief Administrative Officer of Kitgum. I do not know whether he has been appointed or not. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Yesterday, I informed the Leader of the Opposition that should he harbour any grievances against my performance, he should then go to the Constitutional Court for clearance. Similarly, if hon. Anywar also has a problem, she should do the same because Parliament is not a court of law.

THE SPEAKER: No, she is concerned that the funding for Kitgum is not moving properly because the posted CAO is not in office. That is her problem. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, this is what I am saying. The officials who are aggrieved should go to court. (Interjections)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order because the Deputy Leader of Government Business is responding to my query. We are aware that we, Members of Parliament, represent our constituents and we are their voice. When we come to this august House, we bring issues raised by our constituents. 

It is well known that the government in power has a cardinal duty, which is constitutional, to respond to all issues across the country. I brought an issue concerning the plight of my people of Kitgum. Once the account is not moving, everything is static and this has been a result of the minister’s directive who posted that officer to our district. It should be the same ministry to rectify this. 

Is the Deputy Prime Minister in order not to respond to my case and instead refer me to courts of law when this is my place of work where the voice of the people of Kitgum should be heard? Is he in order? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Prime Minister, what they need is to get an answer from the Ministry of Local Government about when a substantive CAO will be posted to Kitgum. That is the problem they have. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Local Government is hereby directed to go to Kitgum and solve this problem. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, today in the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery, we have a team of very prominent people. First, we have Prof. Baryamureeba, Vice Chancellor Makerere University; Dr William Kalema, Chairperson Board of Trustees, Makerere University Female Scholarship Foundation; Dr Thelma Awori, Honorary Counsel of Liberia in Uganda; Prof. Catherine Odora Hoppers, South African Research Chair in Development Education - by the way, that is my classmate from St Catherine’s Secondary School. (Applause) 

We also have Mrs Diana Ofwona, Regional Director UN Women, Central Africa and member of the board of trustees; Prof. Ruth Mukama, Professor of Linguistics, Makerere University; Mr Alfred Namoah, Academic Registrar, Makerere University; Ms Catherine Kanabahita, secretary to the board and Director, Gender Mainstreaming Directorate, Makerere University; and her sister hon. Dora Byamukama, MP East African Legislative Assembly. (Applause)

We also have Mrs Dorothy Ngalambi from the US Embassy here and Shannon Dolsey from the Embassy of the United States of America. Most importantly, we have a woman who has strong ties to Uganda in the person of Dr Shelby Lewis. She is seated there beside Dr Kalema. She first came to Uganda in 1961 under the Teachers for East Africa Programme and taught at Nabumali High School. I do not know whether we have alumni of Nabumali here. After that, she went to Tororo Girls’ School in 1965. Are there alumni of Tororo? - [Hon. Members: “We are many”] - That is wonderful.

Also, in the gallery are other alumni of Tororo Girls including one of our clerks, Rose Ikiror. They are here to accompany her. She is in the country to give the Third Makerere Africa Lecture Series, which she will do tomorrow. You are invited if you have time. Most importantly, she has come to lobby for the rehabilitation of Tororo Girls’ School (TGS). She has written a proposal, which is under consideration, and we look forward to changes at TGS. As a person, she has also come to offer two scholarships to two girls at Tororo Girls’ School from her own money. (Applause)

Because of her support to Tororo District, to the Eastern region and to Uganda, the Tieng Adhola is due to give her a Luo name this week. So, she is also going to become a Luo elder in this country. We really want to celebrate her contribution to Uganda. We thank you very much for coming. (Applause)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009
3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill is a reprint as agreed in the Business Committee, so, it is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for expeditious handling. It has been in the pipeline for more than 40 years, so we urge them to handle it quickly.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, we have no problem with the re-tabling of the Bill but the date of the Bill cannot be the date of the past Parliament. The year 2009 was the other Parliament and as we read it for the first time here to the new Parliament, it should be 2012. Surely, can’t you change the dates and come back?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. I think we should not make life difficult for the Minister of Justice. These Bills were given the first reading in the other Parliament. These are the Bills we saved ourselves here by our own motion and we directed them to re-print these Bills. We ask them to lay for the first time so that they can go back to the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Attorney-General for giving way. As you may be aware, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered this Bill in its totality in the last Parliament and you may recall that we were even ready with a report to be debated by this Parliament.

The Attorney-General at the time requested that he be given time to consider some of the views that he received just before we presented the report. I wanted to know from the Attorney-General whether he has finally considered those views. If he has not, we are ready with the report to be presented before this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are the ones who said that the new members do not have these Bills. We directed the government to re-print the Bills so that all the members can have them, and we said that the first and second reading will be shortened. Do not make life difficult.

The Bill is committed to that committee. Even if it is returning tomorrow, it will come for a second reading tomorrow.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE CHATTELS SECURITIES BILL, 2009

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance. I beg to move that the Chattels Securities Bill, 2009 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Honourable members, that Bill is also a re-print, so we ask the committee to expeditiously conclude the report and return to the House.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE COMPANIES BILL, 2009

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Companies Bill, 2009 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that Bill had been debated and it was at Committee Stage, so we expect to complete the second reading within a short time.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy to report to the House that following the instructions of the Business Committee of Parliament, we went ahead and got copies of the Companies Bill, 2009. We, the new and old members, have gone through the Bill and we are ready, even tomorrow, to submit a report on the Companies Bill, 2009.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, it will be reflected on the Order Paper as business to follow.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TRANSFER OF CONVICTED OFFENDERS BILL, 2007

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the legal committee, what is the position on the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, now that the Bill has been read for the first time, we shall also consider it after the Bills that I have already mentioned are ready before the committee.

THE SPEAKER: But do it expeditiously because it has been in the pipeline for some time.

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS BILL, 2008

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Geographical Indications Bill, 2008 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded and committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for expeditious handling and report back.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY BILL, 2009

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Industrial Property Bill, 2009 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. It is committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for expeditious handling and report back.

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS

3.13
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the statement of Government business for the week starting from February 28th and ending on March 1st 2012. 

In accordance with rule 25 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to inform the House that the following will form part of Government business for the week of February 28th and ending on March 1st 2012:

Bills for First Reading
(a)	The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009
(b)	The Narcotics and Psychotropic Substance (Control) Bill, 2007
(c)	The Regional Governments Bill, 2009
(d)	The Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill, 2006
(e)	The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010
(f)	The Uganda Forestry Association Bill, 2010
(g)	The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011; and
(h)	The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010

Ministerial Statements:

(a)	On the progress of the implementation of the parliamentary resolution on the cotton sector - Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

(b)	On the performance of PLE and UCE and Government    commitment to increase teachers’ salaries - Minister of Education and Sports.

(c)	On financing of roads - Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(d)	On nodding disease – debate continues.

(e)	On state of the economy - Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

(f)	On Youth Venture Capital Fund – Members to be clarified - Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Motions:

Motion for a resolution of Parliament authorising Government to borrow US$ 150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme in selected municipalities - Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery, we have students from the University of Toronto. They are here to interact with the women Members of Parliament. Their course unit is “History of Elite Women in Africa in the 20th Century”. They are led by Prof. Nakanyike Musisi who has brought them here today. You are welcome. (Applause) (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I think the members are asking about Dr Kiyonga’s report on the PAC recommendations.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Can I make an oral amendment of this one? It should be “Consideration of the remaining recommendation of the PAC report.”

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is also the matter of the presidential address to Parliament but apparently it is missing. As you may be aware, there are new developments in that sector, which have also been reported in today’s newspapers. Following the President’s speech where he commended the farm-down to Tullow, Tullow has also sold to CNOOC and Total. Again, the same matter that we had with Heritage refusing to pay tax has happened with Tullow, despite the strong assurances from the President that for any farm-down to take place, these companies must pay our taxes. 

The small taxes we were to get as crumbs from the deal have apparently also become a subject of litigation. It is important that we heard the statement so that we put it in its rightful place. Other than that, as a country and Parliament and as chairperson of PFOG, we are at a loss and do not know how to proceed. We thought we would use the opportunity when debating the President’s speech to raise serious matters of concern. However, I do not see it anywhere in the business we are handling next week.  

THE SPEAKER: I think we had reminded you last week to get the re-print of the President’s speech which he had promised to send. However, we have not yet seen it. There are concerns that it is not among the items you have indicated here.

LT GEN. (RTD) ALI: Madam Speaker, I beg that the statement of business be corrected so that we can include it in next week’s business.

MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just looked at the statement of business by the Deputy Leader of Government Business. I wonder whether this statement is meant only for the other side. The Opposition is part of this House and we are expected to take part in what he has just read, but he has not even copied it to us. Moreover, he has made a carbon copy to the chairperson of the NRM Caucus. Is this business supposed to be handled on the Floor of Parliament or is it only – 

THE SPEAKER:  No, honourable members, I think you are just being fussy. He is fulfilling rule 25 where he is supposed to inform the nation that for a certain period of time, this is what we shall be bringing; it is not for debate. [MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: “But we need a copy.”] No, in fact he has been nice by putting it in writing because he could have as well stood there and said “This, this and that Bill…” (Interjections) No, those are small things. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker – (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: We are on the Order Paper. We asked for a statement yesterday. Let him read it, then you can take issue with what he has read. (Interjections) Let him read what he has brought and then you can say, “Our name is different; it is not what you have written” and then you tell us your official name. Hon. Minister, proceed.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, my statement is being distributed and it reads as follows:   

The Government of Uganda is extremely concerned that once again, unlawful protests have led to violence on our streets. Early on Tuesday 21st, in the afternoon, a small number of people assembled at the Katwe market called LC I Katwe in Kampala and informed Police that they intended to hold a political rally. 

Uganda, in common with other states around the world, normally asks organisers of such public assemblies to liaise with the Police to ensure the safety and the security of both those involved in the gathering and others who may be around. In this case, the organisers were informed in writing that the market in which they intended to assemble was unsuitable as there were unacceptable safety risks involved in organising a meeting in so crumpled conditions. Any assembly in the market would also have been disruptive to those who are getting on with the normal business around the market. Police were also concerned that the market is on the verge of busy roads including the main highway between Kampala and Entebbe International Airport and so any assembly posed a risk to road safety as well as to public order.

Despite this prior notification, organisers insisted to Police that they be permitted to assemble in the market in Katwe. In efforts to reach a compromise, the Police commander at the scene suggested an alternative venue a short distance away, which would not disrupt the business of the market. However, the group refused to leave and engaged in a stand-off with the Police. Officers then came under attack with large rocks and other missiles. 

Four officers were severely injured and they required hospital treatment. In defence and to protect innocent bystanders, the Police deployed a small number of canisters of incapacitating gas. The objective in so doing was to disperse the violent mob. Police officers on the scene exercised commendable restraint in the face of violent provocation. 

Despite some hysterical and irresponsible reporting, no live rounds were discharged and no baton rounds - what we normally call rubber bullets - were used at that rally. The only weapon utilised by the Police was the standard gas canisters which have been used for many years in this country. While any injuries are obviously regrettable, no person sustained any serious injuries as a result of the Police action.

Madam Speaker, in recent times, some leaders have engaged with the Police and informed them of their desire to hold rallies and public meetings. Without exception, every time they have done this, the assembly has passed off without any incident. Hon. Nabilah Sempala organised rallies in Ndeeba, Namuwongo and Kawempe and they all passed without any incident, if I may add.

It seems that some opponents of Government are simply not happy with the peaceful and safe protests. They seem intent on grabbing headlines by creating confrontation with the Police and provoking conflict. When they fail to persuade people with reason, sense and logic, they resort to violence - (Applause) - against the law enforcement officers responsible for maintaining law and order and then claim that they have been victimised when Police respond to their assault.  

On that Tuesday afternoon, officers of the Uganda Police were attacked by a violent mob. Members of that mob included people who have stated publicly their support for attempts to seize firearms from Police officers and use them to overthrow this democratically elected Government. A number of officers were injured. The officers responded by using a gas which is designed to disperse crowds. No civilians were seriously injured on that day. 

These are the simple facts, and I am extremely confident that any reasonable person would reach the conclusion that the Police response represented use of the minimum appropriate level of force and was therefore entirely justified. The simple facts, however, were lost in a smoke screen of hysterical, sensationalistic unclaimed false reporting. I saw Twitter reports on the Internet saying that a person had been shot and news reports that grenades had been used by the Police, that another person was fighting for their life and that Police weapons had been seized by the mob. None of these is true, Madam Speaker.

It is long overdue that the media in this country begin to take their responsibility seriously. Some seem far more concerned with creating the more sensational headlines than reporting events accurately without fear and favour. 

Let me be very clear. The Government of Uganda will not tolerate the use of unreasonable force by any Police officer at any time. If any person has evidence that any Police officer has behaved improperly, unprofessionally or unlawfully, then they should make a complaint to the professional standards unit of Police who will take care of these issues. We will, however, be equally emphatic in standing by our Police officers to defend themselves and the citizens of this country in the face of violent attacks.

This is the end of my statement. For God and my country. (Applause)

3.31
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg for your indulgence. I cannot express myself properly these days, so I assigned my colleague, the Opposition Whip, to represent my case.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kiiza, five minutes.

3.31
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to respond to the statement of the minister. I would like to thank the minister for this presentation. I thank him for making it timely as he promised but there are some fundamental issues which I disagree with.

When the minister informed the House that the organisers-(Interjections) - I am just responding to what the minister has just read to us. When the minister says the organisers of this rally had not been permitted by the Police and that they had not even sought permission, I really do not understand him. I wish to lay on the Table, after reading it, a letter written by the woman Member of Parliament, Kampala, hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala, who was the convener of this meeting. 

The woman Member of Parliament Kampala wrote to the Inspector General of Police requesting to use the market - (Interjections) - the market ground. Can you listen to me? We listened to the minister as he was giving his statement. The woman Member of Parliament wrote to the Police to use the market grounds and the Police said the venue was not appropriate. Accordingly, she wrote another letter on the 17th February asking for change of venue. She stated in her letter, and I will read it verbatim:

“The Inspector General of Police, Kampala
Dear Sir,
Constituency Consultative Meeting
Further to my communication of 13th February to the Commander Kampala Metropolitan Police, which was not acknowledged, I would like to inform you that I am holding a consultative meeting in Makindye constituency next week on Tuesday, 21 February 2012. Since as you communicated in your letter dated 15th February that you feel uncomfortable with the Katwe playground, I am planning to use the usual venue where we normally hold all political rallies, that is, Kayembe yard at 2.00 p.m.
I thank you in advance for your cooperation”.

The letter was signed by hon. Nabilah Sempala, the woman Member of Parliament for Kampala. The officer who received the letter put a comment for another officer ASP/OPS and said, “Forward to ALP Kampala to handle in the agreed position” and this was forwarded. The AIGP Kampala was also instructed to handle. They said, “Please handle”. 

The adverts were on radio and on television. I want to show you that this was not just a gathering which Police was not aware of. It was just on the 21st when these people had gathered for the Member of Parliament’s consultative meeting that one police officer came waving a letter dated 21st saying they are not agreeing to their meeting. Just that day, 21st, at 2.00p.m, the officer came waving a letter which he even said he was not going to give to the convener of the meeting and said, “We are no longer interested in your being here.”

I do not know, at this rate, if Members of Parliament will continue holding consultative meetings with their constituents. This is a Member of Parliament from Kampala requesting Police to address her own people in her own constituency and the member is stopped from addressing her own people. It is really a shame. 

Something else that we are not agreeing with in the minister’s presentation is the professionalism of our Police. It is true - maybe if given opportunity we can bring the medical reports from Case Clinic where the victims were treated - people were shot and even up to now, they are treating wounds. It was even seen on television. I think that is why the minister is saying some media houses and media practitioners should be cautioned. These were not fabrications.

The other issue that we are concerned about as a people of this country is the way our Police is being too militant in handling Ugandans. We have information, which I would want the minister in charge to make clear to us as a people of Uganda, about the people who went to be trained as cadet officers in Masindi on 3 December 2010 and stayed up to July before they were paid and deployed. Even before completing their training, they would be deployed to come and handle cases here. Worse still, even before the time, these people were receiving pay. They would be deployed in Kampala; they would be ferried from Masindi and brought to Kampala to quell the assumed violent gatherings.

You can imagine a man who has spent like four months without salary, without anything and with a family back home, how he would behave on the streets. We are still informed that these same officers are now being forced to join the Army yet they joined as police officers. This tells us the level at which the Government I think is desperate at militarising the police forces, which we say is not really appropriate for this country. The Police, which is supposed to keep law and order, is turning out to be the force that is creating disorder in society and harming civilians whom they are supposed to protect.

It is quite unfortunate that the minister cannot see this and can just let it lie below the carpet. It is quite unfortunate. We would request that in future, when problems occur, when your officers manhandle individuals and they err, you have to own up to some of these unfortunate circumstances. To err is human. Your officers may do some things beyond your imagination and when they err, be human enough to say, “We are sorry”, just like the former Minister of Internal Affairs said here. He said, “I watched the whole thing on television, I think it was an error and I must apologise”. It is quite shameful that you are coming here to shatter his apologies, which we had all accepted wholeheartedly. We should begin behaving as human beings and treat other human beings with dignity.

I want to thank you and to call on all Ugandans that we are all Members of Parliament and we have to respect the people we represent. When we go to consult, we should be given this respect and we must condemn these acts with the highest disrespect.

Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table a letter written by the woman Member of Parliament requesting for permission to use the venue which she actually used when she was disrupted. It is on the constituency consultative meeting and it is written to the Inspector General of Police, Kampala. (Interjections) The letter indicates that the meeting was sanctioned. I beg to lay on the Table.

3.42
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibaale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the statement. 

I remember when we were ending the Eighth Parliament we had a very emotional debate where we had videos and counter videos being shown. I learnt one lesson then; that when we are considering matters in Parliament, we should be sincere and avoid issues that divide us along party lines. 

I sought clarification from hon. Kiiza and I want to draw her attention to what she was talking about - a consultative meeting of hon. Nabilah. Logically, any Member of Parliament would want to hold a consultative meeting in his or her constituency. I would be offended if I am restrained. However, the statement we received - what is on the Order Paper and what we heard in the news - is that this was an A4C rally, not a rally for Nabilah as a Member of Parliament. That is a point of concern. (Mr Amuriat rose_) Which order? Do not be timid. Let me raise my point. 

My second point-(interjections)-, Madam Speaker, thank you for your protection. Be tolerant and listen. (Ms Alaso rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You will have your chance.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, my second point - (Ms Alaso rose_)-of concern is the constitutional duty given to the Police. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, point of order, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament to refer to a colleague as being timid? Is that parliamentary?

THE SPEAKER: Timid? 

MS ALASO: That hon. Tumwebaze, a Member of Parliament, very experienced in the language of this House, can address a colleague and say, “Do not be timid”; is he in order to insinuate that colleagues are timid? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Alaso, I think you wanted to detract from what he was saying. Please proceed. (Applause)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is important we listen to one another, however much our opinions vary. 

The second point I was raising before an attempt to divert me was made is on the constitutional duty of the Police. I was a member of the committee in the Eighth Parliament which investigated the brutality of the Police and I am associated with that report. One observation that becomes palatable is that members of the Police force are not from Mars; they are our daughters, they are our brothers. 

Sometimes, when you see a Police officer being hit with a stone-(Interjections)-, you wonder what professional response you want this person to give in retaliation. I remember one incident, and I have mentioned it here and my colleagues from the Opposition have not rebutted it. The former MP from Mbarara, the wife of the FDC president, went to the High Court and slapped a poor woman officer on duty. The women activists in this country never condemned that. While I condemn Police officers who are erratic, it is also uncivil for political leaders to disobey constitutional rule and expect a Police officer to behave exemplarily above the set standards. (Applause)

Finally, and this is a question to my colleagues in the Opposition, we are here in a multi-party set government and we have the ruling government which won elections and it is legitimate. That is why we have the government side and the Opposition side. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay half a minute.

MR TUMWEBAZE: My last point was, if you have someone announcing on radio that they shall change Government through protests, – you get the point? - how should the Police respond? It tells you someone is working to instigate each and everything by going into markets where there are crowds to instigate an insurrection. Mind you, a procured rebellion can never last. A rebellion which takes off government is the one which is voluntarily conceived. Understand that.

3.48
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for the statement he has brought and I want to appreciate him for bringing it forward on time. 

I want to raise my concern. Last time, we debated this issue. I want to raise my concern regarding the Constitution of Uganda which says that now we operate in a multi-party system which gives each party a mandate and right to express themselves. According to what they have said on the Floor and the letter which our honourable member wrote to the Police, it has come to my notice that it is not the first time. 

Whenever another party is asking for a date and security, because our Government which we love so much is supposed to provide security, even our own - I remember last year, Nsereko asked for security and protection. He was going to carry out a consultative meeting in his constituency and he was being denied to go and consult his constituents. How do they think we shall go and consult our voters? 

Here is honourable Nabilah, and she is one of our own. It will happen to her today and tomorrow, it will be you. She was holding a consultative meeting with her constituents, with her voters. She gave a venue, they sat with the Police and they changed the venue to where they always have rallies. 

We have fundraisings, we have meetings and we call Members of Parliament to accompany us. Even you, Madam Speaker, they call you to accompany them. Even the President is called to accompany them. Even her, when she calls her colleagues to go and accompany her when she is carrying out consultative meetings, why should we just shoot teargas. I watched it on TV.

Last time, I said Walk to Work is not good, but the way we handle it makes it a topic. Why is it that we spend a lot of money on Walk to Work? When Besigye says, “I am going to go there”, they will deploy. Roads are very bad, we do not have water, we do not have medicine but you put like 100 vehicles to monitor one person. How much money is wasted? How much? (Applause)

This time, I want to be fair. I am trying to be fair dear colleagues. This is not about party issues. I am trying-(Interjections) - to give my view as a Member of Parliament because today it is Nabilah, tomorrow it might be me. Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

3.50
MRS ROSE AKOL: (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): I thank you. I am seeking guidance from you, Madam Speaker. There is a time for everything; there is a time to be born, there is a time to die. That is from the book of Ecclesiastes. The other day, hon. Makubuya reminded us and added another one, that there is a time to be a minister and a time to be a backbencher. Even when God was creating the world, he created the earth, then the seas, and on the seventh day, he rested. 

This House has Rules of Procedure which guide us on how we proceed, how we do things in this House. I want to seek guidance from you with regard to rule 96 on page 144, on leave of absence. It says, “Every Member shall attend the sittings of the House unless leave of absence has been given to him or her by the Speaker.” I believe we are all supposed to be here. There is a time to be in the House and a time to be in the constituency mobilising. I would like to know whether the member in question, hon. Nabilah, sought permission from you to be absent to go and mobilise constituents. What should we do with those members who absentee themselves from the House without your permission to go and cause chaos in the public?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank hon. Akol for raising that issue. Some time back, I informed you, members, that I am accountable for your activities on the days when we are supposed to be here. I created a calendar and I published it. The recess ended on 7th February. Any member who wishes to be absent from this House must get my consent in writing. I do not have any request from hon. Nabilah to be absent from the proceedings of this House. 

3.54
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable minister for the response. I also want to thank the Opposition Chief Whip for her response. It is a constitutional right to assemble but while enjoying your rights, you are not supposed to infringe on the rights of others. The Constitution is very clear in Article 43 on that matter.

If I may define a market, it is a place where goods and services are sold. If you choose a market of all the places to hold a rally, [Hon. Members: Order!] - then I think you are yourself out of order. 

Article 43 of the Constitution states clearly, “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.” It is very abnormal to ask the Police to allow you go and hold a rally in a market; it is illegal. 

For the Police to write on a letter, “Please handle” is not an authority. In the letter that the Opposition Chief Whip has read here, the officer made a comment saying, “Please handle”. I perceive that was the best way for the officers to handle it. 

MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member for giving way. I happened to watch a clip of what transpired during that market fracas. A police officer announced four times on a microphone and said, “Please, do not hold a rally here because this is a market place”. Before long, I saw civilians wrestling with the Police. A Police officer was thrown down and they stepped on him. So, the Police was left with no choice but to react the way they did.

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. Honourable members, we are all Members of Parliament and we do hold consultative meetings in our constituencies but we do not have to first ask for the Police permission. Madam Speaker, when you go back to Kamuli, you also hold consultative meetings, but I wonder whether you have ever asked the Police to allow you consult with your people. 

So, there is a hidden objective they are not willing to reveal. The Opposition has a hidden interest to disorganise this peaceful country and to disorganise the people of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.58
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I beg Members of Parliament to listen to me because want I am saying today is very important to all of us. Article 79 of the Constitution speaks of the functions of Parliament, and I am speaking to you as a Member of Parliament. Article 79(3) notes that Parliament shall protect the Constitution and promote democratic governance.

Article 79(1) says, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda”. Honourable members, Uganda has had a bad history and our people have suffered; it is the role of this Parliament to create peace and stability in Uganda. We must have a benchmark where we all agree as leaders of this country that in the line of peace, we must all agree and in the line of disorder, we must all refuse to take part. 

Today, I want to appeal to you, honourable Members of Parliament, to note that it is our role to create peace in this country. That is my prayer to you. We promulgated our Constitution in 1995 and we have had amendments to our Constitution where we feel it was not promoting peace and good governance in our country. Members, you might be in the Opposition, we might be in Government, but tomorrow it might be you in Government. So, when you are in the Opposition, know your role as a member of the Opposition. When you are in Government, know your role as a member of Government. 

I appeal to the members of the Opposition that the time is right for us to build a country that is premised on peace. (Applause) For anybody to disturb the peace that we have, we must detest and protest that in the strongest terms. Madam Speaker, I am saying this because I intend to lead this country in future. (Laughter)

As I end, I appeal to my brothers and sisters that this is our time as Members of Parliament, whether in the Opposition or in Government, to create peace in this country. Therefore, we should not organise any programme that will disrupt our peace. (Applause) 

I, therefore, now want that we as Government – I now want to talk to my government –(Laughter)- I want to talk to my government that we must design a strategy of allowing the Opposition to have peaceful rallies and also appeal to Government to increase the number of well-trained Police to police, but not harass. We must get all our instruments in order –(Interjections)- the strategy – we are going to disallow – I want to appeal to you that we disallow any rally in any place that will create disorder. We shall sit as Government and lay all those procedures in place together with the Opposition so that we create peace and development for our country. I thank you very much.

4.43
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Just to continue from where hon. Okot Ogong has left. There is no society that believes in disorder and I am very sure that if the FDC ever came to power, they would want an orderly government, and I think that should be the starting point.

Referring to the letter that the Opposition Whip read, it was written not to only give notification to the Police, but also request for permission. I was, therefore, expecting - and this is my understanding - I was expecting that following the comments that were read out, “ASP, handle,” it required that a certain form of response was required, which has not been presented here. Did the Police say, “Yes,” or “No.?” I think that is what should come out.

Secondly, even on the Order Paper, it is clearly stated; “Ministerial Statement on the Action For Change Rally” and not, ‘Consultation of Hon. Nabilah’. I am now asking myself, what is this that we need to do? I would like to borrow from Karamoja where a few years ago, there used to be something called Karamoja Act. It was stated that if you found any two Karimojong standing together, they are either from a raid or are intending to go for a raid, and that was the law. Now, if the law says that there is no assembly without notification or permission of the Police, why do we insist? I think we should respect the Constitution. If the Constitution has stated that demonstrations and violence are one way of changing Government, then we do it. Why do we want to contravene the Constitution? 

Members of the Opposition, I think it is important that we should not interfere with the lives of others. I would sound mad if I wrote a letter to the IGP asking for permission to hold a meeting in the hospital, because it would not be right. So, in this case, even the minister in his statement has said that the Police advised that the assembly point was unsuitable and you were given an optional place. I expected that the Opposition was rising to say that they went to the optional place that was provided by the Police and so, why the violence? Even if you say that the Police are violent like my colleague, the honourable Chief Whip of the Opposition is saying, we have already been demonstrating violence ourselves. Colleague, you recall that you appeared in the papers for slapping or being violent against the Karimojong woman on the streets. Now, if you, as a civilian, could be as violent as that, what do we expect of the Police who are armed? [MS KIIZA: “Order!”] We all work for peace, harmony and if it is true that our move is part of consultation, then we do – 

THE SPEAKER: Point of clarification, hon. Mulongo.

MR MULONGO: I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague. I would just like to seek clarification from the honourable colleague holding the Floor; is it true that the distinguished Member of Parliament, the Chief Whip at that, on the streets of Kampala and in the Republic of Uganda, riding on a smooth road, found a lady Karimojong beggar and slapped her? Is that possible? –(Interjections)-

MR PETER LOKII: It is true. It was in the papers that a Karimojong woman was slapped under the pretext of taking care of the right of the children. [MS KIIZA: “Order!”] 
(Member timed out.)

4.08
MS MARGARET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. However, I have an observation, where the minister said that the Police Commander on the scene suggested an alternative venue, but the group refused to abide by that. I am really wondering what hidden agenda they had in mind, because if you can be given an alternative venue and you insist on going to the market, I think there is a hidden agenda as to why they were making that rally there. I think it was not right for you to go where the Police had not gazetted or allowed you. 

I think we should be people who love our country –[MS AOL: “Information.”] I do not need the information now. (Laughter) We should be peace makers, nationalistic and love our country. I know that today we are in power and tomorrow, another party will be in power. I think we should not force people to accept us. If this is time for NRM, wait for your chance. Why should we continue antagonising and causing chaos around? Being on the front pages and you assume we love our country? It is very unfair. We should come to the scene of power when people have seen us and they love our ideas and accept us through the normal ways. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)  

4.10
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Constitution of Uganda, it is stated very clearly in the preamble that, “We the people of Uganda: Recalling our history which has been characterised by political and constitutional instability,” and it goes on to say that, “Committed to  building a better future by establishing public politics based on principles of peace and unity…” The Constitution under National Objectives goes on to say, “All organs of State and people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability.” Is Action For Change working towards these principles? Isn’t Action For Change provoking the government? So, what do you expect? Why do you want to provoke Government and you expect Government to come softly to handle you? It is not possible! That is why Government has all weapons of coercion. Governments are never loved, but feared, and that is why they have all the weapons of coercion.

If you create pain, if you cause anarchy, what do you expect from the Police? (MR WADRI: “Clarification.”) I do not accept that. (Laughter) There is a legal saying that if you are seeking equity, you should do so with clean hands. Is this provocation clean hands? We were accepted and it was public - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, we should not forget our history. It wasn’t anarchy; it was a popular support. This Government is the one that caused the election of Members of Parliament –(Member timed out.) 

4.13
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take on from where hon. Rose Akol stopped. Yes, she tried to remind the House about Rule 93 of our Rules of Procedure, but, I would like to say that that contribution reminded me of a story in the Bible – see John: 7:53, where we read about a parable of a woman who was caught in adultery and when people wanted to stone her, Jesus said that let those who knew they had never done it be the first to throw the stone. 

What hon. Rose Akol said made me begin to imagine whether she has ever missed from this House without permission from the Speaker –(Laughter)– without having to write to you. I am saying this because in any case, Madam Speaker, hon. Nabilah –(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Hon. Franca Akello is trying to insinuate that I have always absented myself from this House without permission, but I want to make it clear that whenever I have left this House, I have always written to you –(Interjections)– yes. So, is she in order to say that I always absent myself without permission when I actually always seek permission from the Speaker whenever I want to be absent.

THE SPEAKER: I don’t recollect her travelling without notifying me.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling, but do you remember that at the time you adjourned the House yesterday, members of the NRM were absent - hon. Rose Akol was not in the House too. Had she asked for permission from you to be absent?

Anyway, that aside, in any case, hon. Sempala Nabilah lives in Kampala and this is her constituency. Even if she was still consulting with her constituents at 2.00 p.m. for a period of just an hour, she would still have caught up with the House. 

Madam Speaker, let me get this clear: Is it really a must that whenever a Member of Parliament is to consult with their people, they must always ask for permission from Police? During the recess, I held consultations with my people. I visited them from 11 O’clock till the next morning. I could go and spend a night in one part of the constituency until morning without anybody holding – I did not get any permission from Police, but also, I did not cause any chaos just like hon. Nabilah did. So, wouldn’t she have been given the benefit of doubt by letting her to first hold that rally?
                                                      
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think I will encourage indiscipline; that the Members who come from Kampala should roll in here any time. I gave you a calendar which I published. I gave you a recess of two months to consult with your voters and asked you to come back on 7th February. So, working during Parliament time without my knowledge is absence without leave. I will not encourage that for any of the Members, either from the Government or Opposition side. Yes, hon. Latif Ssebagala.

4.17
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that in a sinking boat, there is no survivor. I have heard from colleagues, especially those from the other side, they are talking as if they are encouraging Police brutality. If you are not doing that, I would have expected you to condemn Police action. We know that we are all Ugandans. We also know that all of us have equal rights in our country. When you see what is going on, you definitely ask yourself whether you are living in a country where people enjoy rights equally.

Madam Speaker, I would like you to recall the days of apartheid, where many people who were in Government in South Africa used to support whatever was going on. But after some time, things turned the other way round. Being in the Opposition is not like being a member of a clan. For example, that if I am a member of the Mamba Clan, that will never change. Being in the Opposition does not mean we shall be in it permanently and forever. Tomorrow, we will join Government. The other statement is also true that being in Government does not mean that you will be there forever. So, while in Government, you have the duty to treat your colleagues in the Opposition –(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the hon. Latif Ssebagala in order to say that throwing stones at the Police is a way of demanding for respect of rights?

THE SPEAKER: Let him substantiate.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I don’t know the rule I have offended. I ask you to put it to me. However, I believe that all of us have equal shares in our country. And so, we must treat our colleagues the way we also want to be treated. The issue of Kampala rallies being organised by hon. Nagayi Nabilah Sempala – given the fact that this Member leaves within her constituency; and given the fact that she is a Member of Parliament who represents people in Kampala, from morning to night; she can always consult with her constituents. 

So, whatever happens to us, as Members of Parliament representing the people of Kampala – Madam Speaker, hon. Nabilah Sempala was almost on her way to Parliament. She wanted to first prepare everything before coming to Parliament to attend to House business. So, I want to say that Members who leave within their constituencies cannot be treated like those who leave faraway from their voters. This is because from morning as we get out of our homes to Parliament, we are always interacting with our constituents.

Anyway, my humble appeal to those in Government is that they should remember that yes, they are in Government today – if you treat us the way you are doing, be prepared for the same if we get into power. Thank you very much.

4.22
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to draw the attention of the House to Article 21(2): “Without prejudice to clause (1) of this article, a person shall not be discriminated against on the ground of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability.”

I equally want to draw your attention to Article 24: “Respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment. No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.”

That said, I would want the minister to explain to me whether what he saw on TV represented appropriate minimum force. Because it is one thing to say that we shall do everything humanly possible to defend our Police in the face of any violent attack, but let us also look at how the Police reacted. I saw people bleeding. Does minimum force mean some blood or the bleeding that I saw? -(Interjections)- I can be a very good heckler, but I have very good values that I protect. 

The honourable minister is referring us or any other person who will be caught up in such a situation to the Professional Standards Unit of Police. Let me be very clear and ask the minister. Last night, if you watched news, there was a case of a man who butchered an entire family including one-year old twins.  We have approved in this country budgets for community policing. What is so magical that you find it so difficult that I would have a rally or a consultative meeting in an urban setting and you heavily deploy? Why are you and the sitting regime scared of the urban council, towns and cities? Why? The precise reason is, you realise, that the people who are in the urban areas are more informed of what is going on in this country and so that is your biggest scare. That goes to prove to you that as long as you continue managing the affairs of the country like this, and as long as the elite continue to stay in cities, your biggest challenge now stands that you are scared that there might be an Arab spring in sub-Saharan Africa.

4.25
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want first of all to thank the minister for his statement. I would like to say that it is not about who gets into power or not. To me, I think, it is about responsibility. I think it is not right to deny Members of Parliament from consulting their electorate. However, the nature of consultancy matters. If it is going to be related to actions for change in a manner that is violating peace and freedom, then I believe and I am afraid, teargas would be the answer. (Applause)

However, I also believe that Police should also know that human health is equally very important. So, they should do whatever they have to do in a more responsible manner. 

There is also need to present the Police in a more civilised way and not in a warlike kind of arrangement. This is quite very intimidating. It is wastage of resources and in itself, it will call for violence as a response. I think it is better we work towards presentation of matters without intimidating those who seem to have equally rights to present themselves in any given time.    

MS BAKO: Thank you my colleague for giving way. 

THE SPEAKER: He hasn’t finished. 

MR ANDREW ALLEN: Madam Speaker, I was giving her an opportunity to give me information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have got a very long Order Paper. Yes, hon. Otto.

4.28
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. I want to plead guilty that I was one of the MPs who were going to the constituency without writing to your office. I ask for general amnesty. (Laughter)

I have four observations to make. Firstly, I have decided as a Member of the Opposition – by the way being an Opposition member in Africa is a very big sacrifice. You don’t know what we go through. It is not a very lucrative thing to do. But as a Member of the Opposition, I have decided never to blame the victim because in this situation, there is a victim and there is a person who made that person become a victim. So, to come in this House and side with the offender - at least for me as an individual, I will never do that. So, tomorrow if you are caught on the wrong side of the law and you are the victim, I can assure you, I will side with you. It gives me peace of mind. 

Secondly, I would be the last to accept advice from a former rebel. Having civil activities in town is a more civilised thing than carrying a gun, 27 of you, and going to the bush. (Laughter) We all have options of having guns, but we don’t want that uncivilized thing of killing people to get to state power. (Laughter) 

So, I have ignored the advice of Col. Fred. I don’t need that kind of advice. What you did 25 years ago is not what we want to do. We just want to demonstrate around the city in a civilised manner. (Applause) (Laughter)

Having said that, I have been observing, because I have friends on both sides of the House, I think these political parties are getting a little deeper in this country again. And it is coming with its level of intolerance. We need to really review, as a country, whether we are ready for multipartism. Because as day follows night, it has become practically impossible for the Opposition to have rallies anywhere. 

We have political parties. Our role is to acquire political power, but the process we undergo to even get one rally – you really see you are very far from state power. 

Madam Speaker, I would submit that there is a high level of political intolerance. The ruling party comfortably uses the Police to ensure the Opposition does not discharge their duties, which are permitted under the Political Parties and Organisations Act. 

MS AMOIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard very well from my brother hon. Otto, that this Government is becoming intolerant; when I read this paragraph, that on Tuesday afternoon, officers of Uganda Police Force were attacked by a violent mob, which is more intolerant. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for that clarification, but the point I am raising is a little bit at a higher level than what you are saying. (Laughter) 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member who was giving information and seeking clarification at the same time, is a Member of Parliament. Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for my Chairman of Government Assurances, a senior parliamentarian and a lawyer as such, to undermine, belittle and degrade a fellow MP by saying that what she is discussing is below standard and yet it is in the same line. Is it in order, Madam Speaker? (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I appeal to you to treat each other with dignity and respect, which each of you expects from the other? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am most obliged by your ruling. However, what I was saying is, we need to debate whether we can stand under a multiparty system. Because if we can’t as a country, then we have other political systems enshrined in the Constitution. 

4.34
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I would like to refer this House to Article 20 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that talks about our fundamental rights and freedom of an individual. These rights are granted not by the State but are inherent. So, the right to assemble is something that is guaranteed. I detest the double standards that we are experiencing today in handling of rallies organised by political parties in the Opposition vis-a-vis the manner in which the Police handles rallies organised by our colleagues in the NRM. I would like to challenge my colleagues on the other side of the House to tell us whether any single rally organised by a Member of Parliament of NRM has been dispersed by the Police. (Interjections) I know you are shouting the name “Nsereko”, but Nsereko has been labelled an “NRM rebel,” which we all know and probably that explains –(Interjections)- I will take the information from my fellow engineer. 

MRS SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Amuriat, for giving way. Whereas the Constitution as quoted in Article 29 gives all the citizens the freedom to assemble, still, the same Constitution under Article 17 mandates every citizen of the Republic of Uganda, first of all, to have respect for the rights and freedoms of others. (Applause) 

Furthermore, the same Constitution says that every citizen of the Republic of Uganda shall have a duty to cooperate with the lawful agencies in the maintenance of law and order. I wanted to duly inform my colleagues that it is contradictory to this Constitution and, therefore, it contravenes Article 17 not to cooperate with the Police. Thank you so much. 

MR AMURIAT: I thank you for that information, but it doesn’t warrant response. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, all I am saying to my friend, the hon. Baba, is that the way the Opposition is treated should be the same way our friends on the government side should be treated. If NRM is treated with respect and their rallies respected, we also deserve such respect. 

Permit me, Madam Speaker, to go back to the text of the minister. In his statement today, the minister contradicts himself. When he says in paragraph two that, “A small number of people assembled at the market at Kalerwe,” and then goes on to say, “A mob,” in my clear definition of “a mob,” a mob is a crowd and a crowd are many people coming together. What does the minister want to say to this House? Small number or was it a mob?  As far as I am concerned, I saw clips on television. The number of Police officers was actually more than the number of people who had assembled. 

So, this tells us about the calibre; the training; the experience of the Police Force in handling even small numbers of people. What I would have expected, Madam Speaker, is the Police to arrest these small numbers of people instead of beating them. If they were found to be wanting in as far as the law is concerned, they should have been arrested. 

Secondly, in the very text, the ministers chose to intimidate the media. The media is the fourth arm of Government. They are the unsung heroes of this country. When you choose to tell them how to do their work, then you are violating press freedom and I think this is not good for democracy. This is not good for the growth of multipartism. I would like to request the minister and Government to desist from harassing the press. 

4.40
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the onset, I would like to say that whenever the Opposition are having a meeting or intend to have a meeting, they cooperate with the Police and that is the reason they have been writing letters to the IGP. The way I am seeing the arguments from my colleagues across, it looks like they think that because hon. Nabilah never had permission, they should have killed her. (Interjections) Yes, that is the way I am seeing it. If that is the case, then you should have said, “The Police over acted.”

Members have talked about the Articles; of course, we have those for freedom of association; we have Article 20 for fundamental rights; we have Article 29 and there is also an Article which talks about people rising against the government if they want. I have also learnt something today that whenever this side is empty, these people have got permission from you. If they have not got it, I have never seen you taking disciplinary action on their absence. 

I have also noticed, Madam Speaker, that -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, early this week, you came to my office and said I should take action against Members of the House who absent themselves without authority. You led a delegation to my office on that issue and I am taking action now. Do not complain.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nabilah wrote asking for permission and in fact informed the Police and I am surprised that colleagues are changing the statement from what she said.

Initially, they had wanted a place near the market and they went to an agreed place called Kayembe. That is the place where they were. They were not in the market. Now, why are you insisting on the market? Why do you want to change things that way? But even if it was in the market, there are even voters in the market. They had gone to consult.

The statement of the minister is no different from the one of the Inspector General of Police, which he gave on 21 February 2012 at 18.40, you will recall, at the Media Centre. He said at the end of the statement, “We are aware of reports that some civilians were injured during this incident. Again, contrary to some reports, our information is that none are seriously hurt.”

The same minister says they are not seriously injured. Are you now saying hon. Nabilah who is in Case Clinic on Oxygen is pretending? That Case Clinic put her on Oxygen to pretend yet she is not seriously hurt? Now I see that these colleagues across are all doctors. They have tested everybody and discovered that there was nobody seriously injured.

He goes ahead and says, “Uganda Police Force will continue to investigate the incident today and will diligently pursue any person it considers may have committed a criminal offence.” Then why do you investigate if you believe there are no serious injuries and you are right?

The minister says on page two paragraph three that the mob is trying to get guns from the Police and that is why they were there. I want to tell you that if the people of Uganda wanted guns, they are everywhere. We see them walking with them at night, we see them parked everywhere, they would have grabbed them long ago and I can tell you that they are not interested in guns and that is why they have not grabbed the guns.

I want to remind you that when you are happy today - and that is why I like Prof. Makubuya - there is a time to laugh and a time to cry. A time to be a minister and -(Hon. Karungi rose_) Incidentally, I have been in Parliament for 11 years and I am more informed. There is a time to laugh and a time to cry. 

Even in the 1960s, there was a man called Balaki Kirya and his group; when they were making laws, they said these laws should have been made yesterday. They were long overdue and indeed they made them. The following day, they were applied on them.

You should listen to me carefully this time; that when we came from the bush in 1986, we said this is a fundamental change and we said, the people of Uganda should enjoy their rights. It does not mean that when you are in the Opposition, you should not enjoy your rights.

I am happy you are saying that is why you are enjoying. I can tell you, tomorrow –(Interjections)- yes, by the way I have Police; they guard me, escort me and lead me and that is not your money, but our money.

What we want to tell you is that the Constitution is clear on freedom of expression and organisation and association. Hon. Nabilah never committed a crime to hold a rally; whichever name you want to call it. I can call it a coffee rally. Whether it is Action for Change, whether it is absenteeism from Parliament, she is free to hold her rally and you are also free to hold it.

Some of you fear to hold them because you do not want to go to your constituents. For her, she is very strong, and that is why she went there -(Interruption)

MR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am one of those Members of Parliament who respect hon. Nandala-Mafabi because of his brilliance, but today I want to slightly defer.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we are not fearing to go back to our constituencies when there is a session of Parliament because people sent us here to deliberate on their behalf. Now you are telling us that we are not holding rallies on parliamentary days just because we fear to go to our constituencies. 

Is he in order to make such a blunder when he knows he is the Leader of the Opposition? Is he in order? He is supporting somebody who leaves Parliament and goes to have a rally on a parliamentary day. That he or she is in order and for us we are just criminals. Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition, you are an officer of this Parliament and I am repeating, early this week you led a delegation to my office and one of the major complaints was that Members are not attending Parliament and that I should take action. You complained about Members not attending committees and you said I should take action. Now you are standing here to encourage Members to hold meetings on parliamentary days? No, you are out of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The best person to discipline a Member of Parliament who has not attended Parliament is you, but not the Police and tear gas.

For your information, all the trucks you are seeing, for tear gas and the pink colour, are from South Africa, which were used by the Boers on ANC and the black people. And I know my brother, hon. Mbabazi, knows about it because he is the leader in importing them.

Now, those were used by the White people against the Blacks. Now, in Uganda we are only Blacks, and they have brought them to use on some Blacks. That means there are some who are White and others are Black. Who are these ones who are White?

If you see people who are protesting, there must be a problem. There is no smoke without fire. Why should people come to attend a rally if there is no need for them to attend? There must be a problem and we must not sweep it under the carpet; we should address it. Few individuals are rich while the rest are poor; others are stealing public funds; the rest are not. You may be clapping there – the Police is defending the corrupt and they are taking our money. Instead of getting angry, you are busy clapping. 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. I think it is good for us to get things right; I would like hon. Nandala-Mafabi to clarify on the subject of discussion because he does not even want to admit that the Police were provoked into action. 

Secondly, he is also not bringing it out clearly whether violence is one of the objectives of these meetings, and neither is he drawing a line between the consultative meetings they are talking about of hon. Naggayi and the A4C meetings. I think it is important to put these matters into context. Please, clarify.

THE SPEAKER: Please, clarify and then wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that we went to different schools. I may be speaking English, which my brother from Karamoja may not understand.

MR KYEWALABYE: Madam Speaker, when hon. Odonga Otto was contributing, he said something that seemed to belittle another honourable member, and you ruled that when we are speaking, we should respect each other. Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to say a disrespectful and belittling thing to another honourable member? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement by the Leader of the Opposition is in breach of the Constitution. You are saying that a person who studied in Karamoja should not be in this House. Please wind up and stop insulting Members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to correct one fact; I said we went to different schools. I went to Busoga College, Mwiri and it is not in Mbale. In fact, I had wanted to go to Moroto, but unfortunately, at that time I needed a permit in order for me to go to Moroto. So, it is good he went to another school. And the minimum requirement for a Member of Parliament is senior six. And if that is what he has, he qualifies to be here. But some of us - 

MR PETER ALEPER: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the subject matter of our discussion is very clear; we have deliberated for long over this matter. With all due respect to my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who is the Leader of the Opposition, even after you have given a wise ruling that he deliberates on issues, he continues to discuss about schools. The subject matter is about the lives of Ugandans; we are talking about security and peace in this country, not the schools we went to. You may be lucky that you went to a good school because you were born in Mbale. It is unfortunate – and I was not about to raise any issue against hon. Nandala-Mafabi, but the demeaning way he has portrayed the Karimojong is annoying. I have been respecting him for all this time - with all due respect, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please humbly withdraw this statement that demeans the Karimojong because we can all equally talk in this House and Ugandans will get the sense we are communicating. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to proceed in a manner that demeans a Member of Parliament in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that the Leader of the Opposition has lost interest in the statement on the Floor. I now invite the minister to wind up. (Applause)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank all the Members who have commented on my statement, including those who were fairly negative. This is the spirit of democracy and the exchange of ideas. I wish to start by commenting on the letter which was put on the Table. First of all, this letter is an internal administrative communication within the Police department. I do not know how this letter found itself into the hands of – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. (Interjections) I am addressing the Right Honourable Speaker and none of you have reached that level yet. Madam Speaker, you and I have walked a long distance to reach where we are now. The Right Honourable Speaker and Cecilia Ogwal have walked a long distance to arrive where we are now. I am saying this because the time of intolerance to other views has gone. The moment we adopted the multiparty dispensation, it was very clear that we could now tolerate other people’s views. I would hate a situation – and personally I have blamed my own side for walking out when statements which do not go well with us are being made. So, I do not see why the other side cannot tolerate the Leader of the Opposition, a person who holds a constitutional -(Interjections)- hon. Nandala-Mafabi is the Leader of the Opposition in this House and of this country. He holds a constitutional position. Whether you like his opinion or not, he is entitled to make a statement in this House -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, it is important that the Leader of the Opposition be allowed to execute his constitutional duty. I, therefore, want to be guided on why the Leader of the Opposition cannot be allowed to make a statement on our behalf including myself. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable member, I know that the Leader of the Opposition holds a constitutional office, but when he persists in insulting other Members of this House, despite my ruling, I cannot allow it. Continue. 

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I was referring to this letter of 17th,  which was laid on the Table. It was from hon. Nabilah Naggayi to the Inspector-General of Police informing the Police about her consultations. When this letter reached the Police headquarters, it was a matter for internal consultation. I want to know how the Leader of the Opposition got this letter in his hands and into this House. What I know is that at all times, the Police responds in writing. They do not hand out comments like this as notification. All the time they notify in writing in response to any information they receive about holding rallies. 

I want to thank hon. Tumwebaze about the Opposition’s intention to always head for the markets. Now, if you have no capacity to mobilise people to go to other venues, why do you target markets? It is because they know that when they choose markets, they are an unsuitable place for assembly and they are sure that the Police will obviously not allow them and it will cause problems there. That is why they always want to go there. The Police Force has an obligation to protect the safety and security of all Ugandans and markets are not appropriate places for holding rallies. As the honourable member mentioned, we have to protect the interests of others -(Interjections)- I will take the clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, please. Conclude, I have got other business. 

MR BABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Okot Ogong for the great appeal. Let us create peace in this country. This is the only country we have and it is a small one. Let us not waste our energies on creating chaos all the time in the name of consultations and in the name of going to our constituencies.

Hon. Amuriat asked if we were being fair to the government side and to the Opposition side. Yes. Hon. Nabilah Sempala held four rallies here peacefully, in Ndeeba, Kasubi, Namuwongo and Kitintale without any problems. Was she from the government side? But when you start heading to the markets or after the rallies you start moving to the highways, the Police have an obligation to stop you in order to protect the interests of others. And we will not allow that. We will be firm on the protection of the interests of other Ugandans.  

The peculiar circumstances of Kampala; because of the many activities that take place here, it being the Capital, we need to work together and collaborate; but that does not mean discrimination. It does not mean not allowing these rallies to take place. Like I have said, we have done it. 

Madam Speaker, I think most Members in this House supported the statement and made strong appeals that we must make this country peaceful. We must protect the interests of the other people while exercising our rights and freedoms. I absolutely agree with that and I want to give the undertaking that the government will allow demonstrations and rallies provided they are peaceful, unarmed and in the interest of public law and order. Thank you very much. (Applause)

5.08
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT: (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to add my voice to that of the minister, first to commend the Opposition. I wish to categorically and explicitly commend the Opposition for the turn for the better that they have taken in the management of our politics. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, as you know, the main contention of the Opposition has been, “We have the right to demonstrate and the Police has no role in our demonstrations.” Therefore, they had refused to notify the Police each time they wanted to move around and this caused problems that we saw right after the elections last year. So, when the Opposition decided to act on the side of the law and notify the Police, we have seen, for the first time, the Opposition exercising its right to demonstrate and to hold public rallies without fracas. I want to say, “Opposition, thank you; that is the way. That is the right thing to do -(Interjections)- I said when the Opposition decided to write to the Police to inform them - because you see it is very clear under the Constitution that this right you are talking about in Article 29, if you read all of it, as I will do, and not only part of it, it is on protection of freedom of expression, assembly and so on. Article 29(1)(d) says, “Every person shall have the right to – freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed ...”

Whose responsibility is it to maintain peace in Uganda to make sure that this demonstration is peaceful? Whose job is it to ensure that people move about unarmed? It is Article 212 which says, “The functions of the Uganda Police Force shall include the following:

a) “To protect life and property”. That is why they must protect the lives of our people on the streets; they must protect the property, especially of our people who are lawfully carrying out their duties in a market. It is a job.

b) “To preserve law and order”. This is the job of the Police. Therefore, it is obvious that if you really want to act within the law, the Constitution is clear; please inform the Police and it is up to the Police to inform you that, “In this place where you are thinking of going, there is this and that problem, could you consider another place?” That is not to grant you permission; that is to perform their constitutional duty. 

Hon. Frank Tumwebaze made a point that to the best of our knowledge, the publicity - everything that has been covered about the incident in question - was about A4C; Action for Change. Hon. Nabilah, to the best of my knowledge is a Member of this august House on a party ticket - FDC. Since when did she become A4C? Since when did she become a representative of A4C in this House for you to argue that as a Member of Parliament she has a right to exercise? (Applause)

A4C obviously, is an illegal organisation engaged in unlawful action and everything that it does smirks of unconstitutionality. When the people of Uganda decided to exercise their right to choose a government and they did choose a government, A4C was formed in order to reject the peoples’ choice. This was pronounced very clearly and publicly by A4C in order to remove the peoples’ government by unconstitutional methods. This is by a statement of A4C itself. So, my advice –(Interjections)- no, I am ready to listen to any spokesperson of A4C here -(Interruption)

MRS CECELIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, to say that A4C was formed to remove the government unconstitutionally. Is it in order for him to say in Parliament before some of us who support A4C that it was formed to remove the government unconstitutionally? Is it in order?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MS CECELIA OGWAL: And why are you answering yes when I am talking to the Speaker? (Laughter) Is it in order even for the Movement to say “Yes” when they are not supposed to?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ever since A4C started their work, they have not given me any report about their activities, so I cannot rule about what they do. Please conclude. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, the Speaker gave me a very short time. My advice is this, honourable colleagues; my simple and honest advice is to our friends in the Opposition and all of us on the government side; please abide by the law in your actions. Act in accordance with the law. This House is the custodian of constitutionalism.
 
Hon. Okot Ogong; although I had heard him declare his aspirations before, I had not heard him act in a manner that really stood him as a possible candidate. But today, I think, he has reached a threshold because indeed when he was speaking, for the first time ever, I thought maybe I could possibly consider even considering hon. Okot Ogong as a possibility -(Laughter)- because he made a very fundamental point; the point I am making now; that Parliament shall make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance. It is the responsibility of this House. 

Therefore, when we are behaving, please let us be the role models in terms of abiding by our laws. The Opposition obviously under a multiparty system has a role to play. We recognise it all of us as a country and that is why we relate to you as we are doing now. Please act as an Opposition; do not oppose for the sake of opposition. I have been seeing what I call grandstanding, trying to show people that they are confrontational simply because they are an Opposition party. Please let us all try to be mature and behave in a mature and civilised manner. 

The Uganda Police Force is under clear instructions and indeed has been using force proportionately. Anyone in the Uganda Police Force, as the minister said, that exceeds that proportionality will be subject to the law. So, what I would expect my colleagues in the Opposition to do - because there maybe elements in the Police that indeed may exceed this – I, therefore, call on you if you find any, please do not try and turn it political, because it will not be helpful, but since we are doing the same thing as parliamentarians, bring it to the notice of Government and action will be taken.

PERSONAL STATEMENTS ON THE BORDER DISPUTES BETWEEN WEST NILE AND ACHOLI

5.21
GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI (NRM, East Moyo County, Adjumani): (Expunged.)

5.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Lands) (Mrs Sarah Opendi): (Expunged.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I want to propose that we expunge so that everybody goes back to zero. (Mr Otada rose_) Okay, move. 

5.51
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank you. Now that your ruling is clear, I beg to move that the partial statement that was made by Gen. Moses Ali and the partial rebuttal that was made by hon. Sarah Opendi be expunged from the records of Parliament and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the statement which eventually offended Rule 42 be expunged from the records of this House.

         (Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now we are at zero.

  PERSONAL STATEMENTS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omach, I hope you are not going to enter into controversial issues. If you do, I will also expunge. Hon. Omach.

5.52
MR  FRED OMACH (NRM, Jonam County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, Pax vobiscum, meaning “Peace be with you”. I stand here to make a personal statement and I pray that no part of it will be controversial.

My personal statement is also on issues that concern me and the people of Jonam, the people whom I represent in this Parliament. 

On 13 February this year 2012, in the Acholi press statement in which they referred to the Jonam people as a clan in Acholi and I quote: “The Alur people are grandchildren of Gipir, while the Acholi people are grandchildren of Labongo, including the Jonam people, who are just a clan like Payira, Patiko, Lamogi and  Acholi.”

Madam Speaker and colleagues, permit me to make a categorical statement that the Jonam people are a tribe of their own and not a clan among the Acholi people. They are recognised in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as tribe No.43 and, therefore, it is not acceptable for any person or group of persons to refer to them as a clan. 

I would like to lay this particular page 212 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, in which it is clearly an ethnic group of its own, on Table. So, as leaders, we should look for unifying factors rather than things that can divide our people.

In the same statement, the Acholi Parliamentary Group stated that since the LRA insurgency, there has been tension over the boundaries with districts neigbhouring the Acholi land. But I would like to say that the concerns of the Acholi Parliamentary Group in regard to border disputes between the Madi of Adjumani and the Acholi in Amuru, and also border conflicts with the Langi - I pray that such border conflicts are resolved urgently and amicably.

However, as regards the administrative border between West Nile and Acholi in Nwoya and Amuru, I want to say this is very clear and it is the Rive Nile that draws that border. (Applause) So, there is no dispute whatsoever. The administrative border between the 18 original districts of Uganda, West Nile and Acholi, is the River Nile.

On 13 February 2012, the Member of Parliament for Nwoya, Hon. Richard Todwong, while reading a press statement on NTV, made allegations that I, Fred Jacan Omach, Member of Parliament for Jonam County and the Gombolola Security Officer (GISO) for Pakwach Town Council, were ferrying the Jonam People to settle in Nwoya. He also alleged that the two of us were selling land in Nwoya.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, these allegations are totally untrue and not in good faith. First of all, I do not own any land in Nwoya nor am I selling land in that place.

Secondly, the people of Jonam originally occupied the Eastern Banks of River Nile until around 1910 when the British Protectorate Government forced them to the western side of that river to protect them from Tsetse Flies that had infested that area.

Some of the Jonam People chose to move to areas now referred to as Gulu. When sleeping sickness was handled, the Jonam, during a legislative meeting in the late 1950s, requested to be settled on the Eastern Banks of the River Nile. But that was not accepted until 23 March 1963, when the then hon. Martin Okello Abbey (RIP) moved a motion in this very House on the resettlement of these people on the Eastern Banks of the River Nile. 

This motion followed the gazetting of land east of the Nile as a National Game Reserve by the Legislative Council, commonly referred to as LEGICO, on 17 July 1952. In that motion, the people there asked for that land to be opened for resettlement by the Jonam People, who had been moved away due to Tsetse Fly infection. That motion was seconded by hon. Obonyo from Acholi Sub-region.

The motion was passed on 26 March 1963, when this very House made a resolution. Allow me read that resolution verbatim. It reads thus: “This House do urge the Government to open parts of the said seasonal area surrounding the Aswa/Lolim Game Reserve lying East of the Albert Nile and North of the Pakwach – Gulu Road, for settlement.”

Madam Speaker, with your permission, let me lay these documents on Table. The first one being the statement made by the Acholi Parliamentary Group on 13 February 2012, while the second one is a copy of the Hansards of the Uganda National Assembly of the 25 March 1963 and that of 26 March 1963.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the land that I am talking about came to be occupied as a result of this parliamentary resolution. And you know that whenever there is a Resolution of Parliament, it is only right and fitting that such a resolution is respected.

In 1987 to 1988, as rebel activities intensified, many of the people were forced to flee west of the Nile again. When peace returned, the land owners got back to their land on the eastern side of the River Nile like any other displaced persons who had been living in the camps did. That is how the Jonam people got back to their land in Amuru and Nwoya.

Issues of cultural sites and jurisdiction are a matter for cultural leaders and not for politicians. I am saying this because there had also been mention of the fact that people who are settling there are claiming the border to be beyond the River Nile. 

But on 7 February 2009, the Paramount Chief of Acholi, His Highness Rwot David Onencan II, together with His Highness Rwot Marcelino Olarker Ali IV from Jonam, signed a resolution between the Acholi and Jonam communities. That resolution was signed from the Bunyoro Kingdom.

Allow me lay a copy of this resolution on Table for the record of this Parliament. But before that, there was also a letter from His Highness Rwot Achana to His Highness the Rwot of Jonam dated 24 November 1999, on the same issue. I lay it on Table too.

Madam Speaker, in Resolution No.6, it was said thus: “While the Acholi community has no objection to the Jonam Community accessing their cultural sites within the current Amuru District of Acholi, now Nwoya District, there shall be prior joint verification and agreements on the exact cultural sites, the sizes of each site and modalities for utilisation to avoid associated disputes and to promote harmonised co-existence. 

As I mentioned earlier, the Jonam originally had their homes there and, therefore, most of their cultural sites are on the eastern side of the banks.

Resolution No.2 of the same Memorandum of Understanding, and I would like to quote verbatim, “Any Jonam family displaced by, and after 1986, from any part of Acholi land, shall return to their former family settlement without any hindrance as long as there is adequate evidence and there is no dispute. And in case of any dispute, the Local Government and/or the office of His Highness the Paramount Chief of the Acholi, shall resolve this dispute amicably.”

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this resolution is pertaining and if there are any disputes, this resolution can still be utilised to ensure that there is amicable settlement of any disputes between the people of Acholi and the people of Jonam. 

The people going to their land are, therefore, are not being ferried, but are simply going back to resettle on their lands. I have always referred issues that affect them to my colleague the Member of Parliament from Nwoya, hon. Richard Todwong, for settlement. This has been the practice between the two of us. 

The insurgence of 1987/1988 also saw many of our brothers and sisters from Acholi who have moved to Jonam, and instead of being put in camps, they were integrated into the Jonam society, and most of them live peacefully in Jonam to date, and they will continue to be there. 

On the 24 July 2007, political leaders from Amuru and Nebbi district met at Got Apwoyo in the then Amuru district, under the chair of hon. William Nokrach, representing the Acholi Parliamentary Group. This was attended among others by hon. Simon Oyet, hon. Catherine Mavenjina, and myself. It was resolved among others that the Jonam people who have their land in Amuru district, now Nwoya, be free to resettle in their lands. And with your permission, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I will Table the minutes of this stakeholders meeting which took place at Got Apwoyo on Tuesday 24 July 2007.  

This was important when there were some conflicts between the two tribes and we agreed that should there be any dispute, this dispute should be handled amicably. I am happy to note that on the side of Amuru, the Chairman LC V, the RDC and on the side of Nebbi, the Chairman LC V and also the RDC, were in attendance in that meeting, which resolved that we must always resolve our issues amicably. 

On page 5 of my personal statement, I make it categorically clear that dialogue is the best way through which leaders can resolve issues. It is my conviction that there is room for further dialogue for the good of the two sister tribes of the Acholi and the Jonam, and the country as a whole. Issues that bring us together are more important than issues that divide us. 

There is reported harassment of the Jonam people settled in Nwoya District and this I pray should stop forthwith. Government in 1999 through the Prime Minister then, Apollo Nsibambi, sent a delegation to settle problems that were pertaining between the two sister tribes. I believe that the government should also investigate this and establish the truth as there are reports of destruction of property, falsification of documents and forceful eviction of people settled in their bona fide land. 

I believe that this Parliament, the Government and the two communities, the Acholi Parliamentary Group and the West Nile Parliamentary Group or the two communities of Nwoya and Nebbi District or the two communities of the traditional and cultural leaders of the Jonam and the cultural leaders of the Acholi, can resolve this thing peacefully without any hindrances. 

I also believe that as Members of Parliament, if we have any issues to raise, it is good if we first consult before we go to the media. I say all these for God and my country. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I now invite hon. Oketayot to read the joint statement of the Acholi Parliamentary Group.

STATEMENT BY THE ACHOLI PARLIAMENTARY GROUP

6.09
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON ACHOLI PARLIAMENTARY GROUP (Mrs Lowila Oketayot): Madam Speaker, I stand here on the Floor of Parliament on behalf of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, to make this statement. I would like to thank you on behalf of the group for giving us space to make this statement. 

On 8 February 2012, hon. Gilbert Olanya, the area MP of Kilak County, Amuru District, raised the issue of some people from Adjumani who attacked some people in Apaa and Elegu in Amuru District, claiming that those areas belonged to Adjumani District. After a week, forceful evictions by the Police, Army and Uganda Wildlife Authority forces on the residents of Apaa village, Pabbo sub-county in Amuru District followed. 

We wish from the onset to let everybody know that this is not a conflict between Acholi and Madi. The two communities have lived together for long without problems. In fact, many Madi people are people of Amuru District. It is also a fact that we all came through Sudan during migration, though some people came much later after state formation and, therefore, may not only know the boundary, but the history of co-existence.

Allow me to add that it is evidently true that if we get to Amuru District to a place called Bibia, we will find that the people living in that area are Madi and they live very peacefully with the Acholi. 

On 15 February 2012, the Acholi Parliamentary Group made a fact-finding visit to follow up the issue raised by the area MP. The Acholi Parliamentary Group travelled to Apaa to verify the information and we found out as follows:

Road blocks

The Police, Army and Uganda Wildlife Authority forces had mounted a roadblock on the main Amuru-Adjumani Road and several others on the village paths blocking vehicles and pedestrians from accessing their village. 

People were being stopped, searched and money extorted from them. Acholi Parliamentary Group leaders rescued a boy whose wallet had been taken, and there is a video clip on this. Several families were forced out of their homes and were helplessly sitting at the roadside with their household property. They were told that if they remained in their homesteads they would be killed by the very forces meant to protect them. 

Government vehicles belonging to the Uganda Wildlife Authority were ferrying people forcefully under guard and they were being dumped in the Pabbo Sub-county Headquarters compound without water, sanitation, housing and food.  This was done without any regard for the young innocent children and the site was very pathetic. 

People’s houses were being torched by the wildlife rangers and the Police. 

Several people were illegally arrested and detained in squalid conditions and moved while handicapped in the command of the Assistant Inspector General of Police, Grace Turyagumanawe. 

School desks were being used by the Police as firewood, which was an issue raised by the LC III Chairman of Pabbo in the presence of the Acholi Parliamentary Group and the AIGP, Grace Turyagumanawe. 

UPE schools and classrooms were closed and turned into an Army/Police operational base and due to that, children were not going to school.

The community boreholes were blocked and closed by the security agencies in order to make people leave the centres.  

The forces opened live ammunition on the civilian population leading to the death of one person and disappearance of nine people who the villagers allege were killed during the above actions and the whereabouts of their remains are not known to date. Villagers were blocked from looking for the bodies in the bushes. 

Madam Speaker, this very person who was killed happened to be coming from Alero in Nwoya District. On the 16th February, I accompanied the MPs of Nwoya to go and stand with the family during the burial of this boy. And though we went as leaders to comfort the family, when the father of the boy narrated to us what he went through in the process of picking the body of his son from Adjumani to Alero, there was no way we could stand the pain. 

Personally, I broke down and failed to comfort the father of the boy and the family. It was very sad; the body had decomposed and yet the Police officers had assured the leaders that they would treat the body and generally take up the responsibility of ensuring that the body is buried well; they would provide a coffin, transport for picking the body from Adjumani and take it to Alero, but none of the assurances was fulfilled. The old man carried his son’s body in a reeds mat. 

The Police blocked the local civilian population from attending the meeting with members of APG.

People’s livestock were looted and eaten by the forces carrying out the operation in the area. Other properties like bicycles and solar panels were collected from homesteads and sold individually by the forces or kept at the command point. 

The Acholi Parliamentary Group also made the following observations: 

(a)	That Apaa Health Centre II that was constructed by Amuru District Local Government under PRDP and commissioned by the then Premier, Apollo Nsibambi was still intact but empty.

(b)	That Apaa Trading Centre has two polling stations, namely, Valentino’s A and B gazetted by the Electoral Commission under Amuru District, and Acholi have been voting at the stations since 1980. The area MPs and local leaders campaigned and voted in that area in the last concluded 2011 General Elections.


(c)	That Apaa in Pabbo is reflected in all the population census figures of the Republic of Uganda.

(d)	A Court Injunction: Police was seen carrying out forceful evictions in spite of a valid court injunction issued on 15 February 2011 at Gulu High Court Case Application No.004 of 2004.

(e)	All the people arrested were forcefully taken outside the jurisdiction of the Gulu Court that issued the injunction and were produced in Adjumani District. 

(f)	The DPC of Amuru District where Apaa is, was ordered by the AIGP, Grace Turyagumanawe, not to appear on the scene. 

(g)	The AIGP, Grace Turyagumanawe in contempt of court, continued ordering the evictions ascertaining that the order was for Amuru District and that he was in Adjumani. However, the Health Centre II and the school which all the forces occupied are Amuru District Local Government property. 

(h)	The Police and not UPDF were busy engaged in local politics and propaganda arguing that people defending their livelihood and property in Apaa were being given alcohol by the leaders, which was not true.  

(i)	The APG met the community who expressed concern of forceful life threatening evictions. 

We, therefore, recommend the following: 

(a)	That the Court Order and injunction be respected by the enforcement agencies and that the evictions must be stopped until Civil Suit No.0062-2011 is disposed of by court. 

(b)	That the evicted families be allowed to return to their homesteads and/or resettled by Government.


(c)	That AIGP Grace Turyagunawe be brought to book and relieved of his duties for human rights violations and ordering of the killing of innocent civilians.
 
(d)	An independent joint committee of surveyors acceptable by the district local governments, expeditiously resolves the boundaries since the Cabinet team of experts have potential of being biased by the Third Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali. Madam Speaker, we advise that this independent team shouldn’t comprise of any of us, the leaders from Acholi and the other side, to avoid a conflict of interest. So, we would like an independent team that should not even involve any of us. 

(e)	Government should investigate the people who went ahead with the eviction contrary to court orders. 

(f)	(Expunged)

We would like to thank His Excellency the President who, according to the information that we got, intervened by stopping the mass evictions. We wish to reaffirm that the Acholi Parliamentary Group will always stand by their people and we will be willing to have dialogue in order to resolve this matter. 

Madam Speaker, as the Acholi, we really want to live very peacefully with all our neighbours. As we all know, we have seen enough bloodshed and we want to have peace. I beg to lay on Table pictures showing the different scenes that we witnessed in Apaa. I also want to lay on Table a picture showing people aboard a truck for Uganda Wildlife Authority with their property and with forces guarding them with guns.
Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on Table a picture showing people including young innocent children dumped at Pabbo Health Centre II where there was completely nothing; no water, shelter or food. I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on Table a picture showing the destruction that was done by the forces; the Police, Army and Uganda Wildlife Authority forces. I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on Table the picture of the hut that was completely destroyed and properties destroyed by the same forces.

I beg to lay on Table a picture showing spots of blood of the people who were shot by the forces.

In a very sad way, I beg to lay on Table the picture of the innocent boy who was shot and killed and the body already decomposing and looking very terrible and yet the Police had promised to treat the body, provide a coffin, transport and give him a decent burial. In a very painful way, I beg to lay.

I beg to lay three pictures showing spots of blood in the bush as people were claiming some people were injured and they could not trace their bodies. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

I also beg to lay the picture of some of the leaders interacting with the Police when they got to Apaa. As we heard, there was information given that when the leaders - the Members of Acholi Parliamentary Group - went to Apaa, they intimidated the Police. 

But I beg to lay on Table a picture showing hon. Odonga Otto seated together interacting with the Assistant Inspector General of Police. I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on Table a picture showing other MPS; hon. Okot John Amos of Agago, interacting with the forces.

When we got to Apaa, out intention of going there was just to see what was taking place, not to incite anybody or cause more problems and I request you to give us some few minutes so that we project some of the video clips that were captured on the scenes that we witnessed in Apaa. This is to show that what we went to do was really to see but not to incite anybody.

6.27
MR STEPHEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a statement of Acholi Parliamentary Group, but at the end of it, it has a list of prayers, which I presume is an application to this House for action.

Under our Rules of Procedure Rule 27 under petitions, it is only through petitions that this House can receive applications and I will read No.27(1). “Subject to these rules, every application to Parliament shall be in the form of a petition and every petition must be presented by a Member, who shall be responsible for the observance of the rules contained in Appendix (e) to these rules and to inform the House that the petition is properly worded.”

Appendix (e) gives the details on how you are supposed to draft and all that contained in a petition. I can read it for you. “Rules concerning petitions. A Member presenting a petition to the House must put his or her name at the beginning of it and shall give notice of his or her intention to present the petition by entering his or her name on the notice paper reserved for that purpose. A petition must contain a prayer at the beginning of it stating the general objective of the petitioner or the nature of the relief asked for and...” 

My contention here and why I am rising up is for you to rule on whether this is a petition, a statement of national importance and whether this House can have any of these prayers answered. These are applications.

Mine is to seek for your guidance under our Rules of Procedure, whether the statement that has been made in the way it has been made can be received in this House, because it is clearly petitioned, but wrongly worded and not following the procedure under Rule 27. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know it is a cardinal principle of law that justice should not be denied merely because of technicalities. I hasten to add that this matter was raised by hon. Olanya on the 8th February. The following week, the Acholi Parliamentary Group wrote to me requesting for permission to go and verify the complaints made by hon. Gilbert Olanya.

I gave them that authority to be absent from Parliament. I even informed this House that the Acholi Parliamentary Group were not in the House because they had gone to Northern Uganda for two things: One, the nodding disease; and two, to evaluate the complaints raised by hon. Olanya.

Honourable members, I think that as leaders, we would be failing in our duty if we silenced the request of these Members merely because of technicalities. So, I want to propose - because there are many matters involved like boundaries; whether the land is in the game reserve or not, whether it is in Adjumani or in Acholi.

So, I want to propose that our Committee on Infrastructure go and undertake a study of this situation and give us a report because the Members are complaining but the government is also saying other things. So, I want to ask our Committee on Infrastructure to go and verify these complaints and give us a report so that we can debate from a point of information. I have ruled and I think that is fair. Let us get the information. 

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have absolutely no intention to water down anything contained in here. My concern is in prayer (f). They appeal to Parliament to totally disregard the statement of hon. Moses Ali. I think to be fair to Gen. Ali, this Parliament, unless the statement that is being referred to here is a different statement, but if it is a statement, which we have just expunged by way of a resolution, then I think there is nothing that prayer (f) would stand for.

Therefore, if that be the case, I would like to move that prayer or recommendation (f) be expunged from our records just to be fair to Gen. Ali.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since there is no statement from Gen. Ali, part (f) is redundant; let this be expunged.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I have no objection to the Acholi Parliamentary Group’s statement, but there are issues they have raised under part (c) on page 4, where they mention the name of the AIGP, Grace Turyagumanawe. According to our rules, Mr Turyagumanawe cannot defend himself here at the moment and so I suggest that –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, you have delegated a committee of Parliament to go and look into this matter and thereafter report to the House. Is it in order for the honourable member to jump on the Floor as though he was in a wrestling session and oppose your ruling without a formal motion?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have tasked our committee to go and make a fact-finding tour and return with a report. So, let us leave the committee to tell us who was there and who was not there. (Interjection) Which rule does not allow?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, at any one moment, when a Member makes a personal statement to accuse a private person who is not a Member here, you have always ruled that it is not allowed. 

MS ALICE ALASO: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague, and I hope that it will comfort him; in this matter, we are talking about the people of Acholi, especially the children - not the Opposition. At least they can beat the Opposition, but spare the Acholi children. That should comfort you if we investigate Turyagumanawe.

THE SPEAKER: Can we get the report within three weeks? Who chairs the Physical Infrastructure Committee? Hon. Ssemugaba?

MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA: We ask for four weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall give you one month to come up with the report.

(Video Presentation.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lowila, how long is the clip? We can also give it to our committee as part of the evidence, together with the photographs. So, the photographs and the clip should be handed over to hon. Ssemugaba and his committee so that they can evaluate them and give us a report.

MRS LOWILA: Madam Speaker, the clips are showing mainly two things – that scene shows the burial ground where the dead body was buried. The other main scene shows the leaders holding a meeting with the community to find out what was taking place. That man is the boy’s father, narrating to us how he suffered to get his son’s body from Adjumani to Alero. What pained me most was when he said he did not eat for three days, but when his son’s body arrived at home, he got relieved and finally ate.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we ask the committee to take those clips and include them as part of their evidence.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we completed the debate and so, today, we need to handle the committee stage.

6.40
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion without notice in accordance with Rule 46(1)(g) that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of the whole House to enable it consider, in detail, the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do resolve into a Committee of the Whole House to consider the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Citation

6.41
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we insert new rules as follows:

(i)	   Citation. “These Rules shall be cited as 	   the Rules of Procedure of the 		   Parliament of Uganda”. 

The justification of the proposal is to provide for the citation of the rules.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any objection to the introduction of the citation? Clerk, please tell them the pages? Honourable members, I put the question that the citation be introduced into the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 1

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to introduce (ii) after the citation to read as follows: “...except as otherwise provided for in the Constitution or in these rules, these rules shall not restrict the mode in which Parliament exercises and upholds its powers, privileges and immunities.”

Madam Chairperson, the justification for this amendment is that the powers, privileges and immunities of Parliament should not be curtailed for lack of an express provision in the rules to that effect. We do propose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, if the practice in the Commonwealth has always been that we borrow from conventions if there are instances where there is a lacuna in the rules, that in itself should not stop Parliament from the performance of its duties. So, we were providing for the event of a lacuna that would not in effect offend the Constitution.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I would think that No.1 should come as an exception to something. It should not be one of the first provisions. So, we should probably say at the end, “Except when not provided for, practices of other jurisdictions shall as much as applicable come into board.” The way it is now, it sounds like it is showing anyone who is starting to browse through our rules that these people in their wisdom suspect there is already a lacuna in that area. So, it should probably come at the end.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson if I may read Rule 7 of our Rules of Procedure: “Procedure in case not provided for and precedents: In case of any doubt and for any question of procedure not provided in these rules, the Speaker shall decide, having regard to the practice of the House...” So, I think this one is enough and we do not need to introduce anything in our rules.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you are just repeating it, but it is there. It is already in our rules. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson this is not a very controversial matter we shall concede and withdraw it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Thank you.

Interpretation 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson - There is no amendment; they have withdrawn it. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I see the chairman of the committee conceding on this particular rule, but I think that in our old Rules of Procedure - the ones that we are using currently - there is no provision anywhere for Assistant Speaker or the dean and I feel that until such a time that we –(Interjections)- on interpretation. Until such a time as we have agreed that there is a necessity for us to have the Dean or Assistant Speaker, can we then ask for interpretation. Otherwise, it might be futile if we went on to interpret and then go on to the body of the report, and found it unnecessary to have an Assistant Speaker or Dean for the Independents.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairman, I propose that this comes at the end after we have agreed on the text of the rules. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Much obliged.

Rule 4

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson we propose to re-draft sub-rule 5 as follows: “A person shall not be proposed as a candidate to the Office of Speaker unless that person has given his or her consent to the nomination.” 

The justification for this is that provisions of legislation are never drafted in the negative. So, we wanted to cure an error in the previous drafting. Nothing new introduced.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any objection to that?

MR RUHINDI: I think what he is trying to say is that when you see sub-rule 5 of rule 4 it starts by saying, “No person shall be proposed as a candidate...” Now, according to him, and I think it is okay, because he is saying let us be positive by starting, “A person shall not be proposed...” it is the same substance –(Interjections)- so I do not know. To me, rather than actually making debate out of nothing, we could still maintain the status quo. The chairperson can concede on that. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson the justification is that the provision should not be drafted in the negative. However, when you read it, it is actually in the negative. You can redraft it in the positive even then. The principle is okay, “A person shall be nominated with his consent...” It can be re-drafted without this, “not, not, not,” because what it is seeking to do here is to bar instead of to propose. It is not procedure. Whereas the intention of the rule should be a procedure of nomination, this one is intending to bar. “A person shall not be proposed...” That is not procedure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No but honourable members I think this is working in the reverse. How do you consent unless you are proposed? You must be proposed first then you say yes or no. 

MR KATUNTU: “A person being proposed as candidate to the Office of Speaker shall give his or her consent to the nomination.” I propose.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson I think the original rule is more precise and is really what we are looking for: “No person shall be proposed as a candidate to the Office of Speaker unless that person has given his or her consent to the nomination.” I think that is direct and that is what we want.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that is what they are trying to cure. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I do agree with the proposal made by the committee, but the proposal made by hon. Katuntu takes away the emphasis which is in the, “Person shall not” - yes, if we can listen to what he was proposing again, it takes away that emphasis that no person or a person shall not. The beauty of the proposal here now is that it is in the positive indeed as the Chairperson said. The meaning is negative, but the statement is in the positive.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, colleagues, I think what we are trying to cure is this; if we can listen to each other. When you listen to this, “A person shall not be proposed as a candidate to the Office of Speaker unless that person has given his or her consent to the nomination” means that you have to give your consent before you are nominated.

But I think what hon. Abdu Katuntu is proposing is more pro-active, that you first get nominated and then you consent by saying a person proposed as a candidate to the Office of Speaker shall give his or her consent to the nomination. I think that is more positive.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Rule 4, sub-rule 5 be re-drafted as proposed by hon. Katuntu.

               (Question put and agreed to.) 

Sub-rule 8

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, we propose to amend sub-rule 8 by re-drafting it to read as follows; “A Member making a nomination shall move a Motion that......do take the chair of Parliament as Speaker and shall in not more than five minutes give a brief statement of the background of the nominee”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why are you removing the qualifications?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, this read together with the second proposal we make, will make sense. In the first proposal, we want to introduce a time limit in which you give justification for the candidature of that person. In the second amendment, we are actually proposing to introduce debate so that the Members can make an informed decision on the suitability of a candidate.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Well, much as the committee has proposed time, in my opinion, I do not really think it is necessary because the person presiding over these elections can ably give time to whoever is going to talk about the candidate. So, I really do not see the necessity of us putting in time.

MR AMURIAT: I support our issue of limiting ourselves to a certain time. You know sometimes when we politicians take on the microphone; it might be difficult for the presiding officer to stop somebody. But whereas I appreciate the timing, I think the Office of the Speaker is such a high office, a very important office in the land, and saying something about that person in five minutes is so limiting. I would like to propose that we set a higher limit of say 10 or 15 minutes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, you know when the Speaker is being elected, that is the only business. Really, why should we say three minutes, seven; it is the only business which is done.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, if I can take the Floor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: One minute.

MR KATUNTU: I think Madam Chair, we need to read this proposed amendment together with the following one where the person being nominated is actually also being given time to talk about himself. So, we are talking about the one nominating you, giving a brief background and then you who is being nominated, also making a speech in the following rules. 

So, in my view, the five minutes for the person nominating, I think, is sufficient, then we can look at sub-rule 4, which is on page 34, if it is numbered like the one I have on top. A person nominated under sub-rule 8 shall be given an opportunity by the Chief Justice to speak about himself or herself. Then you can say, well, you need 10 or 20 minutes to say, “I have been everything in the world, so I deserve this job”.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. Why do we want to underscore the competence and the capacity of the presiding person, because as a Speaker, you have always determined how much time we should use on the microphone and we really go by that? If the day is for election of Speaker and that is the business, then in their wisdom as presiding officers, let them be left to determine according to the time that they see there and then -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to make the Chief Justice to come into our Rules of Procedure. You will be disturbing the Chief Justice.

MR OTADA: Madam Chair and honourable members, hon. Katuntu invited us to read this amendment together with the following one, sub-rule 9. I do not intend to jump the gun, but I wanted to use sub-rule 9 to justify my thinking that we do not have to go by the five minutes. 

If the intention is to move without debate and allow debate to take place, I do not know whether we are saying debate to take place by the House or by the person making the nomination. If debate is going to take place about a nominee, then I think we should give sufficient time, of course, at the discretion of the presiding officer, and not limit it to five minutes, since there is going to be debate ensuing, so that we do not have ourselves limited, that since the whole person will be open up for debate. This is just my thinking.

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Madam Chair, I just want to buttress hon. Otada’s point by really indicating that what is at stake is, whether we are going to allow debate between the candidates and debate about or on the candidates; because, if we are going to allow debate by the entire House to talk about the candidates, then the presiding officer should be able to determine the time. It should be within the powers of the presiding officer, but also debate within the candidates. That should be the only concern. Otherwise, determining the time for the proposer and all that is really not necessary.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I am constrained to advise that we are in a multi-party dispensation. By the time candidates come at that level, a lot will have been done behind the scenes. To come and begin saying there is nomination - we should give time to candidates to talk -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Candidates’ meeting?

MR RUHINDI: - is absolutely not necessary, in my opinion. At least, what we could actually allow without even specifying time, is for the nominator to say something about the candidate. That is okay, that is formal; but for the candidate to come and begin addressing us at that time – what has been the precedent? Has that been the practice? Is that what you want to remove? There is no mischief in my opinion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I think the amendment of these rules about the election of a Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are in good faith. First and foremost, after swearing in, the following day you are going for election of the Speaker. You have new Members; you have old Members. Everybody who comes there may not know. I agree with hon. Ruhindi when he says they would have caucused. You would have caucused maybe on a wrong person and a better person appears who may not have appeared in the caucus. 

Madam Chairperson, the mischief could be different. But in this one, instead of taking a long time, we can allow the presiding officer to determine the time. We could say after the sentence, “...and shall give a brief statement of the background of the nominee,” and we leave it to the presiding officer to make a decision on how many minutes he can give. He can decide to give one or two. People who have CVs which are short can take half a second and they are done.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know, without mentioning names, I think in the Sixth Parliament, we did something like this and two candidates campaigned. Eventually, there was an election and the vote was closed, but the person who was elected Speaker never recovered from that debate on the Floor. I will not tell you who it was. He was elected, but he never recovered from knowing that half of these people are not with me. I do not want to talk about him but it happened. (Interjections) Yes, he never recovered. 

MRS NAMAYANJA NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I wish we could maintain the status quo and avoid debate; otherwise we might find people coming here with vuvuzelas to cheer people. Let us maintain the status quo. Like the Attorney General said, a lot will have been done. Even if a Member is new, believe me, he is not new in politics or in his or her party. Members must know that by the time somebody comes up to campaign to be a Speaker of the House - I really believe that you know the House. I move that we maintain the status quo.  

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, you see, the Speaker is a Speaker of the entire House. It is not the Speaker of maybe, the majority party. I am sure before the majority party nominates their candidate for that position; they could have had an opportunity to listen to that candidate in their caucus. Now, why do you deny the people whom he or she is going to be their Speaker to hear from that person? (Mr Baka rose_) I will make my point first. 

Madam Chairperson, you could have a situation like we are having today, that the majority party is actually 70 percent. But you could have a scenario when the ruling party is even less than 50 percent. (Interjections) You see, the minority

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order 

MR KATUNTU: You see, the other minority parties could be having 15, 20, but the majority party may have around 40 percent and they come up with a candidate for the Speaker. This is our leader, all of us. I know for sure that sometimes a leader might come up, who will attract support from both sides of the House. What this does, in my view, what this proposal brings to the fore – if we can listen to each other – what this brings is for the entire House to own their Speaker. Do not assume this is going to be a Speaker for the party; no. (Mrs Seninde rose_) From me? I will take it.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair and I would like to thank my colleague for giving way to seek clarification. I think in this particular rule, we are trying to look at the time. Actually, what we are trying to discuss is whether we need to allocate time in the Rules of Procedure or not. 

I appreciate that my brother, hon. Katuntu, is concerned that when we are debating or discussing the candidates; everybody should be given time. I do not see any problem with that. What I am probably failing to understand or to be on the same board with him – because he seems to be discussing the next sub-rule. I think for this particular one, we want to determine the time so that we can be able to move. Honourable, can you probably guide me? 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. I think we are on the same wave length, but I had brought in that argument earlier because I was replying to what my learned colleague had proposed - the learned Attorney-General - that you do not need it. In fact, even the Minister of State for Luweero said that by the time somebody stands as a Speaker, we all know him. You cannot guarantee that. Somebody could have been a professor out there and the ruling party or the majority party says, “This is our candidate,” without even being on the political scene. It is possible. 

We can leave the issue about time to the presiding officer. I wouldn’t have any problem with that, but I need to warn you that the person presiding over is the Chief Justice. Those people, the Judges, are so strict with time, on rules and so forth. (Interjections) They are so, so, strict and sometimes, he might come and say, “I give you two minutes.” It is possible. I am not so much opposed to whether we remove the time and so forth, but at least we need to give them an opportunity to talk to us. But about the time, you can leave it to the presiding officer. (Interjections) 

MR ALEPER: Madam Chairperson, we seem to be confusing two things. This particular rule is talking about a Member who will nominate, and that person who is nominating talks for five minutes, which you are proposing, and which the committee is proposing; five minutes about the nominee. What Katuntu is talking about is the person who has been nominated being given time. No, this particular provision is talking about the nominator; the person to be given time to talk about the nominee. That is why we are saying, in regard to what the honourable Minister of State for Luweero has said, that we leave the status quo as it is -(Interjections)- the time is to the discretion of the Chief Justice. So, that time is not about the candidate, it is about the nominator; that is the clarification I wanted to make.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chair. In fact, I am in line with my colleague, hon. Aleper, because the statement as given by our Attorney-General on the other side –(Interruption)

MR ODOI: Madam Chair, we shall drop the time limit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what it means is that we maintain the status quo; so there is no amendment on that – 

Sub-rule 9

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, the committee proposes that we amend sub-rule 9 by deleting the phrase, “Without debate”. The justification is to allow debate in order to be sure of the candidature of the persons who want to be leaders of the House. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, I think we should start with whether the person nominated under sub-rule 8 shall be given an opportunity to speak about him/herself. After that, we go to what the chairperson is proposing; whether there is debate or not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, at which stage does this debate come after the nomination; after the candidate has spoken – is the candidate supposed to respond to the debate?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, the sum total of our proposals are as follows:

1.	There will be nomination and the nominator will address the House in respect to the candidature of the person nominated. 

2.	The person nominated, if he/she so wishes, will also address the House.

3.	Then, three people supporting that nomination will address the House, and three people opposing the nomination will also address the House. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I am saying; there is a candidate who never recovered from that kind of thing. 

MS ROSE NAMAYANJA: Madam Chair, I beg to move that we maintain the status quo. Otherwise, if you allow debate to ensue, that means that as a matter of natural justice, the candidate will have to come up again to respond. So, I move that we maintain the status quo.

MR OTTADA: Madam Chair, you are concerned about the recovery of the candidate; but I think at that stage, that sort of thing tests the stamina of the leader. Madam Chair, I am thinking about the committee that you chair, that Committee on Appointments, where a candidate comes, presents him/herself and the Members discuss it.

So, I think that when choosing our own leader, why don’t we exercise the same practice? That would allow Members who have something to say to speak.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chair. If we moved logically, my proposal on sub-rule 9 would be that the status quo is maintained to second the nomination. 

And then, the amendments proposed by the committee – I am looking at the second part of it; having seconders, those in favour and those against to speak. The argument I want to make here is that at the end of the day, the person elected Speaker is a human being; and if she listened to me stripping her during the campaign time, it is very likely that the number of times I will miss her eye during those five years will be very many. So, for me, I would be very scared. Even if you put this in the rules, I am not going to be among those persons who will be against a particular candidate openly. 

So, the only part I would like to support is for the candidates to speak to us so that we get a sense of ownership. Even if I do not vote for the candidate at the end, I would masquerade as one who voted for the Speaker and that is perfectly in order. But I would rather drop this thing of debating these people publically.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chair, it was never the intention of the committee to create acrimony. Our intention was to create democracy. We never addressed ourselves to the possible consequences of deepening democracy. 

Therefore, I concede that we maintain only the right of the person nominated to speak and then we abandon the others; if that is the view of the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I am not disagreeing with the chairman, but my only problem is that when we delete 9, I think we should allow somebody to second the nomination. The committee says we should delete 9 – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the agreement is that we maintain the status quo –

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Save for the introduction of the right of the person nominated to speak. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that Rule 9 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI: Madam Chair, we propose to introduce a new sub-rule 13(c) and to renumber consequentially that rule as follows:

i)	Each Member who wishes to vote shall proceed to a booth or designated area for the purpose, and located to and within a reasonable distance of the ballot box, and shall, while there, write the name of the candidate of his or her choice, fold the marked ballot paper and drop it in the ballot box.

ii)	A Member, who before casting his or her vote marks the ballot paper in error, may return it to the clerk who shall immediately cancel and destroy the paper so returned and issue another. 

(iii) On the election of a Speaker no vote may be cast, or abstention recorded, by proxy.

The reason we are proposing this is to provide very clearly an administrative regime for voting for the leadership of the House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification? I spoil the ballot and then I return it to the clerk?

MR RUHINDI: I am very uncomfortable with (ii) because it is likely to be a subject of abuse. In (iii), if you are actually refusing voting by proxy, we should not leave there any discretion. So, the word to use is “shall” instead of “may”. So it should be, “On the election of a Speaker no vote shall be cast, or abstention recorded, by proxy.” This is so that it is total; and (ii) should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that rule – Yes, the honourable from the lost counties. (Laughter)

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Chairperson, under (i), the use of the ballot box and ballot paper, do we presume that this Parliament shall never modernise and be able to have electronic voting? Why not leave it and say, “We shall cast…” instead of mentioning the ballot box, the paper and folding it and so forth.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we get a new Chamber with electronic voting, we shall change the rules but now we are in the lost counties. (Laughter)

MR OTADA: Maybe for clarity; isn’t electronic voting open voting? I thought that electing a Speaker is within my right to vote secretly and, therefore, what we propose is what should stand. I do not know whether you get – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am surprised that my colleague, who is a Member of the Pan African Parliament, is the one raising this because actually, in that House they vote electronically. It is just anonymous; the system is such that you just press a button and so on and the system does not show who has voted except the numbers –

THE CHAIRPERSON: The tally –

MR KATUNTU: But on this particular one, the voting is different because you could have five or six candidates and you may not vote electronically. You will have to cast your vote and the only system that captures that is as being provided by the amendments in the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that if we delete 13 (ii), then the rest is okay. I now put the question that rule 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 13, as amended, agreed to.

Amendment 4 - Rule 6

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to redraft rule 6 as follows: 

(1) 	The Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall 		preside at any sitting of the House.

(2)	The Speaker - 
a)	    shall preserve order and decorum 	     in the House; 
b)	shall decide questions of order and 		practice;  
c)	shall, in deciding a point of order or 		practice, state reasons for the decision 		and cite any Rule of Procedure or other 		applicable authority; 
d)	may invite submissions from Members, 		but no debate shall be permitted on any 		such submission; 

e)	may decline debate on any submission.

(3)	No debate shall be conducted on any ruling made by the Speaker under this rule.

(4) 	The Speaker shall nominate members on official parliamentary delegations taking into consideration proportional representation of all parties represented in Parliament based on their numerical strength, the total number of independent members, gender and other special interest groups.”

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I think that this is redundant. This is because the Speaker really needs to ensure that there is discipline. They are not going to send a member of FDC - If there are 10 FDC or NRM Members and all of them have been absent, but now the hand of the Speaker has been tied, that it must be 10 NRM, 10 FDC proportionately. Let us allow the Speaker to have leverage and members must behave well. Issues of attendance, participation, interest and ability – not every Tom, Dick and Harry should go to South Africa and speak nonsense - (Laughter) - with all the due respect, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know this is not practicable. Sometimes some organisations write to me and ask for two members. So now what do I do? Do I send one NRM and one FDC? Do I send one UPC and one Independent? This is not practicable. This is really very problematic.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you. I do agree with hon. Ekanya that the Speaker should be allowed by the rules to manage the institution she or he heads. She or he will need discretion sometimes depending on how members participate in parliamentary business. 

My only problem is on sub-rule (1), “The Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall preside at any sitting of the House.” You see, once you are presiding, you are no longer Deputy Speaker. So it should be, “The Speaker shall preside at any sitting of the House.” In the definition section we can then define who the Speaker is to include the Deputy Speaker. If she is presiding, we cannot say, “Madam Deputy Speaker…” and so on. So, I think we need to delete the words “Deputy Speaker”.

MS RWABUHORO: Madam Chairperson, I find difficulty harmonising (2) (d) and (e). This is because (d) says, “The Speaker may invite submissions from members, but no debate shall be permitted on any such submission” and then (e) says, “The Speaker may decline debate on any submission.” I see (e) as redundant because it is almost repeating – (Interjections) - if it is the whole of it, then the better for me.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you think (d) and (e) are redundant? Hon. Kasule Sebunya.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I thought he was going to concede that we let the status quo be and we do not include any other statement mentioned here.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We concede on (d) and (e) and (4), the justification for not having it is sufficiently convincing. We cannot tie the hands of the Speaker by having provisions that will not be practicable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So (4) is deleted and (d) and (e) are equally deleted. Where is (3)? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we shall make consequential amendments for the definition of the Deputy Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR  ACHIA: Madam Chairperson, yes I agree with the amendments, but when you look at (4) critically, you can perceive the thinking behind it. There are people who have been in this Parliament for 10 years, 15 years but they have never travelled and I think that is the thinking behind that amendment. (Laughter) You can see that it says that the Speaker shall nominate members to travel on official parliamentary delegations. When you talk about a “delegation”, you need to take Independents into consideration.
 
Madam Chairperson, I want to request you to reconsider it. I have met a few people two or three times in New York when I am on my private leave, on a day or two, and they have been there four times, even in this parliament. So, you get surprised, and we see with our eyes.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: It has been deleted. Okay, honourable members, I put the question –

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to say that apart from the proposal that was moved by hon. Abdu Katuntu, principally the net effect of what the committee is proposing is contained in the existing Rules of Procedure. So, I do not think there is any need for us to evoke any amendment because they are exactly the same except for sub rule (1) where the hon. Abdu Katuntu proposes the deletion of “Deputy Speaker”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, rule 6 is restated as it is in the old Rules of Procedure. So, in sub rule (1), the word “Deputy” is deleted.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Chairperson, we derive our Rules of Procedure from the Constitution, which is very clear about the creation of the posts of Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Therefore, we cannot delete the “Deputy Speaker” from our Rules of Procedure. That is for clarity.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: I think hon. Abdu Katuntu was very clear on this. He did not suggest that if we delete the word “Deputy” then the Deputy Speaker shall not preside over this. We still have room to define the term “Speaker” in the definitions to include the Deputy Speaker.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, as a new Member of Parliament, there is something I want to get clear. When the Deputy Speaker is in that Chair, we address him as “Mr Speaker.” So, I do not know whether you want us to start addressing him as “Mr Deputy Speaker” when he is chairing the House. If the definition is already in there, why not maintain the status quo?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I think let us maintain the status quo.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

Amendment 5

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we propose that we stand over this particular amendment and move on to the next.

MR RUHINDI: I appreciate if the chairperson of the committee has had some new challenges that we are not aware of. However, I thought that we already had some consultations, to the greatest extent possible, in discussing these proposed offices, which ordinarily would be in the Constitution but found their way into these proposed amendments. 

I would like to make it clear that we are really very reluctant, even if we stood over this for 100 times, to come to terms with the proposal of including them in the Rules of Procedure. I think I said this yesterday, that certainly the rationale and intention is good but we should handle one thing at a time. When the time comes for us to consider constitutional amendments, they can be handled. These offices of assistant Speaker, deputy Leader of Government Business, chief whips, censoring of the Prime Minister, Vice-President and so on in the Rules of Procedure are anachronistic certainly. So, I do not see what we are standing over.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I thought my learned colleague would have had the courtesy to whisper to me something during the consultations about his views. It is quite unlike him, but I would like to say that I agree with him entirely. Some of these offices were created by the Constitution and so we cannot create similar offices associated with them under the rules. In principle, they are very necessary but the way of creating them should be different. That is my legal interpretation.

However, and I do not know whether this is the right time for me to talk about this, I recall that at the beginning of this Parliament, I brought it to the attention of this House that we actually have the same situation in Government. I actually thought that Government would rectify this. The Office of the Prime Minister is constitutional but I hear people call themselves “deputy prime ministers” without a constitutional amendment. The Office of Leader of Government Business is also constitutional but again, I hear people call themselves “deputy leader of government business” without such amendments being effected. 

So, Madam Chairperson, I think that in matters like these, I would rather ask my learned colleague to give Government proper legal advice instead of political advice. Like now, I am conceding to exclude an office that belongs to my side with a mind that this requires a constitutional amendment to provide for it. However, when you look at it from your side, you have made the same mistakes as Government but you are not correcting it. I am surprised that when it comes to this issue, you are now pleading a different case. These double standards in legal interpretation are not correct. I beg to be put on record – (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Just a small clarification, hon. Abdu Katuntu. Madam Chairperson, I agree with the submission of the shadow Attorney-General because I have stated before, and I can state it now, that these are constitutional offices. If you want to add or subtract, you go to the Constitution. The only difference with the examples you have given on the government side is that these posts are purely administrative. You can do the same. In fact, what we were proposing on your side was that in the absence of the Leader of the Opposition, there would be no harm in the chief whip for that side sitting in for him for that day or a few more days to come. This is purely administrative. So what happens this way is purely administrative. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But now, honourable members, you are getting into another debate. Let us concentrate on our proposal. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we drop this proposal in view of the undertaking of the Attorney-General that they will bring a constitutional amendment and these issues will be addressed therein. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Since we are in the House, this is now a government assurance and we shall hold you to it. 

Amendment 6 - Rule 7

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to redraft rule 7 as follows: “In case of any doubt and for any question of procedure, interpretation or application of a rule and for deciding cases not otherwise provided for in these Rules, the Speaker shall decide, having regard to the Constitutional provisions, previous Speakers’ rulings, established practices of the House, and practices of other Commonwealth Parliaments in so far as they may be applicable to Uganda’s Parliament.” 

This gives the Speaker the power to refer to constitutional provisions, his or her previous rulings and practices of the Commonwealth in questions of procedure and interpretation of the rules. The only thing we have added is “previous Speakers’ rulings”. 

Again to understand this, you have to go to the next amendment that we propose. We propose that the Speaker may, where he or she decides, give his or her ruling in writing and this will form a precedent of the House. This is the practice in many Commonwealth jurisdictions. It is even the practice in the Kenyan Parliament. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Like now I had to rule on the issue of the Amuru problem. So, I have to sit and write it and then –

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, there are sometimes very controversial issues that will involve the interpretation of the Constitution and the law. It is advisable that you adjourn the House for a short while and write a ruling. 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think on this one, we may need more justification. When it comes to the Speaker deciding on cases which come to the Floor and then interpretation and application of rules, it becomes a bit difficult for us to understand. Let the chairman maybe give more justification and interpret it more for members.

MR RUHINDI: I do not know why this has to arise in the first place, Madam Chairperson, because everything here is in writing by way of the Hansard. Once the Speaker pronounces herself or himself, it is in writing. Why do you need unnecessary bureaucracy? 

MR SSEBUNYA: I was reading the Indian set of rules and I realised that even on the point of order, somebody has to state the rule. But here when we are debating, somebody is not required to state the rule before they speak and yet in most Commonwealth countries, members have to state the rules. 

Secondly, the Speaker in the Chair should be given time and space to make a ruling. The previous Speaker may have made a ruling but it might have been in different circumstances. The Speaker should be allowed to have control of the proceedings and circumstances on the Floor. So, I think this kind of restriction is redundant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, there is an area where I want to take issue - having regard to the constitutional provisions, previous Speakers’ rulings – because circumstances may change.

MR KATUNTU: If you institutionalise the previous Speakers’ rulings, then the Speaker is bound by them. We are now providing for the Speaker to follow a precedent, and that is quite wrong. It is his decision and he cannot be bound by a decision of a previous Speaker, especially where the rules have not provided for it. Once you say, “In case of any doubt and for any question of procedure, interpretation or application of a rule and for deciding cases not otherwise...” and then you give these parameters, then the presiding officer, in this case the Speaker, is bound by this. I think that is wrong. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we go back to the original proposal? Honourable members, the proposal is that we retain the present rule 7. I put the question that rule 7 be maintained.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Amendment 7

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Amendment 7 consequentially falls by the wayside because it is only in respect to the Speaker’s ruling.

Amendment 8 - Rule 8

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose that we introduce the sub heading “sitting arrangement in the House” and delete sub rule (4) and replace it with the following: “The Speaker shall reserve sits for Independent Members.” (Interjections) Madam Chairperson, I beg to be protected. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order Members! 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I can already see the Leader of the Opposition threatening to kick me out. I saw him moving towards the dispatch box in agitation. (Laughter)

It makes legal sense. It is only civil that we treat one another as equals. We are all elected Members of Parliament with different backgrounds. Some of you were elected on party ticket and some of us are Independent Members of Parliament, and I do not want to personalise this matter. The Independent Members of Parliament must sit somewhere. Where they sit must be determined by the Speaker, and that is all we are saying, just like where the Opposition sits is determined by the rules. 

The only thing the committee was trying to do here was this - we need to make provisions to cater for the interests of every Member of Parliament and this is good law and good practice. I beg to submit.  

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I had asked for information. I want to inform hon. Odoi that he has good intentions but the best way is just to make a simple proposal that the Speaker shall ensure that all Members of Parliament have a comfortable seat, and the Speaker has already done that. We always have AC because we are all Members of Parliament at the end of day. The Speaker, in his or her wisdom, is building a new Chamber where we shall all be comfortable. What we should ask of the Office of the Speaker is that we are all seated and comfortable.

MS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, the existing rule on Independent Members states that an Independent Member shall notify the Speaker in writing about the side of the House he or she wishes to sit. I think this is very clear; it gives Independent Members the leverage where they wish to sit. Therefore, I propose that we maintain the status quo.

MR MBAHIMBA: To the best of my knowledge, Independents are independent of each other. They are not in one union like we talk about parties. I wish to agree with hon. Ekanya by saying that it will be the duty of the Speaker of this House to put appropriate seats for the Independents, but we cannot categorise them to be a special group when they are independent of each other.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, I think I am in agreement with what the chair is proposing because 8(2) indicates the sitting arrangement in the House and it talks about the sides. As we sit here, the Opposition is threatening because we are voting in favour of the ruling party. Sometimes also the ruling party accuses us of voting for the Opposition. We want to be on our own and vote in our own capacity under our own sitting arrangement.

We are in agreement with what our chairperson is proposing, that you will gazette the sitting arrangement in the House taking care of the ruling Government, the Opposition and the Independents.

MR KATUNTU: I would like to seek clarification. I think this matter is quite sensitive but at the same time we do not have to be emotional about it. I think we are trying to find a solution to some sort of problem, which is not really a problem in my view. All of us are going to sit in this Chamber so long as we have been elected. But I am still confused, maybe my colleague this other side could assist me. 

I imagine that anybody who is not a member of the ruling party is opposition - (Interjections) - Anybody, in law, who is not a member of the ruling party is opposition. Why do I say that they are in opposition? The first thing is that they competed with you in Government. You should listen because sometimes heckling does not help to solve problems. 

Even amongst us that you call the Opposition, UPC competed with DP and FDC but they lost. Anybody who won against the ruling party is opposition but here you are Opposition DP, Opposition UPC, Opposition Independent – (Laughter). You are actually opposition, in my view; because what is the Opposition?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think this debate is not necessary. First of all, we are caught up in a Chamber that was constructed for two sides. There is nothing we can do about it now. If we get a new Chamber, we may even sit alphabetically with your name placed there. What you are suggesting cannot be done now. I have no capacity to do it.

For me, I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition. When we came, we were sitting in the Conference Hall and it was so uncomfortable because it was not Parliament. I negotiated with the Leader of the Opposition and I said, “I want us to go back to the Chamber but I need your help because I have nowhere to accommodate everybody.” In fact, I had asked for something drastic; I had said, “Can we have free sitting including NRM Members sitting everywhere?” He said, “Let me consult my shadow Cabinet”. He came back to me and said, “We shall make accommodation only for the Independents. The NRM shall remain on their side.” I said that is good enough; at least we can go back to our Chamber instead of sitting in the Conference Hall.

You are asking of me something hard at this stage. I cannot deliver. What hon. Ekanya proposed is okay. I put the question that this rule be amended as proposed by hon. Ekanya.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Amendment 9 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to introduce a new rule.

MS ABIA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It has come to my notice‘ that there are times when the Opposition wants to make a statement by not being present in the Chamber but then you find that Members from the ruling side come and sit here and yet the Leader of the Opposition has agreed that we will only be admitting Independents, our colleagues in the Opposition. In circumstances like when the President came here to address Parliament on matters of oil, we were explicitly showing him our displeasure, but the Members from the other side crossed over. Under such circumstances, where do you put us because we want also to put our case clear?

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no proposal for that amendment.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new rule to read as follows: 
“ Broadcasting
(1) 	The proceedings of the House will be available for broadcast on radio and or television during all hours of sitting except under circumstances determined otherwise by the House or as directed by the Speaker.
 
(2) 	Broadcast of the proceedings of the House shall maintain such standards and fairness as are adopted from time to time by the House.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any objections? 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I rise to support the proposal of the committee but may I also use this opportunity to note the practices in other parliaments. Many of them have their own radios and television stations for purposes of accuracy. He who pays the piper also dictates the tune. So, it is important that in this financial year, we budget for our own radio and television stations so that our people can be accurately informed about what is happening in Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, honourable members, I saw it in Zambia where they have their own broadcasting services and they transmit to every region. You could even call in from the constituency in Kaliro and say, “Why haven’t I seen hon. Kenneth Lubogo for three days?” So, it is something that I am pursuing so that we can take charge of our proceedings. 

Okay, I put the question that the rule be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Amendment 10 –Rule 9

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: In the head note, delete the word “Chair” and replace it with the word “House”. The justification is to correct a typo because the contents of the provision refer to the presence of the President in the House.
 
MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, in rule 9, the head note reads, “Presence of President in the Chair.” Their amendment should be, “Presence of President in the House.” I agree with him. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we amend rule 9 as proposed.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Amendment 12

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, this falls by the wayside.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We again expect the Attorney-General to bring amendments to the Constitution to handle this issue.

MR KATUNTU: We need the promise on record. 

MR RUHINDI: These are good proposals and when the time comes, in case the government side is not comfortable with any it can be proposed from Members of the House. Certainly, this cannot be construed as an assurance. It will not be fair on the government side, with all due respect, because I as Ruhindi, Deputy Attorney-General, cannot make an assurance of what Cabinet will decide. Let us be fair with each other. I am saying that these are good proposals that may be considered when we are debating constitutional amendments and they may come from either side of the House. 

Amendment 11 - Rule 10

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we propose in sub-rule (1) to redraft paragraph (f) as follows: “Four Members of Parliament one of whom shall come from the Opposition and none of whom shall be a minister.” The justification is to align this provision with the provisions of the Administration of Parliament Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that rule 10 be amended as proposed. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there might be an incident where the Opposition is bigger than the government side –(Interjection) – Yes, it can happen just like it is in the UK and Kenya now. So, if you try to make rules to restrict and yet these are rules that will stay for a long time - The rule you are proposing now fits in the current situation but how about tomorrow when the numbers  are different? So, what we have to do here is to put, “Members of Parliament and taking into consideration numerical strength”
  
MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am seeking guidance on the point the Leader of the Opposition is trying to raise. This is the Ninth Parliament and much as we had rules in the Eighth Parliament, we are making rules for the Ninth Parliament. So, the position he is trying to project will never occur. So, I do not know what he is trying to provide for because we are making rules subject to the current composition. I seek your guidance, Madam Chairperson.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is imported from the Administration of Parliament Act; he is just bringing the Act within the rules. That is all. We have not amended the Act yet, so we are still bound by the Act as it is.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with that but I would like to correct my sister, hon. Akol, because even the Chief Justice said the rules of Parliament are simply rules of Parliament. - (Interjections) - Please, learn to listen. That is why we are using the rules of the Eighth Parliament to make amendments because we had some problems in that Parliament. This can work even in the Twentieth Parliament.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think the situation which my friend, hon. Mafabi, is describing is possible but I do not think we can really debate now in anticipation of a situation that has not yet come. If that situation comes, then we shall amend the rules to take into account what he is describing. 

MR MUGABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like you to guide this House very clearly. In my view, we have departed from the practice of every House having to make its own rules. Right now, we are not making new rules but only amending rules of the Eighth Parliament so as to suit the Ninth Parliament. This means that every other Parliament will use these rules but could amend them to suit their situation. I have heard some Members suggesting that every Parliament will have to make its own rules, but we have departed from that practice. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the rules we are using are the rules of the first National Assembly as amended by the subsequent parliaments up to today.
 
MR  LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have heard you clearly say that the issue of the Commission is clearly spelt out in the Administration of Parliament Act. One thing I also know is that the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure are provided for in the Constitution, and I know that there is no other law in this land that is superior to the Constitution. So, should there be anything in the Administration of Parliament Act that appears to be in contravention of the provision in the Constitution then it is certainly unconstitutional. 

For that matter, I want to read Article 20(2) of the Constitution: “The rights and freedoms of the individual and groups enshrined in this Chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.” I understand that Parliament is one of the organs of Government. In the same chapter, it is stated that no person shall be discriminated against on the basis of his political opinion.

Madam Chairperson, when we provide for the Commission the way it is, it shows that we have completely locked out the individuals called “Independents” from accessing the office of Commissioner of this Parliament. I think this is something we need to change at this moment. For that reason, I would suggest that that amendment should be clearly re-written to suit the constitutional provision that the rights of individuals in this House are catered for. 

I thought of bringing it at the point of the recommendations of the committee but I believe it can still come up right now. For that reason, I suggest that it be amended to read as follows: “Four Members of Parliament one of whom shall come from the Opposition and one from the Independents and none of whom shall be a minister.” I beg to move.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, this is where the problem now is. My reading of the law is that there is nothing that stops, for example, the Leader of the Opposition from nominating an Independent member to the Commission. If an Independent was to be nominated to the Commission, he would be there as an Opposition member. You see, the shades provided for and envisaged are the ruling party and all forces, whether political or individual, against the ruling party. So, today, if hon. Nandala-Mafabi nominated any of the Independent members to be on the Commission, he would actually represent the Opposition.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chairperson, in my appreciation of law, to discriminate means to treat differently. So, the moment you allege that you are being discriminated against, it means you are being treated differently from the others. 

Now, what I want this Parliament to caution against is this: You are not going to give one position to one person and leave other groups who are seven or 13. It is not fair. That is what actually amounts to discrimination. So, if a group that is discrete – the way the MP from Karamoja stated yesterday – if there is a group of one by one totalling to 47 and you give one position to one person and then you leave a group of seven or 13 like UPC and DP, now you are discriminating against those who are the majority. I want to caution this Parliament against that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that rule 10 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is one proposal; it is importing from the Act as it is. They are just copying and pasting to the rules from the Act.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think where they have an amendment - The rest is actually importing from the Act, but when you look at page 39, (iii) says, “Insert a new sub-rule as follows…”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that? We have not reached there; we are still on 11(i).

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to redraft sub-rule (3) to read as follows: “Of the four members prescribed under sub rule (1) (f) of this rule, one shall come from the Opposition party or parties”. The justification is that this is to correct the cross reference. The specific cross reference is sub rule (1) paragraph (f) and not (1) as it is currently in our Rules of Procedure. So, it was a correction of a typing error.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is true, and in fact we want to amend that rule. If you read the one above, which we have approved, where it says, “Four Members of Parliament one of whom shall come from the Opposition”, the moment you mention “Opposition” it means that the rest are from the ruling party. So when you proceed again and say, “One shall come from the Opposition party or parties”, that is contradictory. I propose that it should be deleted because it is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think this is also being brought directly from the Act. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Act is what has been quoted above. It is Section 2, clause (2) and it says, “Four Members of Parliament one of whom shall come from the Opposition and none of whom shall be a minister.” When you go down to the nomination of the candidates, that is in (2)(b), it says: “Nomination of the candidates for election to the Commission of the four Members of Parliament referred to in sub clause (2) shall be made by the government and the Opposition sides.” So, you cannot bring “Opposition party or parties”; that does not work.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we are not proposing any fundamental amendment from what pertains now in our rules apart from that correction. My understanding is that the Opposition is composed of several parties – that is a reality we cannot run away from. I know several parties but not individuals. Now, in the Ninth Parliament, we have Opposition FDC, UPC, CP and JEEMA. We must provide – (Interruption) 

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, my understanding was that in sub rule (1), what has been brought from the Administration of Parliament Act is to the effect that, “Four Members of Parliament, one of whom shall come from the Opposition and none of whom shall be a minister.” That is a provision in the Administration of Parliament Act.

By us including “Opposition party or parties” this will tantamount to amending an Act by the rules. So, I beg that we go by the provision as stated in the Administration of Parliament Act without necessarily amending it through the rules.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, that means we will have to abandon (2), (3) and (4).

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, I would then move that when it comes to interpretation, we define “Opposition”. I was actually moving that we delete the subsequent one because we are coming with a new amendment in 134.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us leave them and go to next amendment.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new sub rule as follows: “The Member referred to in sub rule (3) shall as much as possible come from the Opposition party or parties-

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have abandoned all those. We are on number 12.

Amendment 12 - Rule 11

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Election of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. Redraft sub rule (1) as follows: “Members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with the rules set out in Appendix B.” Madam Chairperson, do you want us to handle appendix now? 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to seek clarification from the chairperson of the rules committee. With rules regarding elections, even under the Parliamentary Elections Act and Presidential Elections Act, the detailed guidelines are always issued by the authority, the head of the institution. In this case, introducing the appendix here may not be necessary. The detailed guidelines and how they apply should be left to the Speaker, who is the head of this institution, to ensure that the guidelines conform with the law. When you introduce appendices, which tie modification and introduction of guidelines and rules, it really makes elections very hard and impossible unless you have to come back to the rule.

So, I want to seek guidance from the chair. Why don’t you reconsider your position and make a provision that the guidelines for election of Members of East Africa shall be designed by the Speaker in conformity with the law in place or in the Treaty?

MR RUHINDI: I think I would agree with hon. Ekanya because I thought that our rule 11 falls short of all the fundamentals of Article 50 of the Treaty. For instance, the Treaty mentions, “…who shall represent as much as it is feasible.” That expression is missing in rule 11 and to me that is very fundamental.

Rather than actually leaving it hanging, let us reproduce Article 50 the way it is to replace rule 11 where appropriate.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, so the proposal is that we now incorporate Article 50 of the Treaty of East African Community under amendment 12 as rule 11.

MR RUHINDI: Article 50 reads as follows: “Election of Members of the Assembly. The National Assembly of each Partner State shall elect, not from among its members, nine members of the Assembly, who shall represent as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the National Assembly, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in that Partner State, in accordance with such procedure as the National Assembly of each Partner State may determine.”

But you, of course, retain the paragraph 2 of our rule 11. This should be maintained.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, with immense respect to my learned brother, I am having a problem in agreeing with him and these are the reasons: What Article 50(1) requires you is to actually establish a procedure. You cannot transplant this article and just put it in our rules when it is requiring you to prescribe a procedure. It says, “The National Assembly of each Partner State shall elect, not from among its members…in accordance with such procedure as the National Assembly of each Partner State may determine.”

So, what this particular article is requiring is for us to prescribe the procedure, which we should be doing not just transplanting this one and putting it in the rules.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My understanding is that even when we choose to transplant the provisions of the Treaty, the requirement is that the procedure has to be done. I considered that the previous subjects of litigation have had to do with the procedure that we adopted. If we shy away from making that procedure now, then we will continue to have problems. It will be vague.

So, maybe because of the complexity that has been involved in the election of EALA, I will just make a simple prayer that we stay over this matter and then maybe we think through what would constitute the procedure and really handle that appendix and it has to have the procedure.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to capture the substance of Article 50 and I had already said that the phrase, “as much as is feasible”, is missing in our rule 11. To me, that is the substance I wanted to include. However, logic dictates that in recasting rule 11 you cannot say, “each Partner State” because this is Uganda now and we are actually working on our own Rules of Procedure. So, it is a question of drafting. 

I believe that what hon. Alaso is saying is the correct way forward. Let us stand over this provision and then we come out with a recast provision. We could even go to the extent of working out Appendix B, the actual procedure of what will be done, or we defer Appendix B and we work on a recast provision for rule 11. But we first stand over it because it is going to bring a lot of confusion midway. I do not know whether we can draft it here. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, where I want to agree with the learned Attorney-General is on that particular phrase, “who shall represent as much as it is feasible.” My own interpretation of this particular article is that sometimes it may not be possible. Sometimes we may not have that arithmetic precision and it may not be possible. So, we have to find something which is feasible as much as possible. So it gives us a little bit of latitude to sort of move and adhere to the criteria as set out in this particular article as much as is possible. Sometimes we might find difficulties in having a very clear formula of political party representation, shades, gender, and other interest groups in the partner states as it states here. So, this particular provision requires us to do a lot of thinking. 

My view, Madam Chairperson, is that we might need to find a few people to come together and work out some sort of formula which will conform to the criteria set out in the Protocol. Otherwise, to debate it here we might take almost two or three days. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I had a formula which I had shared with the Attorney-General and the chair of the rules committee but I think we need to bring on board other members. We had almost captured the essence of the Treaty in the way it would be done. So, can we have hon. Namayanja, the Attorney-General, chair of the rules committee, our shadow attorney-general, paralegal, hon. Nalubega and hon. Amongi; can you sit tomorrow so that we can conclude this on Tuesday? This is really urgent. 

The Attorney-General and the chair have my formula which I had designed. Hon. Alaso, that is now eight people – (Interjections) - No, I think I will not include honourable – (Interjections) - I think our paralegals are okay. Hon. Kiiza can represent the Secretary-General. Hon. Kiiza will join the team to do the draft. Thank you, members.

Amendment 13 - Rule 12

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Amendment 13 is in respect to the Pan African Parliament. The Attorney-General had addressed this matter. Madam Chairperson, we propose to stand over this to be considered by the committee you have just appointed- they are almost interrelated- so that we report on it as well.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This one is also referred to that committee. Okay we stand over it and also refer it to that committee.

Amendment 14 - Rule 13

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rule 13 falls by the wayside, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This one will abide the amendment of the Constitution. 

Amendment 15

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Amendment 15 falls by the wayside. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That will also abide an amendment of the Constitution. 

Amendment 16- Rule 14

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, we proposed to introduce a new sub-rule (2) to read as follows: “The reason for the proposed suspension of the rule shall be distinctly stated and the rule shall be suspended for the purpose for which the motion is carried.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that different from the present position? When you are moving a motion to suspend, you justify and you suspend for that day only and for that purpose.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, the evil we are trying to cure here is frivolous suspension of rules. The reasons for the suspension must meet some minimum standards that should be determined by the Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But it is a matter which is debated here and we vote on it eventually. It is not unilateral. You must come here, move a motion, we debate it, justify it and members either speak for or against it and we vote on it. Let us maintain the status quo.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I will concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we will maintain the status quo.

Amendment 17

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Insert a new rule as follows: “Request for recall of Parliament from adjournment. 

(1)	Parliament may be recalled from adjournment by a request made in writing by at least one third of all Members of Parliament.

(2)	The request made in sub rule (1) shall be by way of petition made to the Speaker stating -
(a)	that Parliament is in recess;
(b)	the business to be considered;
(c)	that the business referred to is a matter 	of urgent public importance necessitating 		a recall of Parliament;  
(d)	prayers sought.

(3)	The Speaker shall, upon receipt of the petition in sub rule (2), summon Parliament to meet within 21 days after receipt of the petition.”

This is to provide for a request to recall as envisaged under Article 95(5) of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had no procedure for this. We are now activating Article 95 by this provision.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, although in principle I support this inclusion, I have a problem with the 21 days given to the Speaker- (Interjections) - I am sorry I was not well informed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is recall from recess and not from adjournment. I think we should correct that to “recess”.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to this particular amendment to the rule. However, I have a problem with (c) which states, “that the business referred to is a matter of urgent public importance necessitating the recall of Parliament.” We need to act within the parameters of the Constitution. This is not a requirement under the Constitution

However, what I think is necessary is, if you have evoked your rights under the Constitution under Article 95, you need to inform the Speaker what business you intend to have considered as in (b),  but this other particular (c) is now widening. It is beyond what the Constitution provides. For the Speaker to know that I am recalling this Parliament and these are the reasons and these are the prayers sought, I think is okay because even members coming to debate or coming from the recall should know the reasons as to why Parliament is being recalled from recess. However, to continue giving this other condition, which is not provided for under the Constitution, will be acting outside the parameters of Article 95.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, the challenge we have is that we are making these rules when we have a very good Speaker in the chair. Supposing we have hon. Katuntu- (Laughter) - it would be a different case. What I am saying is, we should not ostracize; we should guard ourselves against this comfort zone. For those of us who have been in earlier parliaments, it has not been like this by the way. It is not heaven on earth, the way it is seemingly now. 

So, we are saying in the event we have a very bad Speaker who does not want a recall, you may send your reason and he will say, “I have seen this and it is not an issue of public importance”. I think we should avoid that situation. So, what we are saying, struggle hard and get one third of the signatures of MPs. That one alone should be enough to pass a message to that Speaker. So, I would agree with hon. Katuntu that we delete this (3) which says, “the business referred to is a matter of urgent public importance...” Let us not tie our hands there, so that in an unlikely event we have that very bad Speaker, we may not have to look behind and start regretting. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, “the Speaker shall summon Parliament to meet within 21 days”. It is “shall”. However, when you look at the rules, they are saying, “Parliament may be recalled...” Let us say, “Parliament shall be recalled”. First of all, the moment you get the one third of the signatures, it is, “may” does not need to be here. 

Also, on prescribing what is important and not important, as members have said, something might be important but in the eyes of the Speaker, it is not important. So, we should not tie the hands of Parliament; the Constitution does not allow. In fact, this rule is not necessary because the Constitution already provides for it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am the one who requested the committee to put it in because of the debate we had - when did the petition become effective and when did time begin to run? I think you should also help the Speaker. Do not just say, “You know, I have my signatures, you recall”.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I can see where we are coming from as far as this debate is concerned on this subject. However, looking at it from the constitutional point of view, I think the shadow Attorney-General and the Leader of the Opposition have a point. I think here the benchmark is in the numbers requisitioning for the meeting and not in the subject matter. 

I think the assumption of the people who were behind the framing of this provision was that by the time you really get one third, there must be something burning somewhere. In any case, I think the formulators of this provision must have been looking at, after all, when the meeting takes place and debate takes place, everything will be sorted. To be a little bit rigid may create problems of wanting to challenge this kind of formulated provision of being unconstitutional. 

I think, if we leave (a), (b) and (d) and then maybe we consider what the Speaker has in mind when the time comes for constitutional amendment then we can do that; otherwise, it may create some constitutional hiccups.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I concede to the deletion of (c) and move that you put it to vote, and also include “shall”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Also, the “adjournment” should be replaced by “recess”.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. By all standards, I expect that this House is an orderly House, a House that does its things by plan. For members to be sent on recess and an issue comes up where they must come out of recess, the issue must critically be an issue of national interest; otherwise, how do we guard against being played around on our recess?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, this part (c) actually protects you if it is removed. It will protect the Speaker if it is removed and I have got reasons for saying this. If this thing stays, it does not protect the Speaker and our work as a House.

The most important thing we want here now - By the time over 150 people sign a petition to recall the House, Madam Chairperson, to be honest with you, there must be something. There is no way somebody can play on the intelligence of 150 Members of Parliament, not drunk, and they all sign and they come. What we do not want is the Speaker to recall Parliament and then the government side - you know these people you are seeing here are very interesting on the front bench - they will start saying, “Now the Speaker could not even give reason to see whether this thing was of public importance or not.” 

So, we are trying to untie you so that whenever we have 200 who have signed - because you are ours; tomorrow morning we do not want the Leader of Government Business to say, “Now you see, the Speaker could not even scrutinise to see whether this thing was of public importance or not so she connived with members to recall the House. She could not even think about this one”. Let us untie your hands, Madam Chairperson, because you belong to us. We sit down and choose our own Speakers by Constitution and by law. So now, we want to make sure that in case we have decided to come back and we are 200, you call us and nobody will say that you have connived with us. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new rule 17 be inserted and amended as proposed by the chairperson and members. They have deleted (c) and then they have amended “may” to read “shall” and amended “adjournment” to read “recess”. Okay, honourable members, I put the question that rule 17 as amended be part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Amendment 18 - Rule 22

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I seek your guidance. Considering that there are also gender roles to be undertaken, isn’t it okay that we take a break a bit, because we do the triple roles, and then resume another day? (Laughter) I am just inquiring.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I concede. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, can you move that the House do resume?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House partially adopted the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on amendments from number 1 to amendment number 17, with amendments. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, I move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: The committee should be tomorrow. 

8.54
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I am informed a few of us on that committee will not be available tomorrow. So, I am proposing wherever you are, please share about this matter and we meet on Monday at 10.00 a.m. in the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee Room 139.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe chair, you will come and I give you my formula in writing in the morning before you go for the meeting. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to really thank you. I think we have gone over the most critical areas. I think the rest will be smooth sailing. Unfortunately, I cannot give you a party this evening but we shall do so on another day. For now, House adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.
  
(The House rose at 8.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
