Thursday, 24 February 2005
 
Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and again I want to welcome our special visitors who are in the distinguished visitors’ gallery, who are council speakers of Mbale Municipality, Sironko Town Council, and councilors from Sironko District. They are here to have a first hand experience of how their representatives conduct business. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are most welcome.

Again in the public gallery this afternoon, the little angels we have are pupils from Good Hope Nabulagala Primary School, Mengo, together with their teachers. They are here to listen to the proceedings of Member of Parliament. You are most welcome. 

Honourable members, yesterday I informed you about the meeting with the Secretary General of the East African Community to discuss matters affecting the community with you. After some thinking it was considered that maybe it is better to hold this meeting not on Saturday but tomorrow Friday so that after that you can go to your constituencies over the weekend? This meeting will be here in the precincts of Parliament, starting at 9.00 a.m. You are most welcome to attend and contribute.  

On the Order Paper, item was an error because we told the minister to make a statement on IDP’s bursaries for fees on Tuesday, not today. Also, the minister is supposed to make another statement on Tsetse flies, from the Ministry of Health, not that of Agriculture; and Minister of Health is not here to make that statement. He will do so next week.

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE, SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As far as the statement from Minister of Education is concerned, much as you had told us to be ready by Tuesday, I am pleased to inform you that we are ready now if you can give us the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Are the copies available?  

2.24
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. While I admit that the proceedings of this august House cannot be determined by any other source of information except the Order Paper, I am seeking guidance from the Leader of Government Business or the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs that in today’s Monitor newspaper the Government published information to the effect that there is a new roadmap. This information is officially yet to come to us but whatever appears in the papers cannot be ignored. At the same time I admit that papers do not determine our Order Paper, the two are separate but interdependent. Could the minister tell us, is there substance to what we see in the papers; has he changed programme?

THE SPEAKER: No, since in your opening remarks you said that it is here that we talk about business of the House, asking her to talk about business of the House is – I do not know how she can handle it. I speak for the House about how to conduct the business from here, not from outside. But if she can give advice, they are free to advise.

2.26
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, following the concern that hon. Aggrey Awori has expressed, the people we represent in this House from time to time have been demanding that a roadmap be worked out so that we know what is to follow. Now that a framework of the roadmap has been released, the people I represent demand that we sanction that roadmap as Parliament before it becomes an activity.

THE SPEAKER: But you are not on the same wavelength with hon. Aggrey Awori. Hon. Awori was disputing the roadmap, that a roadmap for Parliament cannot come from outside, this is what he was saying but you are saying we should confirm it. 

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Aggrey Awori and this august House that what appeared in the press was for the public; it was not for Parliament. Hon. Aggrey Awori as a Member of the Business Committee of Parliament knows very well that the business of Parliament is determined by Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we do not want to go very far on this issue. Parliament will determine the roadmap from the date the Bill was presented to Parliament and it is the main thing we have to determine. The roadmap will be determined by Parliament but of course the Executive or other people can advise us or make proposals as to what they think should be the roadmap. In fact I said it when the Bill was read for the first time. Now that we have the Bill, we shall be able to gauge the magnitude of the work and what is involved in delivering the desired transition. So the roadmap will come. We shall work it out together with them but these are proposals, which we shall consider and see how best to adjust.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Minister of Parliamentary Affairs to come here and mislead us that this material is meant for the public and Parliament can wait for the correct one? Whom is she misleading, the public or Parliament; is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I have said, we need not quarrel over this. There was a roadmap, which was given to us by the Executive last year. We said we are going to consider it but now that we have the material, that is the Bill itself, in due course the committee of this House will agree as to how to move on from today.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with due respect to what you have said, I think to be orderly the Minister in charge of Parliamentary Affairs should have withdrawn the statement because you cannot have two parallel programmes on the roadmap one for the people, and one for Parliament. We represent the people and we do not anticipate any alternative to what is deemed to be coming here. So, may I request the honorable minister to withdraw that statement? It is unconstitutional, irresponsible and uncalled for.

THE SPEAKER: No, he was making it in good faith. But what you should care about is the roadmap, which we are going to determine ourselves.  

2.31
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of importance about the outcry of our citizens in Uganda who are involved in trade. What is happening now – and I would like also the Executive to take it seriously - when our head of state confirmed the tariff rates we are going to use, there was a total ban put on sugar and rice. And as Parliament we have never ratified and have never made any input into it. What is happening now is that the rates, which are being used for instance on sugar are for a 100 percent ban. When you go to rice, it also has a 100 percent ban. So you find that it is a problem and there is no information on that. 

I would like the Executive, our colleagues who participated, to at least inform the general public of what is happening because currently people are proposing a strike because of the information, which is not passed on to the public. Most of the importers have now completely changed the importation programme to other countries outside East Africa.

THE SPEAKER: I remember I think it was the hon. Member for Lubaga South who raised the matter affecting mivumba, and it is connected to this matter. Do you not think when a statement is made on the other one, we shall be able to explore other items that are affected by this? We shall be able to deal with this.

2.33
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mine is about the Jinja-Bugiri Road. Yesterday the Minister of Works was supposed to have given us a statement about the same, but he did not. Many people are traveling and when the rains come, I think the work has been left undone and the people who use that route are at risk. So, can I get information from the Leader of Government Business when we are likely to have an answer because that route is very dangerous?

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed that question was raised yesterday and the minister undertook to go and find out the circumstances surrounding the matter. As I speak now the Leader of Government Business has instructed the Minister of Works to come with a statement on Tuesday next week. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL GUIDELINES

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Rukutana Mwesigwa): Mr Speaker, section 97 of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 empowers the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority to issue guidelines for the effective implementation of the law on procurement and disposal of public assets from time to time. Those guidelines, under the same law, have to be laid before Parliament. 

Pursuant to the powers conferred upon the Authority by that law, six sets of guidelines have been prepared and these are:

1. The procurement and disposal guideline for schools, guideline No. 1 of 2004.

2. A format for standard notices, which is guideline No. 2 of 2004.

3. Monthly reports on procurement and disposal guidelines, which is guideline No. 3 of 2004. 

4. Procedure for use of the Authority’s website by procuring and disposing entities, which is guideline No. 4 of 2004.

5. Appointment of members of the Contracts Committees, which is guideline No. 5 of 2004.

6. Third party procurement or disposal providers, which is guideline No. 6 of 2004. 

I now beg to lay the six guidelines on the Table as is required by law. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. These guidelines will be examined by the appropriate committee for comments and a report to us.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE, SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some time back the hon. Member of Parliament for Oyam South, hon. Ben Wacha, raised a very pertinent question concerning the school fees of the students whose parents are staying in the IDP camps. He went to the extent of quoting a letter from the Permanent Secretary where he was wondering if government had diverted from its obligation of paying Shs 47,000 per student per term, to Shs 7,700 per student per term. He also wondered if government was shifting its goal posts.  

Mr Speaker and honorable members, close to the end of 2003/2004, Cabinet recommended that government’s contribution towards school fees for students whose parents live in IDP camps be set at Shs 59,000 per student per term. This figure was arrived at after thorough comparisons with amounts currently being paid at different post-primary institutions in these areas. 

A supplementary budget request for Shs 3.02 billion for this purpose was made to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to cater for fees for the second term of 2004. Unfortunately, only Shs 1.3 billion was released for the 23,380 students who had been estimated to be studying in government-aided secondary schools in this area.

Mr Speaker, with the amount, which was provided, compared to the estimated number of students then, a figure of Shs 47,077 per student per term was arrived at as government’s contribution, which is still committed to the same. 

A verification exercise was conducted during the handover ceremonies of the first batch of fees to the 23,380 students. Some members of this august House participated in the activity and it was established that the numbers in schools were instead 39,256 students extending secondary schools  whose parents lived in IDP camps. 

At the rate of Shs 47,077 per student per term, this would translate into Shs 5.544 billion per academic year for three terms. 

This financial year 2004/2005, only Shs 1.7 billion was provided, leaving a short fall of Shs 3.844 billion. A request for a supplementary provision for this item was made on 11 November 2004. There is an attached letter from the Permanent Secretary, we were waiting for a response to that effect up to now. 

While my ministry would have desired to ensure that all fees for students in IDP camps is remitted at the beginning of every term, the Ministry of Education and Sports must at the same time operate within the existing financial guidelines. 

The honourable members will appreciate that ministries operate within cash limit ceilings, which are given to the ministries quarterly according to the monthly projection. It is against this projection that monthly releases are made. 

However, most importantly the ministry is an integrated financial management system, which only provides for one-twelfth of the budget on every item to be released every month. It is an already computerised system. 

A request was made to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, to accelerate the release of funds and to release funds already approved in lump sum at the beginning of a term. This was not possible because of the cash flow problems at the Treasury. 

Putting into consideration the strain experienced by schools in their operations, my ministry process part payments to schools every month when releases are made. For example, schools receive advance payments because of that arrangement of the Ministry of Finance, of Shs 7,750 per student per school in October 2004, totaling to Shs 281,890,750 in another part payment. Another Shs 7,700 was also processed in November 2004, amounting to Shs 297,610,299. Another payment of Shs 7,500 per student is also being processed.  

What happened is that when the honourable member quoted the letter from the Permanent Secretary to one of the schools, which is attached in the papers we have given you, he was only interested in the figure of Shs 7,770 per student. He did not go further to ask for the covering letter, which would have given him the details that this is just an advance on the quarterly payments. The head teachers are aware that all these are payments as per our communication to them, attached letters are given to you. 

Allow me to submit, therefore, that the Government’s policy on the amounts to be contributed by government, has not changed as purported. 

Government has not abdicated its responsibility to contribute towards fees for the students whose parents live in IDP camps as this is evidenced by regular releases to schools as funds come in from the Treasury. 

Head teachers have been strongly advised that they should never send away students because of fees as these monies will nevertheless come. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for listening.

2.43
MS JALIA BINTU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister because the information he is giving is in regard to the parents who are living in IDP camps. I want to know, when will the Government start paying school fees for the children who have taken refuge in the neighbouring districts like Masindi?  

The second question, when will the Government start paying for all the children in secondary schools? Mr Speaker, you are aware that in the whole of Uganda most parents are poor and they cannot afford secondary education fees, and with UPE we have so many children who are right now in the villages. When does the Government intend to implement the free secondary education programme? Thank you. 

2.44
MR ARAALI BASALIZA (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this statement. I have a few questions. 

The minister says that government is committed to No. 3 and that the amount, which was provided compared to the estimated number of students, is a figure of Shs 47,000 per student per term, which was arrived at as the government’s contribution. But when you look simply at how much they provided last year, it gives us a total of Shs 21,950, leaving a difference of about Shs 26,000 or Shs 25,000. The question I am asking is: how does government intend to catch up with these discrepancies? You promise to give so much and you do not give it and you are telling the headmasters not to send away the children? How are they going to manage the schools minus this money?

And this is not only in these schools, but it is also the same case in primary schools, in teachers’ colleges and everywhere else. Yet government is telling us that the Uganda Revenue Authority is expecting money and projections are being made but the money that is remitted to the schools for this purpose is really not that amount. Could we get assurance as to whether this balance will really be paid to these other institutions? Thank you.

2.46
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the report or statement. My first appeal goes to government and we policy makers about this question of the MTF ceiling and these beautiful words like “macro-economic stability”. You can see the ministry is saying whereas they are willing to pay the fees at the beginning of a term to enable the schools meet their obligations, the existing financial guidelines and regulations cannot permit them to do so. 

So, the ball is in our court as policy makers in this country that we really go back to the drawing board, especially at budget time, and we look at our interests because at times we give ourselves and the technical people a tall order, which at times distorts what we want achieve. To me education is really an investment and Uganda is not doing well like in the export scenario - I mean we do not have lot to export. But if we develop our human resource, get a lot of people to go in the service sector, get a lot of people who can even compete outside the country, this is where our salvation lies. 

An area like education - our children are in IDP camps, you know what went wrong and we are missing a generation because of some of these policies. I think we had better go to the drawing board and do something about it.

The other one is about general government policy on fees. As I have said, the issue of the North is unique and unfortunate. We know how it came about but let us look at the whole country. I come from Rakai, Mr Speaker, and you know what went wrong in Rakai in 1982, almost each family saw it. We have a lot of orphans who lost both parents. We have child-led households. These are no better than those children in IDP camps. What do we do for them? They are there: young girls and boys who are not going to school and these are the people we are looking at for the future of this country!  

As a government we need to intervene and look at the fees structure paid by some of these institutions where we still hold authority, like the post primary, secondary schools and institutions. UPE brought on board so many children who are going to school but it pains that after PLE only a few can continue. Reason? We cannot pay. Yet for example government pays teachers’ salaries, some capitation grants, and laboratory equipment. This is something that the Government should use to bargain with some of the schools and board management. 

What is really the relevant and affordable fees a parent should pay? You find that in some schools over and above fees there is a long list of school requirements. Actually some schools collect goods; materials, cement, iron sheets, soap, name it. I think they open up shops daily. It is really terrible; you cannot believe it! We have so many children who are languishing around, they surround us. When you are moving around a child bumps into you, and she wants fees. So it is an area that the ministry could do something about. 

Before we even talk about universal secondary education, it is sincerely within the ministry’s mandate to come in and control, to bargain with the board on how to bring this situation under control. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, there is a big problem. We are sitting on a time bomb. We have children for whom time is lost; they are not going to school and yet we are looking at them as citizens of this country. I thank you.

2.50
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have one problem. The hon. Minister of Education says that the Government has not abandoned the policy of helping our children in the displaced camps. An agreement was reached that every student should get Shs 47,077 yet currently they are paying Shs 7,750 per student and the Government has directed that the students should continue being in schools irrespective of whether they have been given money. I think that the minister is being unfair to us to say that government has not deviated from the policy that had been arrived at.

My worry is, Mr Speaker, we have information in our Committee of Budget that we have hit the target in terms of revenue collection, and in some areas we have actually gone beyond the targeted amount of money to be collected. If we are on target, we have been collecting revenue, why is it that in nearly every ministry every month they release less than was allocated by this Parliament? 

This means that really funds should be available to be extended to these children in the IDP camps. This money is being diverted to areas, which we do not know. However, we would like to know from the Minister of Finance, if we are on target and we have only completed a few months, surely the IDPs should be getting the money that was intended for sending to the schools. So, I would like the Minister for Finance to tell us why actually this is happening. 

His statement is explaining that the funds being released are less. We would like the Minister of Finance to come out clearly to tell us whether there has been shortage of funds particularly as far as revenue collection is concerned, or if some money has been diverted to other areas leaving our children to suffer, to do without meals, without books, and without pens. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Jack Sabiiti for asking that question. It is true the Government came up with a policy to assist all school going children whose parents were in IDP camps. But from the time of the inception of that policy that item was not budgeted for. Indeed the letter, which I see circulated, dated 11 November 2004, from the Ministry of Education and Sports, requests for a figure of Shs 3.844 billion as supplementary provision. That means that this amount of money was not envisaged in the last financial year or even in the medium-term expenditure framework. 

You know our budget depends on a lined and pre-determined framework, which we call the medium-term expenditure framework. So, by the time the Government put in place this policy, that money was not budgeted for and that is why all the time we keep on providing for it by way of supplementary provision.

It is true that we are still committed to this policy. It is true that notwithstanding our cash flow problems, we are looking here and there to see how we can provide for the school fees, and that is why we are telling the head teachers not to send away the students because we are looking at all possible means to get the money and clear the fees.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable minister. You are telling us that you are looking for money here and there to make up for this deficit. Can you confirm to the august House that the other day you were able to move Shs 7 billion to honour presidential election pledges? Since he promised to win an election, now you are paying out Shs 7 billion in pledges for elections and yet when kids want the money, it is not there.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I am not aware of the provision of Shs 7 billion to honour presidential pledges. But what I am aware of is that so many ministries and so many departments, including State House, have applied for supplementary funding. We are in the process of compiling and presenting a list for supplementary requests, which will be submitted to Parliament. And that is not exclusive to State House. So many other ministries and other government departments have asked for supplementary funding but as for Shs 7 billion to clear the alleged presidential pledges, maybe hon. Aggrey Awori would inform me best of the source of his information. 

MR AWORI: Ministry of Finance.

2.58
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The answer to the hon. Minister of Education to this important matter, answer No. 13, parts 1, 2 and 3 clearly indicate that in a very silent manner the policy has been changed. The policy has been changed not to allow these students to go to school anymore. I was in my constituency for a week in preparation for the Barlonyo memorial service and I left for Kampala yesterday. All the schools in Lira were the IDP students were can close anytime this week. Even some students have been sent away who cannot meet this Shs 7,000. They have asked the students to contribute. Without contributing they will not enter the classroom and as I speak now all these students are at home. 

I was solving a problem of one student who hails from Pader District who was sent home and was arrested by military men suspecting him to be a rebel collaborator. He was beaten up and taken to the barracks. When I left he was still in the barracks. I reported to the brigade commander of Lira. So you can see some of the problems these students are facing. Mr Speaker, I think we need to request the Minister of Education to go to these schools immediately before he concludes that the Shs 7,000, which they are going to remit will help the situation. Many of these head teachers were getting food on credit and they failed to pay because of the delay. Currently the businessmen have refused to give them beans and posho and, therefore, the school cannot operate. 

There is one particular school in Mvara  Stock Farm IDP camp, which has over 300 IDP students and they are not getting any assistance. The authority has put the school fees at Shs 5,000 but still the students cannot meet it. So, my request to the honourable minister is that this matter should not be discussed only here. Please, move to the ground and find out the truth. In fact the policy has changed. If you decide not to meet the real fees for the IDP students and you change it to Shs 47,700 and then again to Shs 7,000, is that not a change? The change to us is that the students of these IDP parents should not go to school and they are not going to school anymore, and this is a big problem in Lira and Apac as I witness it. 

There are five students, you will go and find, who passed in Grade I in last year’s O’ Level examinations but they are now at home because they have means of going to school. Even many who passed the PLE examinations in Grades I and II are at home. They cannot go to any school because their parents cannot afford the school fees. There has been an outcry in almost every sub-county, every camp that the Government should come in and help the situation. So, may I ask you honorable minister, do you not think this is a change of policy? Do you still stand by it when obviously you have changed the policy not to allow our students to go to school? Can you act, please? Thank you. 

3.03
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Education for this paper. But this report is also very sad because we are talking about the human capital in this country, which is about the most important aspect of capital we have in the nation. We are talking about a policy where we do not even know whether it is really a policy and we do not know whether there has been a change to it. I must say that in this submission I do not see any value addition from the time this subject was presented in this Parliament a few weeks ago.

I do not see any value addition because even last time we talked about something happening in the Ministry of Finance and even today we are being told something is happening in the Ministry of Finance, which is not yet concluded. Then I ask myself: really if it is a policy, if we have been living with the IDP situation in this country, if government is committed to seeing that the children from IDP camps are catered for then how come nothing has been planned up to now? It is sad because for Shs 47,700, or whatever is needed, not to be provided for a child who will form human capital in this country, it is really sad.  We know funds are going to other areas, which are not as much of a priority as this aspect of human capital in this country. 

Mr Speaker, I was in Kaberamaido District up to Monday and schools are in total confusion. The parents do not know whether they should pay fees and even the few who may be able to scrap up a few coins here and there and maybe find Shs 5,000, do not know whether they should pay. The teachers have ran away from most of the schools because there is no money to pay them; and because they cannot teach children who are absent most of the time. It is total confusion in schools. The district administration is trying to keep the schools together but without fees going in, they do not know whether to – it is total confusion.  

If government is committed, like it says in the last paragraph that government has not abdicated its responsibility, then let us see something done because schools have started. And especially for the girl child, you cannot start paying when they have already fallen out and they are already married or whatever. We have to pay the fees when it is due.

Mr Speaker, in some of the sub-counties there are no government-aided schools. We request that some of these children who are in those schools, which are not government-aided, should also be catered for because most of these schools in different sub-counties are day schools and the distances travelled to school are long. Therefore it would be nice to also cater for those children who are in sub-counties, which do not have government-aided schools. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.07
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is long since the honorable minister left the backbench and he may have forgotten me. I just want to remind him that I am Martin Wandera  -(Laughter)- Member of Parliament for Workers. 

The hon. Minister of Education stated that the Minister of Finance has not been releasing adequate funds, but he did not tell us why the Ministry was doing so yet we know that Uganda Revenue Authority has been collecting adequate resources. Hon. Ekanya informed us authoritatively a few weeks ago that the Uganda Revenue Authority had even gone beyond its estimated targets for the year.

Secondly, I would like to ask the minister how he expects the schools to continue running without government sending them money? The hon. Minister of Finance said that government had not abdicated from its responsibility but I find it difficult to believe that because you promised to give Shs 59,000 and you are not giving it, without giving that then schools cannot run. So, have you not abdicated your responsibility as government? Honourable minister, can you inform me?

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I stated earlier –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to be responding now –(Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: No, there is an issue – I was in a middle of clarification and then I was interrupted. Maybe if I explain this then honourable members will understand the position better. 

As I stated earlier, by the time government came up with this policy –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister will answer and I know the Chairperson of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee wanted to give the clear information about what we had agreed with the President when the committee met him in Soroti. The minister is here on the Floor deceiving us that this thing had not been considered, and he does not want to take the information from the Chairperson of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee where the commitment about these fees was made. So, should we allow the minister to continue misleading the House? This was before the Budget. Should we allow him to continue misleading us and we keep sitting here listening to that?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, when the minister is not given sufficient time to explain in full and his explanation is only partial, it will look as if it is misleading. I was here explaining, I was interrupted and I sat down; I was interrupted by hon. Aggrey Awori.

Anyway, as I was explaining, by the time the policy came into operation, that item was not captured in the MTEF. Nevertheless, we managed in financial year 2004/2005, to programme Shs 1,700,000,000 for that item. That is all we could afford. The Ministry of Finance can only provide money it generates, so all we could programme was Shs 1.7 billion. That amount was fully disbursed –(Interjection)- can I first finish? As for the balance, we left it to the coming financial year because there are so many other competing priorities. 

It is true the provision of school fees to IDP students is a big priority, but of course it is not the only government priority. There are so many other priorities that cannot wait and we can only provide resources that we generate. In the circumstances what we had to do was to provide what we could afford last financial year. I know we are trying to put in place some other provision by way of supplementary, and I know that we are trying to see how much we can programme for the coming financial year. What I can assure you of is that we still are committed to the policy and the fees will be paid. As to how and when, and how regularly, that can only be dictated by the revenues we generate.

Honourable members, we can shout here day in day out, but if we do not have the money –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, is the hon. Minister of Finance in order to impute that we are here shouting, when we are trying to generate a remedy for our suffering children? Moreover he is doing so in an non- Parliamentary and uncouth language, Mr Speaker, is he in order to use such language?

THE SPEAKER: In this House we debate, we do not shout.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I withdraw the word “shout”. We can debate here day in day out, but if the resources are not generated, then we would not do anything –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, he is not giving you the Floor, please, let him finish.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I am calling upon honourable members to be lenient. As I told you, we are compiling a list of supplementary provisions. I know that fees for IDP students is one of the items. When the supplementary goes through, the concerns of honourable members will be addressed as much as possible. I beg members to be patient. I undertake that we are still going ahead with a policy; we have not diverted from it and we shall, as far as resources allow, provide school fees for students in IDP camps. I thank you, honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how soon do you expect to present the supplementary requests?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the supplementary list was considered by Cabinet yesterday; it was not fully determined. We are going back next Wednesday and of course immediately after Cabinet approves it we shall bring it to this august House for your approval.

THE SPEAKER: Should we say about two weeks’ time from now?

MR RUKUTANA: Three weeks’ time, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

3.16
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have thanked the Ministry of Education for having brought this report in the shortest time possible. And I think members agree with me that the recent change in the Ministry of Education is bearing some fruits because papers are reaching the House immediately unlike in the past when it would take ages for papers to come to the House. (Applause)

This issue, which is being discussed, I remember very well I raised it at the Budget discussion in April last year. We were discussing with the Minister of Education and I stood up and said, “This funding of students in the IDP camps is not in the Budget, which we are discussing now. Where are you going to get this money from?” I did not get the answer at that time and this is the problem we are being faced with now. 

Mr Speaker, this figure of 59,000 must have been arrived at after a close discussion. They must have arrived at this figure after presenting on the table the details for which this money was going to cover, and I think the Minister of Finance who is in this House must have been at that Cabinet meeting which approved this figure. Wasn’t it possible for him to advise Cabinet that it was not in order to approve this money because it was not being reflected in the Budget? Where do we find the mistakes, where is the problem, because once the public has known that Cabinet has approved this, then they expect it to start flowing.  

Mr Speaker, this follows the problem of salary increment for primary teachers. It is a problem of our constituencies. The increase was announced a week before approving the Budget in this House and our constituencies are shaky. They said we refused to release the money which His Excellency the President had offered them. I would like the Minister of Finance to explain to this House where the problem is. Does the President promise money without consulting the ministry? Are things passed in Cabinet without crosschecking the source of funds? And if I can echo the statement raised by one Member, we are told Uganda Revenue Authority is raising more than the targeted figure, what is happening to this excess money? We assume that the other money raised is already in the Budget, but excess money should be used to solve some of these problems.   

Finally, Mr Speaker, these figures are coming out –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: The information I want to give you regards the question where the money is going. You could as well know that a lot of money has been withdrawn contrary to the laws of this country.  For example Shs 20 billion was released from the Consolidated Fund and Parliament never passed it. There was another money given to Tri-Star, which was released without Parliament approval, and this is money that should have been extended to the teachers and the students who are now suffering.

MR TIBARIMBASA: I do not believe that information unless you present papers on the Table (Applause)

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to caution that we need to be careful about some of these alarming statements from ministries at this time when we are about to go for elections. Elections are on the doorsteps; we have to be very careful about the messages we are sending back to our people in the constituencies. We must bear it in mind that these people who are supposed to access this money from the Internally Displaced Camps certainly are not happy, and if this money was approved by Cabinet to purchase food for the students when at school, to purchase books, to pay for say; rehabilitation of buildings or these activities are not attended to, something must be done. We still need to come back to the 8th Parliament, thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, we have spent an hour on this statement and we have been told that in three weeks time this matter is coming up for a supplementary. Don’t you think it is time we heard from the Minister?

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much Mr Speaker and honourable members. Indeed your contributions have been very good and I can see the concern you are expressing. I want to tell you that Government is committed to addressing all these problems and the good will is there.  

Mr Speaker, let me start with the last question of hon. Tibarimbasa. In fact he was giving a good recommendation and the second part of it is addressed to the Minister of Finance to explain if the President makes pledges without consulting them I am not in that ministry. I think the minister of Finance will answer that one.

Mr Speaker, another question was raised by hon. Martin Wandera who was wondering whether if I still remember him as the workers Member of Parliament. Indeed I want to tell him that I even remember his third name of Odwori, and I also want to remind him that I am his chairperson for the Workers Members of Parliament caucus. He asked that why is it that the Ministry of Finance has not been releasing enough funds, and why didn’t the minister tell us? I am speaking on behalf of Ministry of Education and Sports and I think that one will be addressed to the Ministry of Finance. “Why is it that you do not tell them when you are not going to release? How do you expect the schools to run without sending in enough money?” 

I do share the concern of hon. Martin Wandera. In fact, all his questions are rotating on this, but I think we need to remember that much as we are three independent arms of Government, we work together. We know what is happening to the Executive, we know what is happening to the Judiciary and we also know what is taking place in this House. We should not look as if we do not know what is taking place. We are being guided by the revenue generated in this country and we are operating within the existing financial guidelines. As far as my ministry is concerned, we operate within the cash limits ceilings. That is the brief answer I can give, and this is what all of us know. 

So, as I said, the will and the commitment are there. That is why Government goes ahead and releases that little amount, which is indeed little. Otherwise, if it were not having the will even this little amount would not have come. 

I want to remind Members of two points that I made, maybe let me first make these two points so that you can see the concept behind. I said that Members would appreciate that ministries operate within cash limit ceilings, which is given to the ministries quarterly, according to the monthly projections. I further said that however, most importantly the ministries operate on an integrated financial management system where, instead of releasing the money quarterly, it is released every month. 

If our calculations were based on 47 per term, and this is a situation whereby they are going to release per student per month, instead of waiting to accumulate for the term, because the students have to survive, what the Ministry does is to send that little money. That is why you come up with a figure. It sounds very little when you talk about Shs 7,700, but if you look at the batches, which are being released, we are talking in terms Shs 281m, Shs 297m, but when they divide it into number of students, that is why it looks like that. This is done to sustain them so that they can survive as they wait for another release. 

You know, these ministries work independently. There is a way we operate; we cannot direct the Ministry of Finance that “Tomorrow I want money”, we apply for it. That is why we reported here that ever since the Permanent Secretary wrote that letter, we are still waiting for an answer from the Ministry of Finance.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. When you say that even Shs 7,000 the ministry is releasing is goodwill, I would have expected the ministry to take on its responsibility. Out of Shs 47,000 you release only Shs 7,000 in the first term, and another Shs 7,000 in the second and the same amount in the third term, and withhold Shs 40,000 every term and you say that is goodwill of the ministry and government! It is mandated to release the whole amount of money. As my colleagues had said, where is the money going if the revenue is coming in? 

So, I would like the honourable minister to give more clarification on whether you are going to survive on goodwill of handouts from the Ministry of Finance?

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr minister, most of the students you are talking about come from the poorest part of this country. The camps are actually destitute places, many of them are getting burnt, you must have been reading; and so I am asking whether among the students, who are being considered, those who go to private schools are included?  

Secondly, some of the students who go to private secondary schools are they part of the numbers you are talking about? If not, what are they expected to do?  

Thirdly, some of these students are able to struggle hard and go beyond Secondary Schools, some of them go to universities and so on. What programme do you have in place for them to be able to continue with education after their secondary?

Lastly, I wish to ask the Minister of Finance, he talked about government priorities. I am aware that Government is paying Shs 2.5 billion to a former Vice President of this country. Now, we are talking about 40,000 students, who require less than Uganda Shs 6 billion.  To him and to this nation, which is the first priority of the two to which Government should commit money first?

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister to clarify to us. In view of the glaring fact that the Government envelope is not capable of actually meeting all these obligations; and in view of the fact that these students in secondary schools must get education by hook or crook, is it possible for the Government to start thinking seriously about actually money being lent by banks, to these students against promissory notes for what they will pay after they have got their education? The population of these kinds of students is very big, not only in disturbed areas –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the subject before us is children in IDP camps, we are not talking about students from Masaka or wherever. We are talking about students who are in a given situation. When you talk about a loan, how can children in IDP camps secure a loan from a Commercial Bank? What security do they have to secure such a loan? I think for this purpose, let us restrict ourselves to these children in IDP camps rather talking about the general situation in the country.  

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I have got a lot of questions to answer. Since honourable Byaruhanga is my close friend, we can clarify to him more than that even after here.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: I want you to explain to us what constitutes your policy. Mr Speaker, I just want the Minister of Education and the Minister of Finance to guide this House. What, in your view, constitutes handling a policy, because we have policy formulation, policy implementation and policy monitoring and evaluation. If you have not provided funds to implement a policy, how do you tell this House that you are committed to it? Is it still a policy or it isn’t a policy? That is what we want to know; if you cannot provide funds to implement it, is it still among your policies?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Before I answer hon. Eng. Wambuzi Gagawala, I think Government is not ready to look for money by hook or crook as you are suggesting, it will use the proper channels.  

Secondly, I want to respond to the clarification of hon. Banyenzaki. It is fortunate that before I came to the Floor I circulated this statement and it clear. Hon. Banyenzaki is taking it that every term the Government is contributing as you are suggesting 7,750, but you have the statement in your hand. I am talking about releases of about Shs 281 million in October and another release of Shs 297 million in November; that is not a term. At least you can see the process is going on, it is not waiting for a complete term. So, hon. Banyenzaki, I think for that one, read the whole document; you will get it clearly.

Mr Speaker, going back to the questions; the first question was, ‘When will Government start paying for students seeking refugee link in Masindi – (Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I very much want to answer all these questions, and if I continue allowing more clarification I may not finish.  

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, maybe the honourable minister was taking a lot of notes and he did not get my questions correctly. First, I asked whether students who are affected, whose parents are in camps and who go to private schools, are covered in the scheme we are talking about. Then I asked whether those students from the camps who might be able to go to Post-Secondary School, who may qualify to go to Makerere University, are covered in a scheme to take care of them. 

As for the Minister of Finance, I am sure he is going to answer me, which is the higher priority, the 40,000 students who should be given about Shs 6 million or the Shs 2.5 billion, which is to go to one person, our former Vice President?  

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much honourable Member, in fact I was coming to that. The scheme is intended to cover only government-aided secondary schools and institutions; we are not talking about private schools at the moment. When revenue permits, may be the government will come up with that provision also, but we are talking about government-aided schools.

Mr Speaker, the first question from my colleague was, when will government start paying for students seeking refuge like those in Masindi? Mr Speaker, I want to remind the honourable members that it was around June 2003/2004 financial year, when Cabinet sat down and found that there was need to give assistance to those students whose parents are in IDP camps. Similarly, the way you have raised that question; the government is listening, if there is need to assist those people in Masindi, who have got the same problems, it could also be in the calculation. I am yet to consult my colleagues to see what is being put in the pipeline for that. I cannot give a concrete answer at the moment.

The second question was, “When does Government intend to implement the free education system in schools?” I do not know what that question means, either free from primary to University, but as far as primary is concerned there is a provision for UPE and the honourable member is aware of that. As far as secondary education is concerned we have now moved to the IDP camps. So, for the all the areas concerned, I think the programme will also come in future provided the revenue collection permits.

The third question was; how does the government intend to catch up with these discrepancies. I think the hon. minister of finance has answered that.  

There was a question from hon. Sabiiti. He was wondering whether the ministry is serious when it says that government has not abandoned the policy and yet an agreement was reached? The answer is brief, and it is yes, the government is sincere and serious. That is why it has continued dispersing those releases I have read to you. 

And honourable members, I want to remind you of one thing in fact it came as you had just finished shooting your questions. I happened to be a best man of one of my colleagues a year ago. He came up with a budget of Shs 30 million. I asked him, why do you want a budget of Shs 30 million, and he said he knew of a previous wedding where somebody had an escort of six Benzes. He was trying to tell me what happened in Munyonyo. I said, yes the will is there, but what do you have? He said, “I have got about two million”. I said, no, let us operate within the amount you have. Indeed, I can see the will from the government is there, but we have to operate within the revenue collected, because it is not only one ministry, even other ministries have got standing demands that need to be fulfilled. 

As we were contributing one member raised a question that the teachers have abandoned schools simply because they are not being paid. Oh, we have also to look at the teachers and see that they are also being paid. As we solve the issue of the teachers, the health workers will also be demanding. So you can see, it is not as simple as we are talking.

An honourable member raised a query on my number 13.1.2.3 saying it indicates that the policy has been changed in order not to allow the students access to education. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I do not agree with the statement that it intends to deny the students from the Northern and eastern areas, those who are in IDP camps, access to education. The policy is in place; it is only that the money being released and collected is not enough. But at least the operation can show you that there is something being sent to keep the momentum.

Mr Speaker, the rest of the questions have been answered by the minister of finance because they were all circling around finance and I think he has ably answered them. May be for further questions, those will be answered. I thank you very much.  (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister. I think the impact of the debate is that when the government is considering supplementaries it should seriously address the issue of children in the camps. But since the matter will come here, I think we will give a hand to ensure that the supplementaries are passed so that the problem -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, much as we have got this statement from the hon Minister of Education, I am not satisfied. Is there any other chance we are going to get a detailed report on this, because I have heard contradicting statements from the ministry of finance and from the minister who was presenting the statement to us, and it has left me wondering about the sustainability the review of this policy whether we have to look at it and even assist. I need your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is up to our Committee on Social Services to take this up as a special case, examine it, discuss it with the people concerned both from the Ministries of Finance and Education and then come up with some concrete proposals for us to consider.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA BROADCASTING CORPORATION BILL, 2004

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill, 2004 be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, the objective of this Bill is to create Uganda Broadcasting Corporation as a wholly state-owned statutory corporation to take over and manage efficiently and effectively the public broadcasting services currently being provided by both Radio Uganda and Uganda Television.  

Mr Speaker, if the honourable members do approve the establishment of Broadcasting Corporation, the following are the objectives that the corporation will aim at.

1. To develop the broadcasting bodies into a public national broadcasting centre of excellency, capable of providing electronic media and consultancy services that educate and guide the public. 

2. To achieve and sustain comprehensive national radio and television coverage, and 
3.	To achieve and sustain a common career status.

Over the years, Mr Speaker, we have seen a regrettable situation where both Radio Uganda and Uganda Television have been getting less and less financial support. This has meant that the equipment we use today are obsolete and many of our staff have not been treated in a way that they richly deserve, and that means that their morale has over the years declined.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the revenue that both Uganda television and radio Uganda were generating over the years was actually going to the Consolidated Fund instead of being ploughed back to improve the equipment of these two broadcasting bodies. 

What we are going to do, Mr Speaker, if the honourable members do give sanction to my request that the House establishes Uganda Broadcasting Corporation as a statutory body, is that for the first time Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, when it comes into being, will retain its revenue. It will also use the assets it has to borrow, and that will mean the opportunity to invest and then have a modern expanded network that will be greatly improved. 

So, Mr Speaker and honourable members, when you do approve our request, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation will provide the kind of service many of us have not seen in the history of our country, and we will be able. Mr Speaker, the advantage of this corporation is that it will have the opportunity to combine commercial imperatives as well as discipline with best management techniques available and thereafter we will be able to promise a modern and expanded network, the likes of which many of us have not seen. On that note, Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the justification.

3.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs wishes to present its report on the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill, 2004. 

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill, 2004, was read for the first time on 15th of December 2004. Pursuant to Rule 154(c) the Bill was referred to the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs for a scrutiny. 

Mr Speaker, the committee proceeded to scrutinize the Bill and has compiled this report, which it now wishes to present to the House for consideration.  

Methodology: 

The committee held meetings with the Minister of State for Information, who was accompanied by a team from the Directorate of Information, Office of the President, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Ministry of Public Service, and a representative from the Uganda Broadcasting Council. 

The Committee also received and considered a memorandum from the Uganda Government and Allied Workers Union, a Radio Uganda Television Workers Branch, and later held a meeting with the leaders of the Workers’ Union, particularly on the issues raised to the Minister.

Background:

The Government of Uganda currently provides broadcasting services to the public through Radio Uganda and Uganda Television. These two departments under the Directorate of Information, Office of the President have been experiencing under capitalization over a period of time and are currently operating far below capacity. There has been gross dilapidation of the infrastructure in these two departments with some of the machinery used being obsolete and the staff working under very pathetic conditions.

Mr Speaker, these two broadcasting bodies, that is, Radio Uganda and Uganda Television, are supposed to provide broadcasting services to the entire nation, but they only cover 80 percent and 65 percent of the country respectively with some of the areas covered having very erratic services.  

The Government of Uganda liberalised the broadcasting industry under the Electronic Media Act, 1996, which development created enormous competition for the two Government broadcasting bodies. Under the current situation, the services of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television cannot effectively compete with those of privately owned broadcasters. 

The Government has appreciated the pathetic situation under which Radio Uganda and Uganda Television are operating, thus has proposed a creation of statutory corporation to manage the public broadcasting services currently provided by Radio Uganda and Uganda Television. 

This statutory corporation is to be operated under strict professional business principles. It will be autonomous and self-sustaining through the retention of the revenue it generates from the advertisements and television license fees. The retention of such revenue will enable the corporation to modernize its infrastructure as well as improving on the conditions of work of its staff, thus creating an enabling environment for optimum productivity and therefore become more effective and efficient leading to better quality services, which are competitive in a liberalised broadcasting industry.  

The Government proposes that this broadcasting corporation should be called the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), and it should be a public service provider or broadcaster. The basic objective of the public service broadcaster is to serve the interests of the nation as a whole. In this respect, much as UBC will strive to match the competition in the liberalized broadcasting market, it will not compromise national interest for profit.

Mr Speaker, the Bill, namely, the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, 2004, seeks to create the UBC. The committee has scrutinized the Bill in detail and has made the following recommendations and observations.

Observations and Recommendations:

Ownership of UBC:

The committee noted that the memorandum of the Bill states that the Bill intends to provide for the divestiture of public broadcasting services currently being provided by Radio Uganda and Uganda Television into a statutory corporation. It is later stated in the Bill that the statutory corporation will be wholly owned by Government.  

The committee observed that if the services of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television are to be divested to form a statutory corporation, then the corporation will fall under category 1 of the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Statute, the PERD Statute. This situation brings about a contradiction because under category 1 of the PERD Statute, it dictates that all the shares of this corporation should be sold off or divested.  

The Minister, however, informed the committee that Government does not intend to sell any of the shares of this corporation to the public because the state’s control of information disseminated to the public is central to the security and sovereignty of any country. Indeed no country in the world has put any position or any portion of its state broadcaster in the hands of the private sector and Uganda cannot do otherwise. In this respect, what Government intends to do through this Bill is to transform the broadcasting services of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television into a statutory corporation. The committee then recommended that paragraph two of the memorandum should be deleted because it is misleading.

The Interpretation Section: 

The committee noted that the interpretation section of all laws should be consistent with the laws already in existence to avoid multiple interpretations of the same concept. In this regard the committee observed that in the Bill, the definition of the term “broadcasting” is different from what appears in the Electronic Media Act, 1996 and it is not clear as the latter, yet the context of the definition is the same.  

For consistency and clarity, the committee recommends that the definition of the said term in the Bill should be replaced with a definition in the Electronic Media Act, 1996 that reads as follows: 
“Broadcasting means any communication or transmission of any message or signal to the public by means of any electronic apparatus.”  

Authentication of the Corporation Seal: 

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that clause 3 of the Bill provides that the application of the seal of the corporation on any document shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson of the Board, the Managing Director and any other director as maybe authorized. In the absence of the chairperson two other directors may sign in his or her place.  The committee observed that it is not proper for any two directors to sign on behalf of the Chairperson of the Board. A document that does not bear a signature from the office of the chairperson could be disregarded by the chairperson because all the offices in the corporation are subordinated to this office.

Secondly, the normal practice in the corporation is to have one of the signatories authenticating the corporation seal being the Corporation Secretary as opposed to the directors. The reverse should be true in the case of the proposed UBC.  

The Committee recommends that: 

a. The office of the vice chairperson of the board be created so that at any given time in the absence of the chairperson, the office is occupied. The Bill should adjust to reflect this and the procedure of appointing the vice chair of the board should be outlined in the Bill. 

b. The Corporation Secretary’s signature should replace that of the other directors in authenticating the Corporation seal. 

Coverage of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television: 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the current coverage of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television is only 80 percent and 65 percent of the country respectively, thus denying access to the services of the state broadcasters to all citizens that should otherwise be accessible. The committee was concerned that the objectives of the corporation seem to be hinged on national broadcasting as opposed to nation wide broadcasting. The committee notes that national does not necessarily means nation wide, so a nationally broadcaster may not cover the whole country.  

The committee recommends, therefore, that the objective of the Bill should reflect a nation wide coverage not a national coverage. 

The Minister assured the committee that from March 2005 Government would embark on a modernization and expansion of a broadcasting network with a view to cover the whole country.  

Community Standard:

 Mr Speaker, one of the powers the corporation is to comply with the relevant regulatory supervision and broadcasting standards, which include community standards. 

The committee notes that Uganda as a country is comprised of several tribal communities that have different and divergent values. In the Ugandan context, therefore, community standards may be difficult to arrive at and the definition would be subject to different interpretations. The committee recommends that the term community standards should be deleted and an alternative term used.

The Board: 

a. Number of board members 

The Bill provides that the board should consist of not less than three members and not more than five other directors or members.  The committee observed that these numbers are few given Ugandan’s regional diversity and the sensitivity of the matter relating to a State broadcaster in particular the promotion of national unity. 

Each region of Uganda has its uniqueness that is best understood by its indigenous population. The promotion of national unity cannot be achieved in a uniform manner. It therefore, follows that at the initiation of a policy that will govern UBC, there must be an input from each of these regions; hence a need for representation on the board. 

The committee recommends that the number on the board should be increased to not less than five and not more than seven. 

b. Removal of directors: 

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that the Bill gives the Minister unlimited powers to remove the directors. It observes that leaving discretionally powers to the Minister to remove the members of the board is unfair because the Minister is human and could err. 

The committee recommends that the removal of directors should not be left at the discretion of the Minister but rather clear grounds for the removal should be spelt out in the Bill. The conditions must be in accordance with Article 169(9) of the Constitution.

c. Dissolution of the Board 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that there can be a situation that warrants the Minister to dissolve the entire board yet the Bill does not give the Minister powers to do this. The committee recommends that the Bill should give the Minister powers to dissolve the board and clearly indicate the conditions that warrant this dissolution. 

d. Regulation of the Board’s Procedure: 

The committee observes that UBC will be a very sensitive corporation in this country.  The board of directors should not be given unlimited powers to regulate their own procedure as it is provided for in the Bill now.

The committee recommends that the board should draw up its procedures in consultation with the Minister.

e. Functions of the Board: 
The committee notes that the functions of the board are not clearly spelt out in the Bill. The Minister informed the committee that the functions of the board entail initiating policies to achieve the objectives of the corporation.

The committee recommends that the functions of the board should be stated in the Bill.

Board Secretary:

The committee observed that the Bill provides for a board secretary but does not state the necessary qualifications for the post. The committee recommends that the Bill should spelt out the qualification of the Board Secretary and it proposes that the Board Secretary should be a lawyer or a Chartered Secretary. 

Television Licensing Fees: 

Mr Speaker, the Minister informed the committee that the UBC intends to generate most of its revenue from television viewing licenses. 

The committee observed that much as the Electronic Media Act, 1996 provides for the issuing of television licenses, there does not seem to be a mechanism of effecting this law. 

The Minister informed the committee that there is technology that detects television sets. The Broadcasting Council is in the process of advertising for a company that has the capacity to collect these fees. 

Programming: 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that currently a certain category of programmes dominate the airwaves of Uganda Television and this is not desirable. 

The Minister informed the committee that with better capitalisation, there would be better programming and UBC would operate more than one channel so it would depend on the viewer to choose the preferred channel. 

Borrowing by the Corporation:

Mr Speaker, the committee notes that the Bill gives the Board a lot of power to borrow funds for the operation of the corporation. This is seen in the clause that stipulated that the corporation, may subject to the approval of the board, in consultation with the Minister, borrow sums of money required by it for meeting any of its obligation.  

The committee observes that there is need for political accountability for all funds borrowed by a government body. 

The committee therefore, recommends that all borrowing should be done with the approval of the Minister and borrowing a specified amount must be subject to Parliamentary approval. 

Pornography: 

Mr Speaker, the committee appreciated the Minister’s concern about pornography and his effort to make it stand out in this Bill. However, it observed that pornography is part of the editorial policy and therefore should not constitute a separate clause of the Bill but rather a sub-clause of the clause covering editorial policy. 

The committee concurs with the Minister on the fact that legislation against pornography should stand out and for this purpose, it recommends that Government should draft a separate Bill whose main objective will be to fight against pornography. 

Proposals from the staff of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television: 

The staff of Radio Uganda and Uganda television were not opposed to the establishment of Uganda Broadcasting Council (UBC), but they wished to see justice and respect of workers’ rights. They were particularly concerned about their pensions, severance packages, housing and promotions. 

a. Pensions and Severance Packages: 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that currently former civil servants face a lot of difficulty in accessing the pensions’ payroll, and the list of people in this category is very long.  

The committee was concerned that the staff of Radio Uganda and UTV, who will not be taken on by the corporation, would be put at the bottom of this queue, which will be very unfortunate.

The committee is of the view that Radio Uganda and UTV retired staff should access the pensions’ list immediately they receive their severance package.  The justification is that, the staff in question have been subjected to gross discrimination by Government over the last ten years. Since 1998 when UTV and Radio Uganda were earmarked to form a single broadcaster, namely the Uganda Broadcasting Agency, and later Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, recruitment was frozen in these departments, therefore the staff therein were not promoted as compared to their colleagues in other sections of Civil Service who have moved up, some others to up to five stages higher than they were in 1998.

Secondly, with this pending merger of UTV and Radio Uganda, the Directorate of Information under which these two departments fall, has increasingly been under funded. In 1999, for instance, the allocation to the Directorate of Information was Shs 50 million, but in 2004 it had fallen to only Shs 24 million. Under these circumstances, the staff in these departments were denied their allowances that were due to them like professional allowance and transport allowance, yet other sections of Civil Service continued to get them. In this regard, for instance, the lunch allowance was reduced to just a half of what other civil servants got until July 2004 when they stopped getting anything altogether.  

Mr Speaker, the committee sought an assurance from the Minister that the staff of Radio Uganda and UTV, who would not be taken on by the corporation, would access the pensions’ payroll immediately they cease to work for Government, and they would have a severance package that takes cognizance of their long suffering.

The Minister informed the committee that the Ministry of Public Service would try to observe some of the staff, who will not be taken on by the corporation, but qualify to fill vacant posts in the service. However, those who will not be absorbed will be retired on grounds of abolition of office. Retirement under these grounds attracts a big package that includes severance package, consisting of repatriation funds, severance pay, seven months’ salary in lieu of notice and a pension for all including those who have not yet attained the required pensionable years. The pension will in addition have a bonus of 25 percent.

The Minister also assured the committee that the Shs 1.7 billion required for the severance package is available, and that the Ministry of Public Service will consider the affected staff as a special category and they will access the pensions’ payroll as soon as they receive their severance packages.  

Mr Speaker, a staff list of Radio Uganda and UTV was presented to the committee, and is hereby laid on this Table to assure the concerned Ugandans that they will be catered for immediately UBC gets in operation and when their issue of pension is taken care of.  

b. Promotions: 

The committee noted that it was not the fault of the staff of UTV and Radio Uganda that recruitment to their departments was frozen causing them to miss promotions up to five stages, as I stated earlier. If UBC had taken off, at the time the staff would not have been left in abeyance.  Coupled with the fact that many of them have been handling higher duties for a long time, the committee was of the view that they all be promoted at least one step higher before retirement, that is, at least a one-grade promotion be applied to all staff in radio Uganda and UTV across the board.  

The committee, however, was informed that promotions are only done when a vacancy arises and when the individual has the relevant qualifications, experience and has passed an interview.  It is, therefore, impossible to promote everybody in UTV and in Radio Uganda. Secondly, that if a blanket promotion were given, a dangerous precedence that Government cannot sustain would have been set.  

The Minister further explained that staff who have been handling higher duties were paid duty allowance. The Ministry of Public Service asserted that, it was just lenient to allow for this kind of payment of duty allowance to the said staff for the period longer than the stipulated six months because the unique situation in this department was appreciated.

c. Housing Scheme: 

Mr Speaker, the staff of Radio Uganda and UTV requested Government to offer them loans so that they can acquire the Government houses in which they currently reside. The Minister said this would not be possible because the houses in question are institutional houses.  

The committee was informed by the workers that much as the houses in question were saved as institutional houses, they were meant to cater for staff of Radio Uganda and UTV who run late programmes. However, since the merger of the Ministry of Information with President’s Office, some of the houses have been allocated to other staff of President’s Office, who do not work with Radio Uganda or UTV.  

The Minister informed the committee that Government does not operate a housing scheme for its employees. The civil servants who occupy institutional houses pay a nominal rent through the Ministry of Public Service to the Consolidated Fund. The houses currently belonging to the Directorate of Information will be inherited by the corporation. At this juncture, the committee wished to know the number of houses being referred to and thus an inventory of Radio Uganda and UTV assets was presented to the committee, and I wish to lay it on the Table for purposes of being certain that these assets do exist, and at an appropriate time will be the very assets transferred to UBC.

Private account number under the names of UTV and Radio Uganda: 

The Uganda Government Workers’ Union, UTV and Radio Uganda branch, raised a concern that a private account was being operated in Standard Chartered Bank in the names of Uganda Television and Radio Uganda, and funds from the Office of the President were channelled there. 

The Minister informed the committee that the accountant general approved the opening of this account as contained in Annex 1. It is acceptable as a practice in Government to have some sub-account in ministries that have decentralised budgets within their departments as is in the case of the Office of the President.  

The account in question is account No.0105612292500 in Standard Chartered Bank and the signatories to the account are the Permanent Secretary Office of the President, the Senior Accountant and the Director of Broadcasting. The account handles the operations funds for the Directorate of Information.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the committee fully supports the creation of UBC in order to improve the services of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television. For this reason, it supports the Bill with the proposed amendments and urges the House to support and approve the committee recommendations. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. The debate is open.

4.10
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to take the opportunity of thanking the chairperson of the committee for the good report. I have a few concerns that I have to pass over to the House.  First, I would like to welcome the idea of creating Uganda Broadcasting Corporation but the problem that I am seeing is that the old method of the Uganda Television has not been so embracing in terms of language. It has been strictly for a few languages which hinders other people with different languages to access information and yet we know that this kind of media is very educative and it gives a lot of exposure for our population to catch up with what is going on globally. 

Secondly, I would like to ask how soon the workers will be accessing their packages. If they do not get the opportunity of being promoted and even if they were retained, I think this is a new hand of management that needs to cover up the services of those who have been working with these two bodies.  

Thirdly, I want to find out whether the workers will be in a position to get their arrears because they have been working. They need to be paid all that they have put in. I want to find out this kind of information from the Minister of Information, whether these people will be able to access their arrears.

On promotion, I think it is not the fault of the workers that these people have been denied being promoted. The idea that has been brewed by the Committee is very, very useful and acceptable, that these people should be given at least one step ahead of their promotion so that they seem to be thanked for what they have been doing. The stoppage of this kind of recruitment and the promotion was not their own making. So this idea of the committee would be very good and I would urge the Government to accept it.  It is not going to set a precedent like it is being mentioned, but it is going to give the workers the kind of national service that they have been putting in the Corporations. I think these people in Radio Uganda and Uganda Television should be treated as a special case.

4.15
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee for the representation. Mr Speaker, I will start with page 6 on national coverage. Very many areas including Mukono miss out on most of the national programmes because of the many radios that have been set up which seem to have no control over the area coverage. For example, Mukono North, Buikwe North misses out completely on all national programmes because you can only listen to Kiira Radio and NABASA from Jinja in that area. So these people never get all these programmes from the centre. We have been crying over this, so when the committee points it out, I really thank them and hope that very soon this shall be rectified.  

In recent years, Radio Uganda has failed to come up with educative programmes as it used to. In the past programmes on agricultural and health were aired routinely on radio such that one could listen to such programmes or even organise a group of people to listen together. Information from ministries was disseminated to our population in the rural areas through such programmes. But of late, I have come to realize that it is only programmes, which would focus on campaigns of a certain kind that are targeted and are broadcast yet in the past we used to have regular programmes on particular topics and subjects which kept our community well informed.  

On television, still some areas like Jinja and Buikwe North of Mukono are deprived of services from Uganda Television and WBS. We can only view from Kakira operated television. So I do not know whether the Committee had full information about this, because that area is denied all information from the centre. We are sort of left out and we are on a regional basis in that most of these centrally broadcast programmes are not viewed by those areas.  I request that since the committee has brought up the issue the ministry will speed up on this and this corporation would be put in place as soon as possible. 

Mr speaker, I would like to see a scenario where we can get a centre where one can retrieve information broadcast or transmitted on radios, which is a centrally operated station. Because as of now, what we have is a private station and some people cannot pay the fee that is levied for them to get past information, which was viewed or broadcast on radio. With that, I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the good report presented.  

4.19
MS IDAH MEHANGYE	(Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee and the minister for bringing this report to us, and I appreciate this report and I do support this report. I have one observation that is general that I would like to make. The report seems to have two positions; the minister said this, and the committee said the other. I had hoped that when the Bill went to the committee, they would have harmonized and possibly come up with one position except where they do not agree.

I would like to thank Radio Uganda, particularly for serving the big part of the country, and in Kamwenge I do receive Radio Uganda and I appreciate. For Uganda Television (UTV), Kamwenge is out; we have not known any television. It is not only UTV but also others so that even when we are televising things in Parliament, people of Kamwenge will never see anything. So, when you are coming up with something like this, I thank you and I hope that you are definitely going to reach out to these other parts, which never receive some of these services. When I watch –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague from Kamwenge that we in West Nile have had a raw deal for a very long time. We do not get the UTV signal, and the Radio Uganda signal is very poor to the extent that one has to strain the ear to the point of absurdity before being able to hear anything. I am not going to ask my people to start celebrating because there is a promise here that the network is going to be expanded, we want to see concrete work plans. That is the information I wanted to give to my colleague. I thank you.

MS MEHANGYE: Thank you, very much for that information. It confirms that many other parts of Uganda like Kamwenge do not receive these services. 

I do watch Uganda Television in Kampala, but I hear only three languages being used, that is, English, Luganda and Swahili. But I thought there are other languages also - I do not see Rukiga, I do not see Runyankore and all these other languages. Can’t they also translate the news in these other languages and we hear it? Much as they do not reach the countryside, in Kampala or in other areas where the television reaches there are people who speak these other languages. Why do we not get the news translated also in these other languages? So, I hope when the minister is talking that this new Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is going to address some of these issues. It can reach the whole country and still maintain three languages and ignore the others. 

Much as we have not gone to Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, I still have an issue with the programmes on Radio Uganda and UTV. I thought these being national and Government corporations, they should have had programmes that are aimed at building national unity, that talk so much about development, on agriculture and on economics. But these services do not seem to be used so strongly. There is need for a deliberate effort put in them to reach out to the people for development purposes, for good governance purposes, for democracy, for unity. I would want to see a little more put in them even long before this utopia organisation comes in place. The Radio Uganda and UTV can be used a lot better to improve this nation.

I would like to lastly say something about pornography. I would like to thank the committee for talking about pornography and recommending that we should have a different Bill talking about pornography in this country. Pornography in this country has gone far, it has reached the dimensions that we may find difficult to even reverse. In the music that comes along, in the newspapers, even in the newspapers, which we thought it was not important to put these pornographic and naked pictures, they thought they are left out. It seems pornography is part of the selling idea, and so even the other papers have picked up to putting pornography both in words and pictures. I would be glad when this comes here. 

Some of us as parents feel very hurt, feel very disappointed, feel very embarrassed when we see these things on the streets of Kampala, on televisions, and we hear them on radios. Look at Channel 5 on television and it goes unchallenged, nobody seems to say anything about this. Our children are watching these things and actually seem to appreciate these things. At home when I am listening to the news on television, the children tend to walk away, they want when I have finished my news then I go and then they can put their Channel 5. I will be very happy when this Bill about pornography is brought here. I thank you.  

4.26
MR BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for their report, and particularly addressing most of the concerns of the workers in Radio Uganda and UTV. However, I want one clarification from the chairperson in respect of the statement, and I will quote verbatim: “The committee sought an assurance from the minister that the staff of Radio Uganda and UTV, who would not be taken on by the corporation, would access the pension payroll immediately they cease to work for Government and have a severance package that takes cognisance of their long suffering.” 

What I would want to know is whether the joining of the corporation by these workers is going to be optional or by conscription. I thought they are moving from their traditional civil service to an independent statutory corporation, and all of them would be paid a severance package and then the joining of the corporation would be optional. 

For example, what capacity, both legal and financial, would the corporation have to settle the benefits of a worker who is fired from the corporation three months after he has been recruited into the corporation. We have had a problem of people who left the Ministry of Finance and joined Uganda Revenue Authority and when they were fired from their jobs after three months, they went home empty handed. So, that is the concern I would want to be addressed by the chairperson. Thank you very much.

4.30
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): I wish to thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee for that report. I have got two areas I want to comment on: There are regulations of the UBC, and here the committee seems to be recommending that the minister should be part and parcel of the procedure for the regulations formulation; I have a bit of discomfort there.  

Mr Speaker, in the history of the African governments, state media is one of those areas, which are easily abused. We are now trying to form a corporation and I was hopping that by doing so, we are trying to create an independent corporation where government will give policy guidelines, but operational and considerations will be the areas for the corporation now to occupy so that guidelines and whatever has to be covered will be their preserve. If you now allow government to come in and start involving itself in the regulations formulation, then you are stifling the independence of this corporation.
 
Two things will happen, Mr Speaker: One, as we now know Uganda Television and Radio Uganda have been out competed by the private sector. Where I come from I can say less than 10 per cent of the listeners now listen to Radio Uganda and this is a very serious matter. This is because these private organisations tailor their programmes to suit the local situations. Now, it would be better for you, therefore, to leave these people to be independent so that they can now respond fast and appropriately in the local market. If you do not, if they are encumbered by interference by government, this will not be possible. For me, I would think it is better that an independent corporation be left to come out with objective issues which will help it grow and develop because, if you do not, it is bound to depend on government support for it to continue.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I think there should be a very clear arrangement for the payment of the workers who are not going to be taken on when the corporation takes off. My colleague who has just spoken before me has given examples of what has happened in instances where workers are retired and they go and they are never paid. I want to bring to the attention of this House the sad issue of the former workers of the East African Community whose jobs ended so many years ago in 1977/78. 

As I talk now, this money was to be given to the Government of Uganda but many of these workers have not been paid up to now. Many of them have died, even some of their dependants have died without receiving this money and we know the history of our country. I think there should be upfront arrangement for us to be sure that this is done, and I would wish to ask this Parliament that arrangements be made for us to ensure that before we agree to pass this, that the workers are properly covered and their interests are taken into account. I with to thank you, Sir.

4.35
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the committee for the good work and I welcome the establishment of the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. For a long time, I have been interacting with some of the staff and I hope with this new establishment their welfare will be improved otherwise, they were in a very bad shape.
  
Mr Speaker, I want to echo the committee’s recommendation that it should not only be a national broadcasting corporation, but the network should strive to cover the entire country. I want to inform the House that half of my district has been taken over by Kenya Broadcasting Corporation and Uganda Television is not heard of. So, I hope with this new body my entire district will be covered by Uganda Broadcasting Corporation so that my citizens will hear more Uganda’s programmes than Kenya programmes. 

I also request the minister that the television boost which you are trying to construct in Kapchorwa town, you will accomplish it now that you have a corporation so that the people of Kapchorwa can also see us here as we deliberate on national issues.  

Mr Speaker, I want to echo what my colleagues have said that actually this corporation should not be in the arms of Government fully, but we should give it autonomy so that they improve on their programmes. Whenever I am at home and you try to switch on Uganda Television, my children always protest saying that the programmes on Uganda Television are not palatable to them. So, I hope with this corporation the programmes will suit all sorts of categories of people or take interests of all sorts of categories of people. 

There has also been a complaint that UTV at the moment uses very old machines of the 1940s. So, we hope that with the new corporation, you will be in position to have modern equipment that will enable it to compete with other televisions and radios, which are currently on the market.

Then I want further clarification, Mr Speaker, on who is the boss now. We have the Broadcasting Council and we have the Communications Commission.  I would want to know who the boss is now because unless we have a supreme body to take over this, there is bound to be some confusion. I need some clarification on that. Apart from that, Mr Speaker, I support the motion. Thank you.

4.39
MR HENRY BASALIZA ARAALI   (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for this good report. I would also like to thank the Minister of State for Information for the good work he has been doing. In fact, whenever I contact him, he has been very cooperative and we have been receiving Radio Uganda signals, even UTV, but UTV has not been clear. So, I hope with this UBC everything will be okay. I would also like to thank the workers of UTV and Radio Uganda because they have been nationalistic and they have worked under hard conditions.  

Mr Speaker, there are some statements, which have been made in this report, one of them that the minister informed the committee that the Ministry of Public Service said some of the staff would not be taken on by the corporation, but qualify to fill vacant posts in the service. But I do not know how many vacant posts are there! If they are not there, then will all of them go? I would like to request that if they are there, they should be preserved for these people so that when there is UBC, they get these posts.

Mr Speaker, I would like also to say that there should be proper housing conditions and houses for these people who will be working with UBC. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.42
MR BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a fact that at present we are in an era of information and technology, and if there is any thriving business now I think it is in that sector, if you can agree with me. In which case if I sample out, for example, since this sector was liberalized, when you go to some of these other areas like the area I come from, Ankole, the local FMs have captured the market so much that they cannot listen to Radio Uganda. In fact, one time I appeared on Radio Uganda here tonight, it is only one person who told me that he heard me, and that is an old man, who is a retired teacher. But the majority are on local FMs.

So, for that matter, I do not know the strategy the minister is putting in place to ensure that he also edges himself in that market. My fear now is that when you set your goals and objectives and you say your major interest here is to serve the interest of the whole nation, that one - because you have been having a problem of money, if your target is that, you may not be able to penetrate the market and get the money, you might come back to square one.  

Then two, Mr Speaker, I have noted that both Radio Uganda and UTV have been collecting some revenue and unfortunately, instead of ploughing it back to improve on the services, this is general revenue which must be banked on the consolidated account.  But I would like to know from the experience, from what you have been collecting, has that money served as a basis to guide you in trying to set up this corporation so that you say, from what we have been collecting from UTV, advertisements from Radio Uganda, I think if we became privately a full statutory body, we would make money? I would like to be clarified on that.

Then, Mr Speaker, there is this issue I think on page 7, on the Board of Directors, where the committee is disagreeing with the minister. The minister is recommending three to five members and because of what the committee has called the regional diversity and because of so many tribes, it recommends that we should increase from five. What is the problem here? What is the issue really? I think the issue of the board is to ensure effective management of the corporation, and the smaller the board to me the better. 

When you talk of tribalizing so that every region or every tribe - because when you read our Constitution, I think the tribes now are coming to 60, should we come out with the Board of Directors with 60 members because every tribe must be represented? I want to submit that at this stage, I think let us talk of effective management of the corporation because the people will be interested in the services, not who sits where. I think that should be the guiding principle and I strongly support the minister’s proposal of three to five; small but effective and very good. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.46
MS JACQUELINE KYATUHEIRE (Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity, and I want to thank the minister for bringing this Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Bill, and also the committee for your good report.

Mr Speaker, as the committee has noted, Radio Uganda and Uganda Television were leaving a lot to be desired. A look alone at the appearance of the buildings would tell you or make you suspect what is inside there. And when you take a keener look at the services they are providing, the motivation of workers and programmes, you could see there is a problem, and I am happy that this move has been taken and I am in total support of that.

Mr Speaker, as you know, communication and information is a very important tool of human development and 65 per cent of Uganda’s population, which is covered by Uganda Television, and then the 80 per cent coverage of Radio Uganda, show you that we have been having a problem of disseminating information and helping also the other part of the Ugandans to be able to come out of this problem of not knowing what is happening.

As my former colleagues have already said, I think this will help also the areas that have always not been priotized to be thought about. More often than not, Mr Speaker, when I get visitors from my constituency, they ask questions that you feel so bad about and that is when they are watching television. They put questions that I do not want to raise on this Floor of the House. I am appealing to the minister to look at the nation wide coverage like my colleagues have said and not to look at the national coverage because the national coverage is vague. But when you talk about the nation wide coverage at least I would be comfortable that Kanungu, Rukungiri my mother district and the others that are having the same problem will also come on board. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.48
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like also to thank the chairperson of the committee for her informative and elaborate report. I would also like to thank the Government for this innovation of a broadcasting corporation. 

However, Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the minister whether this new broadcasting corporation is going to improve service delivery in terms of quality and quantity. Quantity meaning national coverage; I am asking this because Ntungamo District has missed out on this important service. 

For the last three years, I have been trying to lobby the ministry to take television services to our district. Now, if this new corporation is going to enable the people of Ntungamo District to watch television, because we already have Radio Uganda, I am ready to support the Bill. But in case we are not going to benefit, I wish to state that I am not going to support the Bill. Thank you very much.

4.50
MR PATRICK APUUN (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice on those who have thanked the committee for the report well done. I would like to point out that Radio Uganda, in 1960s when I was a student, was covering almost every region and we used to listen as students in the halls. But these days Radio Uganda does not give those services anymore. I do not know either it is because of these small FM radios which have come and have taken the capacity of Radio Uganda. 

Like in Karamoja, Radio Uganda is not heard at all just like my colleague from Kapchorwa has said.  What you hear there is Radio Kenya, all the programmes are from Kenya and very soon I think when Sudan establishes its own government we shall be listening to Radio Sudan. But otherwise, Radio Uganda, as the Members have reported, if it is as they are saying that there is going to be a merger, maybe it will improve the services. (Interruption)
 
MS ALISEMERA: I wanted also to inform you that for us in Bundibugyo we are watching the television of Tanzania and Congo. 

MR APUUN: Thanks for that information. Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, what we are now listening to in Karamoja is what is called Karamoja FM radio, which has been installed by one muzungu called Gordon Bell. Whatever is happening in Kampala here or broadcast in Kampala we do not receive the message. 

Mr Speaker, there is one issue of general nature here, that is pension and gratuity, which has been observed by the committee. I think most of us have been public servants before we came here as politicians. We used to receive our letters of appointment with all the terms and conditions of service. 

First of all, it was probationary and then from probation you become permanent and pensionable. There is a general outcry especially in terms of gratuities and pensions payment to the public servants in Uganda. I do not know what is going to happen maybe, the Prime Minister can come out with a statement so that people can understand how they are going to be paid. I was approached recently, when I attended the council meeting in Moroto, by the public servants who had retired in Local Government –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU RINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With permission from the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, I would like to inform my honourable friend on the Floor that the function of the Ministry of Public Service, which is responsible for human resource management in the tradition civil service, remains the same. In other words, when you are recruited in public service, you receive your letter of appointment stipulating the terms and conditions of service. When you are retiring you are also given the retirement letter and as a matter of fact, we have a system now six months before your service is terminated the Ministry of Public Service puts in motion machinery to ensure that terminal benefits or your being on pension loan is secured. 

But if there is a problem with regard to payment of gratuity, yes, we admit that currently we are having that problem. But, all pensioners are receiving their monthly pension promptly through their banks as stipulated. But there is a backlog of gratuities and this also has been caused by the generosity of Government. 

The NRM Government realized that pension was not adequate so, in 1994 we validated pensions whereby before revalidation a pensioner who was getting, for example, Shs 10,000 is now getting about Shs 200,000 to Shs 250,000 a month. This caused a backlog in terms of resource mobilization to pay. In short, the Government realizes the importance of pensions and that pensioners should be paid, and we are doing everything to ensure that we pay the backlog of gratuity. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR APUUN: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you so much, the Minister, for elaborating and explaining the circumstances under which gratuity and pension is paid in this country.  You have explained the aspect of the public servants in the traditional public service. The other aspect is in local government, which is now decentralized government. Those who served in the district administrations in the local governments are suffering as of now. Those are the issues, which I was informed in Moroto council. There are about ten pensioners, their gratuities have not been paid and the CAO together with the LC V Chairman have stated that there is no money to pay these people their gratuities and pensions.

MR OKUMU RINGA: I thank you once again, Mr Speaker, for giving me opportunity to explain this matter.  It is true people who are employed in the local governments are supposed to be paid by local governments; but because of resource constraints, local governments do not have the money to pay.  So, the central government has taken over this responsibility and my ministry sent circulars to all local governments, that is, the CAOs who are the accounting officers to get the census of all former workers in local governments so that the quantum of what should be paid is realized. 

My ministry has already received this information and we have a backlog of about Shs 17.5 billion, which the central government has to secure in order to pay all the backlog, which is due to former workers in the local governments and also municipal councils. This is a responsibility the central government has taken over and we are going to honour it. I thank you.

MR KAPKWOMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether the minister is telling the truth. Just two weeks ago, I went to Public Service Pensions and in Room 23, where you have got your senior accountant, a local government worker came with his documents, the man looked at them and threw them into his face, “Go back to the district” and then in the district they are told to go back to the Ministry of Public Service. Now, where exactly do they belong? Is it a statement, which was changed yesterday? 

On Monday I was in Kapchorwa. The local government retired employees were holding a meeting, and I think the next move is to go to court. So, I do not know where these people belong?  In the district they are sent to Ministry of Public Service, in Ministry of Public Service, they are thrown back to the district. So, where do they belong?

MS MEHANGYE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On pensions, I think there are some special problems like my district in Kamwenge.  Kamwenge was part of Kabarole District and so, the people who worked in the local government worked in Kabarole District. And when it became Kamwenge and they retired and they deserved their pension Kabarole says, “You are Kamwenge.” When they go to Kamwenge, Kamwenge says, “For us we have not yet had people retiring, you worked in Kabarole so your pension should be in Kabarole.” Kabarole says, “Okay, you go to the Public Service” and the Pubic Service says, “We are going to see.” 

How long are you going to take to see that the people are suffering! These people are suffering, they served this nation very diligently, and they deserve their pension. They have grown old, they are weak and some of them have already died. To whom do you want to pay this pension if you do not want to give it to them when they are alive? So, I would like to know, in a situation like Kamwenge, how do the people get their pensions, Mr Minister? 

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I would assist clarify some of these issues. The issue of pension is a big problem in this country, and as you know, the pension arrears and gratuity arrears are over Shs 300 billion. I think it would be proper for the minister to come and give a comprehensive statement to this House so that we discuss these issues comprehensively. Otherwise, even in Masaka, where I come from, the situation of pension is bad. So, rather than giving us these piecemeal things, why do you, Mr Speaker, not allow the honourable minister in charge of pension maybe next week to come and make a comprehensive statement over this issue. Otherwise, the situation is too bad on the ground. Thank you.

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with the Member who spoke last who asked for a comprehensive report. But before we do that, I would like to correct an impression, which has been created just now. Although it is true that we did ask for pension arrears from the districts, it is not totally correct that we are going to take it off. I wanted to clarify. Because of the revalidation, the local governments created a lot of arrears, which we thought they could not handle, so we asked for that amount of arrears, which accrued because of the revalidation and that is the Shs 17 billion, which the central government will pay. But as of now, we have not yet taken over payment of the pensioners in the local administration. 

Although we are working out a comprehensive reform of pension for all the public servants, which includes those who are working in the local governments, I would like to say clearly that, the local governments administration are responsible as of now for paying pensioners in their districts.  The central government is going to cover arrears, which accrued from the revalidation exercise, and I am glad to report that there are some districts, which are able to pay and they are paying promptly.  

I am also aware that there are some districts, which have totally failed to meet this obligation.  But we are still discussing this issue to come out with a method of helping out. But as of now, the districts are responsible for paying their local administration pensioners because that is the law, which is obtaining. But, Mr Speaker, as the members have requested, I will come back and give a comprehensive report of the status of payment of pensioners in this country.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.

MRS MUKIIBI: In 30-days time.  So, that will answer my sister from Kamwenge and other newly created districts. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR APUUN: So, Mr Speaker, you can now see the magnitude under which the public servants in the local governments are suffering. I will concede to wait for the report from the minister as she says, two weeks. In short, thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.06
MR JOSEPH KULE MURANGA (Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Radio Uganda and Uganda Television, as far as we are concerned in the Rwenzori region, we do not get most of these services. I remember one time we were promised that Radio Uganda and Uganda Television would be put on satellite so that it can reach everywhere. So, I would like to know how far the minister has gone to provide information through satellite so that it can reach areas, which have valleys and hills like the Rwenzori region? Because, even if we get other means of communication using the usual waves, they may not reach rugged relief like that one of the Rwenzori region.  

Mr Speaker, I remember when I was still young, we used to have very good education programmes on Radio Uganda. But as we talk now, Radio Uganda has lost its sensitivity in educating Ugandans, so I do not know how Radio Uganda is going to compete with FM radios, which are now attracting the young generation more than anybody else. I think most of the people now who listen to Radio Uganda are the old people, who want to listen to news and maybe get prominent announcements. Otherwise, the rest of the young people do not attend to this radio and I do not know how we shall get the money as we form a corporation.  

Secondly, we are saying we are going to charge people who have televisions. I do not know, in some areas of Uganda and more so in the rugged relief of Rwenzori, some areas do not have roads. How are we going to collect this money so that this corporation can make feasible money that can have returns? I do not know how we are going to do this. So, I would ask the minister to see clearly into these problems and see how you are going to deal with them.

Then, Mr Speaker, I remember we had privatisation and we are saying this corporation will be 100 per cent owned by Government. I want to know, in which category is it falling, is it in one or two whatever on the PERD Statute and how is Government going to make sure that it controls this so that it makes profits and stands on its own? With these few words, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much.  

5.08
MR FRED OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Radio Uganda and Uganda Television for the good work they are doing -(Applause)- in particular the fact that now Radio Uganda and UTV do cover us live when we are having our deliberations in this Parliament. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, information is a weapon and it is a very dangerous weapon. It can either build or it can destroy. Even the word information itself has got twelve words in it. The first one is ‘I’ and the last one is ‘on’. So, this information can build the ‘I’ and can also destroy it. It requires a lot of format, a lot of information, a lot of being organized. So, it is a very important tool that the Government must be in control of. So, I support this position of creating a broadcasting corporation in this country.

Mr Speaker, if you read on page 2 of this report and I would like to quote verbatim: “There has been a gross dilapidation of the infrastructure.” The word “gross” in any definition means gross and heavy gross dilapidation of a tool which is a weapon, which can either build or destroy, I think we should prescribe this.
  
Then it goes on to say that some of the machinery being used are obsolete- (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you my brother for accepting my information. Mr Speaker, I would like to give information concerning the sorry state in which the Uganda Television is. About two weeks ago, we were presenting a programme on Uganda Television for the first time after many years, and I was surprised that the state of the studio is as it was about 25 years ago. There is no air conditioning and on that day, unfortunately, one of the participants collapsed because there was so much heat in the studio and there is no ventilation whatsoever. So, one of the participants collapsed and there was no medical facility whatsoever to revive the person and it was just by God’s Mercy that that person eventually reached the hospital and his life was saved. So, the situation you have described I experienced it. Thank you.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you, hon. Omach, for giving me this chance to give you information. Last week, I was also in the studios of Radio Uganda and I had a programme starting at 10.00 p.m. ending at 11.00 p.m. To get back to my vehicle was a problem; no lights, you have to imagine where you passed and the workers who finish work at 11.00 p.m. they have no transport to transport them back. In other words, to get that service in that radio and I think also TV you must cough some subsistence allowance for these people who brave to work in a situation like this. It is a terrible situation! In fact, these people who are serving Uganda Television and Radio Uganda should be given medals they are true nationalists. (Applause). I worked in Ministry of Information in 1973 for about 2–3 years, the situation was bad then, it is now worse! This corporation should be formed soonest and the people of Uganda can be well served under Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Nakasero, where Uganda Television (UTV) is, was a hospital; it was never built to be a television studio. It has never been modified to suit a television studio; it was just snatched by the then government and then turned into a television station. So, I would like to say that there should be a real television studio built to match the modern competitors otherwise, what we are passing is hopeless, WBS is taking over. Thank you very much.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Mr speaker. “Some of the machinery being used is obsolete” I think this is also a very strong statement and as we move towards having Uganda Broadcasting Corporation, this has to be looked into, we are in the third millennium and we should belong.  

Number three, it is reported that staff are working in pathetic conditions. I am aware, Mr Speaker, that most of the people who are now glorifying places like WBS and other radio stations that are mushrooming have trained with either UTV or Radio Uganda and they have moved to those places because of better remunerations, because of better conditions of living. I believe that the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation should address this issue squarely, of ensuring that the working conditions and the remuneration of the staff will not be pathetic.  

Mr Speaker, the coverage –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to be clarified, who is going to own this corporation?  If the person who has failed to cater for the institution that is so vital is going to own the corporation, how are you convinced that he is actually going to change his attitude?

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, the committee will clarify on that, but I believe that the spirit of this Bill is to ensure that we have an effective and efficient broadcasting system in this country. They have seen the problem and this is to address this, and I believe that the Government has an eye, the Government has ears and they will do the needful to ensure that this weapon called information is used effectively and correctly. 

Mr Speaker, given the position of 80 per cent and 65 per cent coverage in the third millennium is not sufficient. You have heard those who are bordering Kenya are saying that they are using Kenya television and you have those who are in Bundibugyo, they are saying they are listening to Tanzania television and Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). I come from Nebbi and my neighbours in Sudan do not send us any of those, my neighbours in the DRC do not send us any of those facilities for broadcasting on radio, we are using Radio Paidah and for UTV we do not have any facilities.

So, we would appeal that when this body is fully operational, ensure that the whole country is fully covered so that any educational programmes, any programme that the Government would like the people to benefit from, reaches every part of the country.  Then also, for the Government to ensure that the people have strong instruments like radios, which are affordable and which can operate for a long time, so that they are able to partake of whatever Government wants to give. That the Government also makes available dry cells or batteries, which can run for some time, not like this Tiger Head, which has no head. It works for only two days, the third day it is kaput, and it is bringing us problems of environmental degradation and poisoning. 

Finally, Mr speaker, the issue of collecting of television license fee. Currently there is no scrambling of the transmission, how is the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation going to ensure that it collects the fee? If I decide to put my television under the pillow and then I watch from there, how will you know that I have a television? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.21
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the minister for this. I also want to thank Government for finally thinking about UTV and Radio Uganda. In any case, I first and foremost would like to salute the workers of UTV and Radio Uganda.  For many of us who go to Radio Uganda and UTV, you will realize that these are dedicated and committed Ugandans, who are using extremely very old machines, but they are able to put something out and we are very grateful! And I think that we have highly professional manpower in Radio Uganda and UTV. 

Therefore, as the minister proceeds to form the broadcasting corporation, these highly qualified staff, highly committed Ugandans, and what I would call nationalists, should not be thrown the way we have seen Ugandans being thrown.  (Applause). You should find a way of retaining them and maybe that would be the last bit of the reward the Government can give to these workers, to finally work in a good environment with good remuneration so that at least they will at the end of the day be able to get something to go back home with; many of them would have left.   

I looked at the committee report when they talk about the coverage of 80 and 65 per cent. I do not know what they meant by the coverage, whether it is the technical coverage or it is the outreach coverage. I think this is not true; both UTV and Radio Uganda actually cover less than 80 per cent. They actually cover averagely, I can say, not more than 50 per cent and let us not deceive ourselves. 

But I want to thank Radio Uganda because from the other part of the country where we come from, when you look at Radio Uganda, most people look at the Nakasero installation alone, but there are now other FM stations being run by Radio Uganda, for example, the Star FM is performing extremely well.  It is able to compete with people in the private sector. In Gulu we have what we call Mega FM, it is actually doing better than all the other private stations there and is being well managed. So, they are doing very well.

Now, this takes me back to this issue of management. The problem, which we are currently seeing, is basically the question of management. As we move towards establishing this Broadcasting Corporation, I hope the Ministry is keenly looking at the success of the new vision corporation. How the New Vision has been able to perform, to succeed and to compete and yet it is a Government corporation? 

If New Vision is able to do it, what can we learn from the New Vision establishment now so that this Corporation could also be able to effectively stand on its own shoulders and be able to deliver? I think there has been the question of mis-management and corruption. If you ask yourself, how come Uganda Television and Radio Uganda gets some money through adverts and sponsorship of programmes. 

I would be more comfortable if the Minister can also brief us averagely how much money, for example, does Uganda Television and radio Uganda get in a financial year, because there is money for announcement, this is quite a lot of money and announcement is read in all the languages everyday. 

There are programmes, which are sponsored and there are adverts which are run, because if the element of management can be improved and the other angle of corruption tamed, then I do not see any problem.  

My concern would be to urge the Minister to withdraw the tendency of licensing viewing television.  Already people pay taxes, when I go to buy out a television I pay tax.  Why should I pay a tax for owning a television and again for viewing? 

If it is true, what my hon. Colleague was saying, hon. Omach, that information is extremely very powerful and this is why Government does not want to let it go, to keep it; then why should you tax people to watch your television?  Why should you, and yet at the end of the day you would actually want to encourage as many as possible to be informed? 

MR BIKWASIZEHI:  I thank you my Colleague for giving way. With regard to television fee, I was a student in United Kingdom in 1996/97 and as students, we combined efforts in our living room and bought a television set, but we were paying tax for that, people came and charged us tax, we were paying annually. So I think it is not unique to this place only. 

MR ERESU: I would like to participate in the debate directly, but I would like to seek the following clarification.  I am a Member of the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee that considered this report.  

Hon Reagan Okumu is reasoning that, we pay tax to have the services of Uganda television and Radio Uganda provided and therefore, it will not be logical to charge another tax for television viewing if it becomes a Corporation because after all, we pay tax to the Government of Uganda even at the time when we buy the television.  

I would like him to clarify to the House because we also pay tax that created a Corporation, which is now run as a New Vision.  Can he clarify why we must pay money to buy the New Vision newspapers whenever we want to read?

MR OKUMU:  I think the two really do not match because New Vision is not a television.  But linking what my Colleague hon. Eresu said, let us not compare Uganda to the United Kingdom.  United Kingdom is far ahead; people are informed.  

The welfare of the people in the United Kingdom is extremely different from our situation here. We are a peasant society and it is a responsibility of Government to inform people and to uplift people. 

My friend let me also inform you that in the United Kingdom, the BBC, which you always listen to belongs to Government, but they do not carry out adverts- (Interruption)     

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Reagan for giving way.  

The information I want to give at this juncture is that, the issue of television viewing license has already been passed under the Electronic Media Act.  If we are about to open its recourse, it will be under a new amendment which will not even be coming under UBC, which will be coming under a Electronic Media Act.  

I think to be fair to the UBC per se; we should leave the issue of the license and then consider it when we consider this other Electronic Media Act, which already has been passed. 

MR BANYENZAKI:  Thank you for giving way.  In view of what hon. Margaret Zziwa, the information is giving, actually the fact that this Media Act was passed in 1996 and up to now that tax which was embedded in that act has no longer been levied up to now, testifies that it is a bad tax that can not be implemented.

MR WAMBUZI:  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that actually televisions and radio stations get the bulk of their money, they earn from adverts and that is their main source of income. So all this viewing is something, which is just by the way and it is voluntary.  

So really I think what hon. Reagan is putting forward is something which is worthy, we should not just brush it aside because the core of the business is actually adverts and those adverts, people pay heavily for them whether sports, Dry Gin or motor bike or what.  

They do actually earn big money and in fact this Broadcasting Corporation we are putting forward today is going to earn, – its bulk of the money in adverts and if we do not focus on it carefully and brush it aside, then we are missing the essence of the business.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, hon. Member, we will be dealing with these details when we are in the committee stage. I would rather think that the hon. Member concludes, proceed, proceed and we see how we proceed.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would again appeal to the Minister to reconsider the fact that, what exists in the Act has not been implemented up to now tells a lot and this is a country, the concern of the Government should be to inform the people and the majority of our people are peasants we should encourage them really to view television instead of creating barriers.

I also want to appeal to the Minister that at least, we would be interested in knowing at least the performance of the New Vision in terms of the monitory value vis-à-vis the performance of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television because this would give us really a reinforced position to support your Bill. When you are responding, Mr Minister, I would be extremely interested in this. 

For example, how has The New Vision been able to perform, what has been The New Vision contribution to the Treasury, and what about UTV and Radio Uganda, how can we manage this? If you could also give us the state of the infrastructure currently in these two, Radio Uganda and UTV, because what I know is that, yes, we can go that far, but what do we have currently. 

 I understand there are some machines at UTV, which have never been used. Is it true, and if it is true, why have we kept it so idle for such a long time, why have we not brought it to use?  

Lastly, I would appeal to you again, Mr Minister, that the condition of workers – you know, if you go to Radio Uganda here even now, you look at the chairs Commissioners sit on, you look at the chairs the staff sit on, some of the chairs are actually three-legged, you have to sit carefully not to fall. 

This is unfortunate because these are citizens who have offered their time and energy to work for this country, we should give them a good environment in order to perform.  I thank you.  

5.35
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I also want to add my voice to all those colleagues who have appreciated the work of the workers in UTV and Radio Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, despite the problems and conditions these people are operating in, almost all Members of this august House who are Chairpersons or Chairmen of Committees have been given an opportunity to explain what is happening in their Committees in and around Uganda, and that way people in the countryside have somehow got to know what is taking place in a certain Committee, what happens in a certain Committee, thereby knowing what transpires in Parliament. 

As my Colleague, hon. Omach Mandir, did say even the live coverage now is something we can never brush aside, it is really very commendable.  

However, Mr Speaker, I am hoping that by forming this Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), Government is not going to abdicate its role of making sure that UTV and Radio Uganda become stronger so that the coverage actually goes and reaches most parts of this country. 

I see a tendency after we have this Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Government now to say, “Yes, you are there, you are now a corporation, you are supposed to be profit-making,” and yet Government must inject some good amount of money to make sure all what has been said, the equipment, the environment, is actually improved.  

Mr Speaker, I listen to Radio Uganda every morning when I am in Kampala, and when they had a Listeners’ Club, if I was not upcountry I would have participated.  Every morning I listen to Radio Uganda, but when I am in the lost counties, I cannot get it.  So, when the Committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Were they not covered?

DR KASIRIVU: When we are doing the constitutional amendments, we shall cover them.  

 Mr Speaker, the estimation of 65 per cent, 80 per cent coverage, I think does not have any background against which it can be sustained because in most parts of this country, UTV actually is not there. 

Mr Speaker, you were balancing the debate, most members were really giving the impression that UTV is not there.  So, the 65 per cent –(Interruption)

MR MAWIYA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  I would like to say that even in Kampala itself – I stay at Lubaga here, but the service is not received.  So, the 65 per cent, the percentages you are giving are even not correct.  Even in Kampala itself, where the facilities are located, if you cannot receive the services, what of other areas?  So, these figures are not the correct figures.

DR KASIRIVU: So, I am happy that the Committee made a good report, but this figure is subject to verification.  When you listen to the FMs, many of the presenters who portray professionalism have been staff from Radio Uganda, and because of the facilities that are available in the FMs they have been poached.  

Therefore, if this UBC is not careful, many more could easily desert and yet we need them there to have a stronger corporation, which will give a nationwide service.  

MRS BALEMEZI: Thank you, the member holding the Floor, and I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

The information I want to give is that as you rightly said that most of the people who are working in other FM radio stations were students, or they served in Radio Uganda, this is very true.  

For example, in the Department of Gender, there are supposed to be six staff members and there are six desks with two chairs, which chairs, if you are of a particular size you cannot sit on them.  It has to accommodate only two people who can sit there full time and you have to be of a particular size.  That is the information I wanted to give. 

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, in the 1970s during Idi Amin’s regime, despite the problems and the murderous activities of the regime, the regime was trying to construct a booster for mid-western in Hoima on a certain hill.  So many years after, I am told the equipment was even in Nakasero. I am sure by now it must be obsolete; it must have rusted. 

 I am now wondering what the Minister for –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I thought we are dealing with the bill to establish a corporation.  What you are talking about are things that are being run in a typical traditional Civil Service. So, the debate should really be on the bill, whether it is justified to have a corporation so that we pull ourselves from the way things are being run.  The purpose of this debate is for this bill, which is establishing a better way of providing the services. 


DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, you see, we are sounding warning bells to the leaders of the new Corporation, to the political leadership –(Interruption)

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not want to interrupt my colleague, but I wanted to know where this law leaves the FM part of UTV. I am meant to understand that Star FM belongs to UTV, where does it remain under this bill?  Thank you.

DR KASIRIVU: Mr Speaker, I was saying that some of the information we are giving is sending warning bells to whoever is going to be in the Broadcasting Corporation so that they do not move with the same mind and attitude when they are moving to a Corporation. 

Mr Speaker, we have been campaigning about UTV coverage in the mid-western and every Minister who has been in that office has been promising that they are going to cover that area.  Now, when it becomes a Corporation and with hope that we do not want a Minister to unnecessarily interfere in the running of the Corporation that becomes even more –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, the member holding the Floor could be referred to page 4 paragraph 3, it could answer much of his concerns.  

The report says, “This Statutory Corporation is to be operated under strict professional business principles, will be autonomous and self sustaining through the retentions of revenues it regenerates from the advertisement and television license fees”.  

In other words, the Committee has been made to know and has indicated it here by writing that these fears that is putting across will be cured through a professional business principle.  

They will have to recruit the professionals and run the place in a manner befitting a professional business in terms of running these services and also that it will be autonomous, meaning that ministerial interferences will be minimal because they should be left to discharge their duties professionally in a manner which will project and make it be viable. 

I think if he reads through this and sees through it properly, I think much of his concerns would be answered. 

MRS OGWAL:  Mr Speaker, the concern of the Member holding the Floor is very genuine because, if you are to improve the management of the organization you will have to cut off non- profit making activities or operations. 

I think his fears has to be allayed by assurance that when this out fit is in place, all these services would be rendered because there is a possibility that the organization which is going to take over will be driven by professionalism and by profiteering and they are likely to cut down on the expanse of their services.  So we want to be assured that the services, which are now being given, are going to be maintained.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we also have a fear because of the message which we are receiving through the memorandum, that after all this Corporation is put in place it may be put under privatisation.  

Our problem is that the Government has been involved in rehabilitating State enterprises and after rehabilitation and spending a lot of money these corporations have been sold for a peanut.  

You talk about Lake Victoria, it was rehabilitated for US $15 million to be sold for just a peanut, Equatorial Hotel and UCB were rehabilitated and fully computerized and sold.  

So, we fear that we may put this corporation in place and when it is working professionally and properly it would be sold. So, we want assurance that when all these things are in place, we would be assured of nation wide services, we will be assured that we would not be sold, we will be assured that it would remain ours.  I thank you.

DR KASIRIVU: Finally, Mr Speaker, I hope that when the Minister was making presentation to the committee, he also gave the committee assurance that there will be an investment plan for this Corporation to show how Uganda Television and Radio Uganda will cover the entire country. If he did not, then the Committee must demand for it, because we do not want to come back and begin making complaints that my place is not getting UTV signals; we are not getting Radio Uganda or something of that kind. We do not want to keep fighting with the Minister who will be responsible for this Corporation. 

But, Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I do not know why there is a tendency in Government whenever there is a change that is about to take place in a Government department, before even a legislation has been passed there is already movements to dismantle, to throw things over board, why?  Why not wait to have a law in place, which gives direction on how things should move rather than – because in the report they have said programmes were cut out, money was almost reduced and so forth.  We are even getting it in other ministries. Why are we getting this type of behaviour?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to limit time for contribution to seven minutes.

5.59
BRIG. HENRY TUMUKUNDE (Army representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to give some clarification as I begin my contribution.  

First of all, FMs do not serve the same purpose as what Radio Uganda intended to serve. FMs are supposed to cover very short spans and their aerials are done as such. So, I think Radio Uganda and as it was formed that time, had a completely different purpose. 

Mr Speaker, maybe, to add voice to the many people who contributed to this very debate. 

First of all, I want to tell you a story of some foreigners I took to the Ministry of Information who were supposed to contribute some equipment. We had a tour with the late hon. Basoga Nsadhu and actually, as we finished the tour the foreign said, “I cannot convince any serious person to put a shilling or a dollar in this arrangement”. 

In fact, Mr Speaker, I was about to request that as you enter deep into this very bill, you send a delegation of Members of Parliament to go and visit UTV and the establishment of Ministry of Information as it is now.  You will be shocked and I do not think there is any place as neglected as that one. I am very sure about that one.  

So, Mr Speaker, while we indeed - by the way, Mr Speaker, there is an impression given that maybe, re-equipping that place needs a lot of money. I want to tell you that two kilometers of tarmac where we have been very successful as a Government can actually – the cost of two kilometres of tarmac or three up to five actually, can restate the whole of Radio Uganda and Uganda Television.  

A very good radio costs US $300,000 that is the highest of the range. You need an aerial rotating, it is very little money; it is not actually anything to talk about. However, what is most important as we advance to this corporation is to give independence to these people. Our fears or feeling that things controlled by Government are the only ones, which work, are certainly outdated and they cannot be justified at this period and time.  

So, Mr Speaker, yes, we form a corporation, give it autonomy; the Minister will still help us to supervise as indeed good examples of The New Vision were raised.  But what is very important, Mr Speaker, even as you talk about licenses and everything, is that the management must be able to compete for the listener.  That is the only way. 

We need to push in quite a bit of money to bring it to a level where it can attract listeners.  When it attracts listeners, then you go to the story of adverts.  When you go to the story of adverts, then you go to the story of a self-running organization. 

Mr Speaker, we need to invest in information, it is very important.  Like we invest in education, especially with a peasantry society, we need to invest in information; and the worries that keep coming up about how to sustain – for example, that BBC you are talking about, those television programmes, for example, the Government of United Kingdom buys in some programmes for purposes of informing their own people and it keeps the corporation afloat. So, if you are worried about how to finance this, even you Government can slot in money by merely buying programmes, by sending their adverts.  

You know, the great thing about us is that we always say, “promote, promote,” when it comes to what promote, you do not even take in there.  For example, why don’t you send in your adverts, you as Government, to this very establishment?  If you were doing that, I can assure you, it would not need any debates like we having today.

Mr Speaker, the other thing I want to caution this Parliament about - not caution the parliament, but alert you about is that where donors are not interested, things have collapsed.  In fact, if you see a Ministry where donors have no interest and it seems Ministry of Gender falls in the same category, then you find it is a shame on our own part, especially the way we always assemble ourselves, present ourselves with wonderful speeches.  We must do slightly better than that, Mr Speaker.  

I want to challenge Ugandans and this Parliament to really work with the Ministry of Information to do something where donors have no interest and have it functioning, like the typical case of “The New Vision.”

Mr Speaker, while we go to this corporation, there is a very obvious threat to people who have been working there.  If you cause damage to an individual, it is also your own job to really rehabilitate him or pay him.  

For a long time these people have been seriously neglected.  I am of the view that apart from giving medals, which will not attract some remuneration, we find a way of giving benefits to these individuals so that they allow the corporation to be reset properly. 

I am worried that if you go to cater for the sentiments of these individuals, we are likely to lose the main goal.  We always fear paying dues, let us get these dues, I know we do not have money, pay people, so that we recruit a new competitive staff or take on those we think can carry on, but not be so much held by the fact that we have got money to pay and then we have to carry on with individuals just because we cannot pay them.

Mr Speaker, the other thing I wanted to raise in this matter is that, we ought to accept taxation.  You see, you profess on many values yet you do not know what makes these values actually real.  

I hear all of you are capitalists, you left communism, and you are now – Mr Speaker, I pray that you allow taxation, you allow licensing; because when you pay this money you promote - especially if the money is properly handled - Mr Speaker, you promote the institution or the corporation as it is going to be formed, and then once it is promoted, it runs on its own with no cost to add there.

My final appeal is that we need to sink in a lot of money to allow these people to compete.  I think any other view will be just sentiments and fallacy, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

6.05
MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have very brief comments and observations.  First of all, I have had the benefit of reading through this bill and I find it very well presented, and I congratulate the Minister responsible for a job well done; so is the Committee’s report, which is also very well researched and presented.

Mr Speaker, one time I presided over an organization, which was being restructured and I can tell you, the job of restructuring an organization is not a simple one.  It needs care, it needs proper timing, and it needs so many aspects to keep the people together still delivering a service until the time they are told, please put down your tools.  

Mr Minister, I would have been happy if, for instance, in Clause 29 of your bill you actually specified the transfer date because we are likely to pass this bill and it becomes a white elephant on our Statute books without any implementation.  We want to bind Government that by this date, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) must be in operation; and at an appropriate time I will move an amendment to give a deadline for the implementation of this project.  

Many of our Colleagues have talked about the care and the benefits that should be accorded to these people and they are many, we can think about many innovative ones, and I thank the Committee for the innovative initiatives they have proposed.  

But by and large, journalism, media work, I normally see many of these being freelance journalists.  Let us give them their benefits, but let them remain in one way or another attached to the corporation and giving services to the corporation, and that arrangement can be worked out.

Mr Speaker, 80 per cent, 65 per cent talked about in the report by the Minister, to me really is a mirage.  I stay in Bugolobi, I had to change my television set thinking that the edge could not give me access to Uganda Television (UTV).  I bought a new television set, a nice one, and there was no UTV.  So, if you talk about these percentages, I doubt really whether we are serious.  Let us be serious in terms of the data we provide to the public.

Mr Speaker, why should we keep getting policies, provision of the law in instalments on pornography?  Mr Minister, you are in charge.  Let us have a holistic law on this matter of pornography.

Finally, there is a problem of the social responsibility of the Corporation vis-à-vis its business responsibility.  The social responsibility as much as I agree with the sentiments of those who say we have to give some money for instance in TV licensing, but if that Corporation has got to fulfil its social responsibility please tread carefully on the issue of licensing otherwise, you are going to have a counter productive law.  Much of my contribution will come at committee stage.  

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. We are going to end this debate on Tuesday.

6.10
MR PHILIP NTACYOTUGIRA  (Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you very much Mr Speaker for according me this opportunity also to discuss this report.  I also add my voice to those who have recommended the Committee for a well-researched report.  

I wish to seek some few clarifications here.  The Government of Uganda currently provides broadcasting services to the public through Radio Uganda and Uganda Television and somewhere this report states that Radio Uganda provides coverage of 80 per cent and Uganda Television 65 per cent.  

My questions are these: how do they come to these statistical figures, are they imaginary, how do you arrive at these figures? 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, my concern is about sharing the national cake.  If Government says they are currently providing Broadcasting services to the public and Kisoro is not a beneficiary of the outcome. Don’t you think that Kisoro is loosing out for the last 20 or 30 years for not being covered and yet it is part of this country, must Kisoro district be victimized because of being far away from the centre; that is Kampala? Why can’t we benefit from these Government services?  

MRS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, hon. Member for yielding the Floor.  The point the hon. Member is making is very important, equitable development.  In fact for the western region especially the mid West of this country, it is totally in the black out on Radio Uganda Services and Uganda Television Services.  For us in Kasese, we have been promised at every election that UTV services will be provided.  

I recall vividly His Excellency the President stated in 1996 that Uganda Television Services in Kasese would be provided by satellite so we do not have to worry about the dilapidated Uganda Television of Uganda.  

So, if the hon. member has raised the point I would like us as a House to recommend vividly that this service should be available to all the places of this country irrespective of their geographical location.  Thank you.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you very much hon. Member.  Actually, I would like to inform the honourable Member and the House that since the Sixth Parliament and this is in written books, it is been stated that the whole country must be covered with Uganda Television signals and FM radios.  

Since the Sixth Parliament, when you go back and read the Ministerial statements, you will find that even the money meant to cover the whole country was stated and I recall it is about 30billion. But to date, how many years now back, we do not know what is happening.  

Mr Speaker, the people of Kisoro have been informed that they are to be served with an FM radio and sometime back, the honourable Minister of information went to Kisoro and he said he had opened an FM Radio and whenever people of Kisoro tune, we do not get any news.  

THE SPEAKER:  But really let us conclude this debate.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you my Colleague for giving way. I understand that when someone is appointed a Minister, he is supposed to deliver services very quickly to his constituency.  

I am meant to understand that the Minister of Information comes from Kisoro, are you trying to imply that the Minister of Information has not delivered services to the people of Kisoro?

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you very much, hon. Member. I was coming to that. By the way I want to give my friend information, the hon. Minister of information, that he risks loosing his constituency from what I hear from people whenever I go to Kisoro.  

They say is the Minister of information but we are not being served, no television signals, no FM Radio, they wonder what he is doing here!  Well he is a nationalist, but Kisoro has been promised for a long time and I do suggest that –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Speaker is the Member holding the Floor in order to begin threatening the hon. Minister on the Floor of the House well knowing that we are now on live broadcast. The Minister is supposed to serve the whole nation and not to use his personal money. Is the member in order?

THE SPEAKER: I thought he was giving a friendly whisper- (Laughter)

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you hon. Speaker for your wise ruling.  Actually, the honourable Minister is my Friend and I thought it is better to give him a tip because, I would not wish that he looses his constituency. Okay, he is supposed to serve the whole country but at the same time he is not supposed to forget himself. 

So, Mr Speaker, I wish the honorable Minister actually could maybe give us information to give to our people. What must we tell them about this coverage of Uganda Television (UTV) signals, UTV news?  Whenever I go to Kisoro and on Radio Uganda; I get muffled news.  Must Kisoro not be a beneficiary; must we suffer because we are at the border?  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would wish to give some advice that Uganda Television and Radio Uganda and other televisions should mind about the morals of this nation.  Whatever actually is being broadcast should be tested because our children are acquiring bad character through these televisions and even these FMs.  Surely Uganda is a country of God and we must stick to that, we must insist on morals.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honorable member.  This brings us to end of today’s contribution on the motion for a Second Reading.  

I have already put on record as to how we are going to move next Tuesday after the completion of the list, which I have already made here, then the Minister and the Chairperson will conclude so that we can if necessary go to the Committee Stage.

This is to remind you again that tomorrow morning we shall have the meeting of East African Community, the venue has been changed from Grand Imperial Hotel to our home here, starting at 9.00 a.m.  

I want to again to give a friendly whisper that, please be on time. Let us manage time; let us be there in big numbers.  It is in our home, but you start such a meeting and then you see three or five or ten, it does not reflect well on us. So, please advice our friends who have not heard this, to come in big numbers so that we show the support we give to the East African Community and political federation we hope to get in the year 2013.  

I thank you very much for your contributions, honorable members. Therefore, we come to the end of today’s business.  House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. when we shall continue with the business.

(The House rose at 6.03 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 1 March 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

