Thursday, 22 February 2007

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members I welcome you to this sitting.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.45
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the closing of NTV made by the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Information and National Guidance, dated Thursday, 22 February 2007. 

Honourable Speaker and honourable members, please forgive my failure to be around last Tuesday to give a statement to Parliament to explain why NTV was switched off and to clarify on the allegation that the closure was either politically motivated or that it might have resulted from corruption.

Your directive, Mr Speaker, on the 14th of February 2007 required me to consult the previous week’s proceedings in the Hansard so that I return next week, which is this week, to give answers to the allegations that had been aired on that issue.

MR OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a procedural point. Would it be appropriate for the Minister to present his statement without Members having a copy and without any kind of apology?

THE SPEAKER: Oh! You don’t have copies? –(Interruption)

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr Speaker, I have given the copies to the assistants to distribute –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So you prepared copies - Okay then, if you want copies before he can read his statement, then we can go on the other matter then we can revert to it later.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 16/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

2.46
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Baptist Kawanga, DP): “How much funding has the Uganda Government so far made to Tri-Star Apparel, and for what purpose?
ii)	What is the present state of operation at Tri-Star Apparel factory?
iii)	What gains, if any, has the Uganda Government so far made from its investment in Tri-Star Apparel Company?”

Mr Speaker, although I had initially directed this question to the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry, it was referred to the Minister of Finance. 

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are still consulting on that.

THE SPEAKER: But this question has been on the Table for quite some time, and the rules provide the duration for which you may consult. Apparently, you are standing in for the Minister of Finance – now let the Minister of Finance answer this question on Tuesday.

MR FELIX OKOT: Mr Speaker, this question has been on the floor for quite some time. Yesterday, the Minister for Finance promised that they would answer that question today. Today, none of them is in Parliament, so what are we going to do?

THE SPEAKER: That is why I have ruled that the Minister answers this question on Tuesday.

MR FELIX OKOT: If you could add on, “without fail,” Mr Speaker, then that would be okay. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I do not need to emphasise, because I have ruled. But on Tuesday, it will be lined up among the questions.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, can we then correct our Hansard by noting that the Ministers for Finance are not here, but note that they are doing further consultation?

THE SPEAKER: No, well, hon. Kivejinja has said that he is standing in for his colleagues; maybe he got an appointment to do that. But let us leave this because we have ruled that it will be on Tuesday.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO SECURE FINANCING FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK FOR THE PURPOSES OF FINANCING THE EAST AFRICAN TRADE AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: No, the business is in the name of the Minister of Finance, either it takes off or not. Since I don’t see any minister, therefore, we move to another item.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, on the issue of a written statement from the minister, I don’t see any effort being made to distribute papers of that statement; it is only the Front Bench with it.

THE SPEAKER: I was going to move to that. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL MEDICAL STORES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members as you remember, a week or two ago, hon. Butime, on behalf of the Committee on Statutory Authorities, read out a report but it was such a big report and we said that you needed time to internalise it before you could make your contribution. I think sufficient time was given and now you are in position to make your contribution on the report. Am I right? No, the chairman is ok, he did his work – the report was presented. Hon. Odit was not here and he asked hon. Butime to present the report. 

However, what I know is that subsequently, Prof. Omaswa replied to what was commented on in the report; I don’t know whether he got a copy of the statement.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I am in possession of his response and I also advise that the sector minister should be in position to present that report on his behalf.

THE SPEAKER: But have copies of this statement from Prof. Omaswa been given to the Members so that when they contribute on you report, they may also have the views of Prof. Omaswa?

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I am not sure whether Members got copies of this statement form Prof. Omaswa, but what I know is that a copy was given to the Clerk’s office for production of more copies.

THE SPEAKER: Do you think it is fair for this statement to be known by the Members?

MR ODIT: I think that it would only be fair that we look at it, we internalise it and where appropriate we incorporate it in our recommendation, because it is not a small response.

THE SPEAKER: In view of the fact that he made that response, do you intend to adjust your report?

MR ODIT: Probably to make our report complete, we would be able to adopt certain positions that he presented. But it doesn’t change so much –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No it doesn’t, but it affects him as an individual and that is why he made a statement. Don’t you think really that your committee needs to look at it, and if necessary – because his integrity was apparently attacked? So would you make a statement in light of his statement, or do you want to –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, the best thing that I can do now on behalf of the committee, is that we defer the debate on the report, so that the committee meets on Monday and looks at the areas of contention and form our opinion on the submission. On Tuesday, we can be able to have the report fully debated.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, now in view of this, the debate on this matter is deferred to Tuesday.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, arising from the response of the chairman, the questions that you have put forward, and bearing in mind that Prof. Omaswa felt that certain writings in that report attack or refer to his personality, which he wanted to clear, wouldn’t it be fair if Prof. Omaswa comes in person? Because it is one thing making a statement and another probing further to find out more because this committee would certainly be limited. But if it goes by what Prof. Omaswa has written, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the professor to be summoned?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think that is to the discretion of the committee. Should they be satisfied after reading it, they could ask for a comment – this is entirely for the committee to decide.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the chairman of the committee. If at all you invited Prof. Omaswa to appear before the committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, what happened was that the report was read and Prof. Omaswa got to know of what had been said in the report, and in his view he was not given the opportunity to appear before the committee to explain. So he travelled from Geneva, he got a copy of the report and made a statement. It is up to the committee to consider the statement. In case they need further interview with him, they can do so.

MR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, the report mentions many people, supposing all those mentioned write reports, does that mean that the debate will go on and on?

THE SPEAKER: I don’t want to speculate. (Laughter) Now that this disposes of this matter, let us go back to the statement. I don’t know if you got a copy of the statement –(Interruption)- then if you have not, do you think you should listen to the statement, in case – otherwise, you would be postponing this matter. Oh! If it is here, then let us get the report.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.00
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I had just started reading the statement and I am requesting that you accept my apology for my failure to be around last Tuesday to give a statement to Parliament to explain why NTV was switched off last month and to clarify on the allegations that the closure was either politically motivated or it might have resulted from corruption.

Your directive, Mr Speaker, on the 14th of February 2007 required me to consult the previous weeks’ proceedings in the Hansard so that I return next week, which is this week, to give answers on the allegation, which had been raised.

Mr Speaker, maybe before I answer those two concerns, Parliament may benefit from a brief background of the whole story of NTV since I took over the reign of Information and National Guidance.

As a trader in information, the best way to stop any speculation and idle grapevine gossip is to give full information on what the public would be excited about. I would, therefore, request the indulgence of the House, to give this background.

Africa Broadcasting (U) Ltd., herein after to be referred to as ABL, is a company that was incorporated in Uganda on February 2nd 1998. The ABL parent company is Nation Media Group. This company is a subsidiary of the Nation Media Group that owns majority shares in the Monitor Publications Ltd. Through Monitor Publications Ltd., Nation Media Group owns majority shares in KFM, a Kampala based radio station. This is part of the Aga Khan investments in the country.  

In accordance with our law, the Electronic Media Council, in May 2005 ABL applied for a license. The company was told that Government had imposed a moratorium on the issuance of licenses. It was advised by the Broadcasting Council that it could be granted a license if it found a company that had not put its license to use and was willing to surrender it to ABL. Under these circumstances, M/s Gentech Ltd sold its license to ABL, which was licensed in December 2005. Thereafter, ABL obtained frequencies from the Uganda Communications Commission. 

At this juncture, it is important to note that Gentech Ltd had secured permission to operate a TV station in Kampala on July 22nd 2005. The permission to transfer the license to ABL was granted on October 3rd 2005 in a letter signed by Eng. Godfrey Mutabazi, Chairman of the Broadcasting Council. The importance of this is that within less than three months, the company had secured and sold a license without even any facility for broadcasting. 

Mr Speaker, in January 2006, ABL through a Kampala based law firm called MMAKS Advocates, requested for confirmation of the validity of the license they had received in December 2005. Eng. Mutabazi not only confirmed the license but also communicated in a letter dated 30th 2006, that ABL was free to commence broadcasting.  

In June 2006, the Broadcasting Council declined to renew the license of ABL that was due to expire on 22 July 2006. At this point, the issue was brought to my attention. My guidance was to the effect that selling licenses was akin to selling chits, a practice that the Movement had done away with because of corruptive tendencies.  

Prevailing Circumstances

Mr Speaker, opening up of the broadcasting industry was effected without a policy framework. To date there are over 140 stations in this country and over 20 television stations. There is now a policy document in place, and the first draft of the Bill to operationalize it is under consideration in my ministry. We have further moved away from having a national broadcaster to a public broadcaster, in the name of Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). 

The challenge that we have, as a Government, is how to simultaneously reach the entire listening public, in the event that there is a need, while using existing infrastructure of radio and television stations. This situation can be envisaged when there is, for example, a national emergency, a disaster, security threat that requires immediate dissemination of information or an event of national character that necessitates the entire listening public to have the same information at the same time from the same source. Under the existing state of commercial radio and television stations with different arrangements, it is not practical to address the challenges without having to introduce new and specific requirements for their operations.

On 27th October, in my letter referenced BC CONF/01, I guided the council that if ABL satisfies all other conditions of the law, they could go ahead to license them with some additional conditions as a point of entry to re-organise and regulate the industry in our space. I guided that the license to be issued to this broadcaster or any other applicant shall henceforth be subject to the following additional conditions:

1. 	All new radio and TV stations shall put in place and be designated in such a manner that will enable or permit them to receive an appropriate live signal feed from the national broadcaster for re-broadcasting at the same time as the national broadcast.  

	The essence of this requirement is to create a condition so as to reach the entire listening public simultaneously for national news, coverage of national events or programmes, moments of national emergency or disaster, security threats or any event of national character that necessitates the entire listening or viewing public to have access to the same information at the same time and from one source. 

	There is also the address of the President issued to the nation in his or her capacity as Head of State or on any national celebrations, or any issue of national importance.

2. From time to time, the broadcaster should be obliged to allocate time to promote Government programmes.  

Focusing on why NTV was switched off, I have the following to state:

Since the Movement Government came to power, two legal instruments have been enacted to manage the media sector. These are the Electronic Media Statute of 1996 and the Electronic Media Act.  Under those two legal instruments, the power to manage the media is vested in the Broadcasting Council. In the 1996 Statute, clause 11(a), the Council is empowered to coordinate and exercise control over, and to supervise, broadcasting activities. This same power is transferred to section 10(a) in the Electronic Media Act. 

In the issue as to why NTV was switched off, the council was executing its normal business. As soon as the issues that caused the switch off are addressed, NTV will be back on air. If it was done wrongly, there are channels to address the issue.

On the second issue, it is Government policy to attract investment. Government, therefore, cannot have a political motive to frustrate its own policy, more so to a serious investor like the Aga Khan network.  

As to corruption, honourable members are aware that corruption is not a commodity displayed on shelves and can only be a subject of investigation. I would like to assure you and the House, Mr Speaker, that as long as I am in charge of this sector of Government, I shall deal with any person or groups of persons who may attempt to frustrate Government policy. With inside knowledge, it is my intention to work with the media amicably and assist our over liberalized media on how to work with progressive governments like the NRM Government in our mission to inform, based on fact; educate and entertain the public. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.09
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for being brave and making an attempt to explain matters surrounding the closure of NTV. 

When you directed that the Minister comes to give an explanation, though he has hinged on two issues, you had expressed a concern that I put this matter in writing. I did put these matters in writing. I had a four-page letter, which I submitted to your Office and to the Clerk. It was handed over to the Minister of Information, but for some reason he has decided not to answer these queries. As you have heard from the Minister, there is no –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a statement by a minister. We have Rules of Procedure to guide us. It is clearly stated in rule 40(2) that you do not debate a statement by a minister. I think it was an oversight on our part to say that we do not debate these statements. If there are matters, which you sent to the Minister and he has not touched on them in his statement, formulate questions, which you can put to him to answer. That is the only way we can comply with the rules. 

I see the concern. I told the Chairman of the Rules Committee to revisit this particular rule, to see if it was an oversight or if we need to amend it to allow debate on statements of a minister. Unfortunately, as of now nothing has been done. Since you know what you put in that long document, formulate them as questions to the Minister.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, let me clarify on this matter. I actually did comply with your directive. This document –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I saw it. I received a copy. All I am saying is that now that he has not answered the queries in his statement, put them as questions. Put these questions to him. There is no motion here. We are dealing with a statement.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, notwithstanding the letter that I wrote through you and was delivered to the Minister –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You wrote to the Clerk. You gave me a copy.

MR BANYENZAKI: I wrote to the Minister. The letter is addressed to the hon. Minister of Information through the Clerk to Parliament. I did not write to the Clerk, Mr Speaker.

Notwithstanding this letter, which I wrote detailing what I wanted to explain about the closure of NTV, there was an understanding on the Floor of the House when I had moved a motion, which was duly seconded. We had actually started debating that motion but the Leader of Government Business on that day pleaded with me to shelve my motion until today, if the Minister does not give a satisfactory explanation as to why NTV was closed. Now that the explanation is not satisfactory –(Interruption) 

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on how best we can have this issue resolved. In the statement the Minister referred to a number of individuals and authorities who, unfortunately, may not be in a position or this House may not be in position to verify the authorities and the information he was quoting. Would it be procedurally right if the Minister’s statement is referred to a relevant committee of Parliament so that it can be dealt with? It could then provide a report to this House, in order to enable the House fully debate the report and the issues that have been raised. Wouldn’t this be procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what I had in mind. The Minister came the last time and he did not make a satisfactory statement, according to hon. Banyenzaki. We wanted to give him time so that an elaborate statement could be made. We understand from hon. Banyenzaki that he sent certain details to the Minister but the same have not been referred to in this statement. He was saying that he had moved a motion and he was persuaded by the Minister to shelve it. 

I think the best way to go to the details of this matter is not through a motion. Maybe you know what happened, but other Members may not really know. Therefore, I think if we want to know exactly what happened to this particular case, we send it to the appropriate committee of Parliament and give a timeframe. Other people, other than the Members of Parliament seated here, will be able to go and make their case and give technical details. The committee then will come with a comprehensive report, a well researched report that will be presented to us so that we are able to contribute to something whose details we have. I am not forcing you, but I am entirely in agreement. I think that is the best way we shall be able to find a solution to this problem.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true that we were not in the House when this matter came up, but it is also true that we have been following events in the House for some time. Listening to the Minister’s statement, I was just wondering what the fundamental issues are that would require a committee. The Minister has not pointed these issues to this House in his statement. He has not said that the action of the Broadcasting Council was based on some legal imperative, or on some administrative imperative that necessitated switching off Nation Television.

If we as Parliament accept that our committees are used to delay justice to those who were legitimately cleared to broadcast, it becomes a serious problem, not only in the eyes of the investors but also in the eyes of the Ugandan public who look to Parliament to defend their interests. In my view, since the Minister has made the statement he made, I would encourage hon. Henry Banyenzaki to move his motion and we debate the matter.

THE SPEAKER: We do not know whether what the Minister has said is true or not and yet you are saying that we are delaying this matter. What would happen if we vote on this matter and because people do not know the details, they vote according to the side they represent? It is a problem because the truth would not have been known.  

The committee is going to help you to know the truth because there are other people who are not here but are knowledgeable about the incident and even the owners will be able to put up their case. Therefore, when eventually you debate you would have heard both sides. The only side we have now is that of hon. Banyenzaki who moved the motion.  Would you really depend on what you read in the newspapers as the truth? So, don’t you think that our committee would be able to investigate and give us a balanced report that we shall use to debate this matter? I personally think that is the best way.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, as you have heard from the statement of the Minister, the issues he was trying to quote are in the Electronic Media Act, which is the law that this Parliament passed. There is another law guiding this media and these broadcasting houses, the Uganda Communications –(Interruption)

MR KALIBA: Mr Speaker, you have ably guided this House in conformity with our Rules of Procedure. I wonder whether it is in order for the honourable member to continue debating this matter when the rules are very clear! I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in my view what we want to know is what happened, why it happened and find the solution. When somebody says there is a law, which we passed, I do not know it. It is true Parliament passed that law but I do not know it off my head. I am a lawyer by profession but if you ask me, “You passed this law, can you tell us section 214?” I do not know it. Therefore, what we need is the committee. The committee will examine all these; we study the law and get the facts in order to come to a reasonable conclusion. I send this matter to the committee to handle and report within a week.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I have a motion on the Floor of this House, which was deferred to today. The motion is a different matter now because it is from a Member of Parliament. So, I need to be guided –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, on the Order Paper, which I am following, I do not see a motion. If you want to move a motion so that it is placed on the Order Paper, give a notice as required by the rules and we shall debate it. Otherwise, this matter is sent to the appropriate committee to handle and report within a week.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, this is a motion without notice, which I intend to move under rule 46(1)(k), which provides to move a motion without notice. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the strangers’ gallery we have Uganda Marty’s University, Nkozi students; you are welcome. We also have our children from Kisugu Junior Academy, Kampala; you are most welcome to your Parliament. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  With all due respect to the advice you have given to this Parliament, I was a little concerned on the attitude and impudence in which the Minister of Information and National Guidance presented his report to Parliament. I think for heaven’s sake, the problem is not Parliament. Parliament is just concerned about what could be happening to NTV. But that kind of impudence exhibited does not make me very comfortable –(Interruption) 

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to demean the hon. Minister of Information and National Guidance that I was impudent?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you substantiate what you stated?

MR ODONGA OTTO: With all due respect to the Minister of Information and National Guidance –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, let us start business on this matter. The sooner we have it disposed of, the better for us, for the country and for the concerned parties. We give it one week and everybody, including the public, is informed that the committee will be handling this maybe, starting from tomorrow. Therefore, whoever wants to come and assist the committee please, do so including the owners of this television station.

MR OKOT OGONG:  Mr Speaker, I am standing on our rule 40. I want guidance from you now that you have noted the baggage we have and the problems that we have on rule 40. Could we refer rule 40 to the appropriate committee –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Which is rule 40?

MR OKOT OGONG: Rule 40 is about statements by ministers.

THE SPEAKER: I told the chairperson a long time ago here that this rule requires a review and the communication I have received is that the Committee on Rules is meeting on 6th March to deliberate on it. We shall thereafter make a report to the House. Meanwhile we are caught up, you see, we are caught up by the rules we passed. They are inadequate as far as I can see and that is why I referred the matter to the committee to revisit it so that maybe -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I think we appreciate the communication of the committee but apparently the committee does not seem to see the urgency in dealing with these rules. Just like this matter, which has a lot of financial implications, is referred to an appropriate committee and given one week, why doesn’t Parliament give this committee one week to deal with this so that we resolve it and proceed in a free way?

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, the view is that you may have a lot of business to handle and the rules but because ministers are making statements almost daily, you can convene your meeting specifically to deal with this particular rule. Make your report to us so that we can pronounce ourselves on it. You will be able to make up your mind about it within a day.

3.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In view of what the Members have expressed, we are in position to meet in the next three days and make a report on Tuesday. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Very good. Thank you very much.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I just want to seek guidance on how we are proceeding because when I read in our Rules of Procedure, specifically rule 56 on motions to amend rules, it clearly stipulates on how a motion to amend our Rules of Procedure is supposed to be conducted. I do not know how we are going to proceed on this specific one, whether your referral to the committee would ordinarily constitute a motion or it would require a Member of this House to move a formal motion so that we comply with the Rules of Procedure?

THE SPEAKER: No, the Committee on Rules has demanded from time to time to be advised on how the rules are helping us. So this will be an initiative from the committee advising the House to adopt its recommendations.

MR BYAMUKAMA:  I am referring to the NTV issue.

THE SPEAKER: No, please. It is closed. (Laughter)

MR BYAMUKAMA: I wanted to ask which committee because there are two committees. There is a Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, which deals with the Communications Commission, and there is a Committee of Works, which deals with the Broadcasting Council, now which committee?

THE SPEAKER: The Broadcasting Council. (Laughter) I now see the Minister of Finance has come and we have disposed of what is on the Order Paper. So, honourable members let us get the answer to the question supposed to be answered by the Minister of Finance.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 16/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

3.31
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Baptist Kawanga, DP): “How much funding has the government of Uganda made to Tri-Star Apparel, and for what purpose?
(ii) 	What is the present state of operations at Tri-Star Apparel factory?
(iii)	What gains, if any, has the government of Uganda so far made from its investment in Tri-Star Apparel Company?”

3.31
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Rt hon. Speaker and honourable members, the question concerns Tri-Star Apparel Corporation. The honourable member wanted to know the funding of Tri-Star Apparel and the purpose of setting it up.

On 24th April 2002, the government of Uganda entered into a memorandum of understanding with Apparel Tri-Star Uganda Limited (ATUL) to enable the exploitation of concessions and benefits granted to Uganda under the United States of America’s African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA). Uganda particularly sought to benefit from the special provision that allowed less-developed countries to enjoy duty free access to apparels made from fabric originating from anywhere in the world, until 30th December 2007 -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, today as our rules –(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Sit. (Laughter)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, the Minister is reading a statement and we do not have copies, has it changed today?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kawanga, are you satisfied with the situation so that the Minister continues?

MR KAWANGA: Mr Speaker, the Minister has just given me the answer now, I have a copy.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us proceed.

DR SURUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Government was to provide the cost of infrastructure and working capital, among others. The foreign partners were to provide: 
1.	Skills transfer;
2.	Market access especially to the US market.

This was a pilot project intended to establish the feasibility of making and expanding apparels from Uganda to the United States market. The long-term vision was to enable vertical integration of the textile industry from growing of cotton to final processing and therefore to increase export revenues and employment.

How much money has the government of Uganda given out to ATUL? In 2002, Government pledged to facilitate ATUL to obtain a loan facility of US $2.5 million at an interest rate of 7.5 percent per annum with a grace period of one year of which US $1.5 million was to be made available as capital investment for the importation of machinery and US $1 million for working capital. 

Soon after commissioning of the factory, the government provided a further US $0.5 million. Later on in operations, Government guaranteed funding to the company of US $3.342 million from DFCU Limited; US $0.9 million from DFCU Bank and US $1.758 million from Stanbic Bank, which was guaranteed by Bank of Uganda. Thus in total, Government has provided US $9.4 million to ATUL.

The present state of operations of AUTL factory

Presently, the factory is closed mainly on account of lack of working capital given the lack of sufficient trade credit facilities in the country. Measures are in place to restructure the factory, ownership and management before operations can resume.

Gains are what Government has made from its investment in the company. The company has provided skills and employment to over 1,000 people in the making of garments. It has demonstrated access to the United States market. The company has produced pants and shorts with the output rising from 53,7756 pieces in 2003 to 1,320,528 in 2005. Total export sales since the project inception is equivalent to $10.173 million. The current assets of the factory are equivalent to Shs 6.6 billion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, honourable minister, for the answer. But I want to find out specifically from him whether Government did not advance Apparel Tri-Star $3,060,636 million from the government Trust Fund at the Uganda Development Bank.

Secondly, why has Tri-Star failed to service all these loans? I also want to find out whether it is true that by 31 December 2005, the net loss incurred by that company was to the tune of Shs 22 billion.  

3.39
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Minister of Finance, the total loans are $9.4 million and the sales are $10 million. If you subtract, you get $0.6 million as balance. Does it mean we exported our loans instead of using the money to be able to purchase items, sell and make money?

Secondly, if it is true that you gave out money, where did you get the authority? We know the Constitution says, any guarantees, any loans must be approved by Parliament.  

Honourable Minister of Finance, you said the total assets are Shs 6.6 billion, what are these assets and where are they so that we know? Some of them might be cash! Why is it not being used? Where are these assets? What is the profitability of this company? If it is not making a profit, why are you still interested in it?  

Mr Minister, we have a budget in the ministry for industries and every year we are providing billion shillings for AGOA and this money of course goes in respect of Tri-Star. Is this included in this $9.4 billion we are talking about?

Finally, Mr Minister, who are these new skilled management team trend who are going to run this company, who have failed to run it despite the fact that they have $9.4 million dollars given directly and $1 billion given through the Ministry of Trade per annum?

3.41
MR OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, hon. Speaker. I expected the honourable Minister of Finance to give us some apology for coming extremely late, but I did not get any.  Nevertheless, I would like to seek the following clarifications: Who are the shareholders of this Tri-Star company?

Secondly, does this company have a board of directors? If so, who are they? 

Thirdly, the minister talks of restructuring the company; in the meantime, the employees have been sent home. Is there any guarantee that after restructuring, these same employees will come back? I thank you, hon. Speaker.  

3.42
MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the Minister of Finance aware that there is a report, which was adopted by this Parliament on Tri-Star on this very issue, which was urging Government to recover this money that was given to Tri-Star? If so, are there any steps that have been taken by the government to recover this money?  

Secondly, Mr Minister of Finance, do you agree that actually Government did not comply with the constitutional provision by guaranteeing a loan to Tri-Star? What measures has the government taken to rectify this?

Thirdly, why is Government and specifically you, Sir, and some other ministers like the Minister of Investment, continue to defend this company which is a fraud?

3.44
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just have one clarification I want from the honourable minister. I am interested in knowing why Government, which knows that we have an outstanding problem of energy that affects and has affected very many industries in Uganda to crippling levels, has continued or is giving individual companies huge amounts of money that would boost a sector which would propel us to go for real industrialisation? Why are they interested in this? What is the rationale? Thank you.

3.45
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to ask the minister: Are you aware that Tri-Star project was a total fiasco that no sensible person would support? Is it true that the owners of Tri-Star came with a brief case and got money from poor Ugandans? Is it true that Tri-Star is not servicing their loans that they were given? I want to know to what extent Tri-Star promoted adding value to the cotton from the people of Dokolo. Thank you.

3.46
MR ALBERT CHARLES ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I have only one question to the Minister of Finance on whether he is aware that the memorandum of understanding signed between Government and Tri-Star did not include the aspect of rent for the former coffee building they were occupying. And whether that was by deliberate omission or was it an error and what has that cost Government since they occupied that building and what is Government intending to do towards recovering that amount? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are constrained with time.

3.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti):  Thank you, hon. Speaker. I hold the Minister of Finance in high esteem because he was my lecturer of Economics and today I graduated with a Masters in Economic Policy and Planning. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations!

MR OKUPA: Thank you. Now, I want to handle the honourable minister on economic issues. The honourable minister has attempted to give us the benefits from Tri-Star but he did not take into consideration that all the training, the salaries were paid by the Uganda Government. Taxes were not paid because there were tax waivers. That is how Government would benefit and that is what the doctor taught me at Makerere University.  

On the issue of transport, 71.5 per cent of the transport costs were paid by the government. Rent was not paid by the Tri-star. Power was not paid –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you ask whether tax was paid rather than you giving a position? We can then get the answer from him.

MR OKUPA: How much money did Government spend in training the 1,000 Ugandans? How much did the Uganda Government pay as salaries to the workers? How much in monetary terms was paid as transport costs? How much has been paid for power? How much tax has been paid and now who is going to pay the creditors? You have talked about the net worth of the assets, how much of that is the Bugolobi plant? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want to interrupt you but certainly with all these questions about figures and you want the answer now here, will it be an honest answer from the minister or you will give him time to go and make research?  

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, this will be up to the honourable minister to advise us. I just want the total net worth of the assets. The plant at Bugolobi was offered as security, how safe is it now that Kananathan has defaulted? Finally, why hasn’t Kananathan been apprehended for causing a loss? Today we saw in the papers hon. Bakoko Bakoru Zoe wanted for causing a loss of more than Shs 8 billion to the government of Uganda. What about Kananathan?

THE SPEAKER: It seems everybody wants to ask questions but there is a rule and a limit. 

3.50
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Mr Speaker, you had given me. I have a specific supplementary question to the minister. In order to allow a foreign investor you must have information on that investor; can he produce a personal data of Kananathan so that we look at it? Thank you.

3.51
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before we handed over that property to Tri-Star it had machinery, what exactly happened to that machinery? Has any legal action been considered against this massive loss of Government resources and taxpayers’ money?

3.52
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Mr Minister, you proudly, among the achievements of Tri-Star, reported that they created employment for Ugandans. We also do recall that Tri-Star flouted the Uganda labour laws to the extent that when the workers went on strike, the minister and her commissioner for labour were closed and denied access to the workers that were being employed by that factory. You have further gone ahead to say that this company will re-open. Do we now have an assurance that this company will respect the laws of this country, especially relating to our workers? 

3.53
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, the question as to why Tri-Star has failed to service its debts is a very important question and the main reason appears to be, which we did not know before this plant came into being, the costs of transportation over land bringing fabric from outside Uganda and turning it into cloth and then transporting it back. It is very costly. We did not know this but we know it now. So, if you are competing with companies which do not have to cover that similar distance or which are close to the Coast, certainly you cannot compete with them.  This is a problem and it means that in order to continue to develop a textile industry in this country, we have to integrate vertically into spinning and fabric making and dyeing locally in order to be able to compete.

Now, the final accounts of Tri-Star are in the process of being finalised and audited by the external auditor. I think when the external auditor has finalised the account, we will know the exact amount of the loss. What we have are the estimated figures.  

There was a question on the amount of sales vis-à-vis the amount that we invested. I have to look at that again to see the accounting relationship. I am not an accountant but I will take a look and see whether in fact there is an error in these numbers and come back to you.

Where did we get the authority to lend? Mr Speaker, the authority as I understand was given by the Bank of Uganda not by the government of Uganda. Other loans, which were given by Uganda Development Bank, do not require a guarantee of Parliament to lend since they are banks.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to read this.  “Government has provided US$9.4 million.” Government not Bank of Uganda.  Now, what is this Government?  Is Bank of Uganda Government or you are the government?  

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, in my statement I gave a breakdown of who provided various funds totalling to Shs 9.4 billion and the honourable member can look back. Perhaps I should say that these are Government bodies or Government related bodies. So, I apologise if I should have said Government bodies rather than Government. So, a guarantee was not necessary.

The issue of the profitability of this company clearly does not arise because we have said that the company has been running at a loss. So, I do not know how you can ask me about the profitability of a company which I indicated is running at a loss.

Why are we still interested in this company? The history of this country is well known to the honourable members as a cotton-growing colony, exporting cotton as a raw material. This has continued up to today. I think it is a great credit to this Government that we are making an effort to create a local textile industry rather than continuing to export raw materials. There is relatively less value in exporting raw materials.  Industrialisation is a way of the future. I think the honourable member should support the attempt to industrialise.  

We recognise that when you enter business, there is no guarantee of success. In fact, I did a study of 28 parastatals, which were Government-owned in the 1960s, and I found out that most of these were operating at a loss. So, it is not anything new that we should find that the company -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. Supplementary questions were asked of the minister as a follow up of his answers to the first primary question. The minister attempted to answer one or two of the very many questions asked. I can see now that he is going into a discourse rather than answers to these specific questions. 

I recognise the difficulty, Mr Speaker, that the minister is faced with because he is being asked about figures, about specific actions et cetera. Would it not be, if this process is supposed to help this country in regard to Tri-Star, procedurally more appropriate for Parliament now to request the minister to go back and prepare a substantive statement on Tri-Star that covers all the wide range of questions asked? This would help the minister to bring to this House things that would have also been backed with data, with photocopies of agreements. Subsequent to that, Parliament can then see whether a select committee or any thing should follow up the matter if they are not satisfied. But as of now, the minister is in a very difficult position and he really needs to be assisted.

THE SPEAKER: I think my assessment of your contribution is that it is a helpful contribution if we have to use the opportunity to know. But if we just get this answer and the other, we can proceed. Since we want to know and we want to help the minister - because as hon. Okupa asked questions, you do not expect him to answer, he does not have the books here. How would he answer?  When he answers then it will be wrong answers. So, if you want time really to go to compare notes so that you come back to answer those supplementary questions, I think we can allow you that.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the graciousness of the Leader of Opposition. I am willing to answer those that I can and if the Members are still not satisfied, I will be happy to go back and prepare –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. If you answer those you can, it means you will leave others where you cannot. But now giving you a break will help you to answer all the questions. (Laughter)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I am at you mercy. I will do as you advise.

THE SPEAKER: Let it be on Thursday. Apparently, honourable minister, in your absence there was business for which you were called but again it was in your name. We skipped it because you were not here. That is the resolution for a loan. Can’t we handle it now?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO SECURE FINANCING FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK FOR THE PURPOSES OF FINANCING THE EAST AFRICAN TRADE AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION PROJECT

4.02
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, we have a resolution in which we are requesting Parliament to authorise Government to secure financing from the IDA of the World Bank for the purpose of financing the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation project. The resolution was moved I understand and I would request that the House approves this resolution to borrow from the World Bank.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. Chairman. Honourable members, do you have copies?

4.03
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Copies were given on Tuesday but there are some few other copies with the Clerk and I think they are going to distribute them.

On Tuesday I laid on Table the documents which the committee considered and these included the IDA financing agreement, the project implementation plan and operation manual, the project appraisal document, the draft transport master plan, URC concession agreement, schedule of considered assets, a direct agreement which was a revised concession agreement, RVR performance bond, considered assets insurance policies, the abbreviated resettlement plan, and I also laid on Table an agreement between the government of Uganda and URA.

Mr Speaker, the loan request –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But this is a 14-paged document. How are you going to treat it?

MR KADDUNABBI: I can summarise. This loan request was referred to our committee and the funds are to be borrowed from the IDA of the World Bank and it totals to SDR 18.2 million which is equivalent to US$ 26.4 million. The project will be implemented by two implementing agencies under the Ministry of Works, Transport and URA. There will be a project implementation team. 

The East African Community and the Northern Corridor Transit Transport Coordination Authority countries have identified the barriers to trade in the region and this project is to address such identified problems. The project is also as a product of the need to widen and deepen the regional trade integration with the estimated population of more than Shs 90 million.

With regards to methodology, the committee interfaced with the Minister of Finance, Minister of Works, URA and the committee analysed the documents, which I laid on Table. We also conducted field visits to various places. 

In our field visit to Mombasa, we noted that there is a urgent need to streamline the operations of the transport network including all stakeholders and these include the transporters, clearing agents, Government agencies like revenue authorities and there is also need, which we noted is being addressed at Mombasa that they have acquired more powerful cranes and they have expanded the container yard and they are interested in addressing the non-tariff barriers like the convoys. The project will facilitate the implementation of the tracking as one of the tools to improve transport and trade in the region.

The project will cover the specific areas especially which will need fencing the ports and border posts and coupled with the checking of all goods entering and leaving the ports with the scanners, which they have installed at Mombasa port.

In Dar –es - Salaam, we noted that they have also imported new powerful cranes for the same purpose. We were informed that the Southern route or the central corridor would also be opened and this has advantages considering that we now use only the Mombasa-Kampala route.  

Mr Speaker, in Malaba and Busia, we noted the following:

•	Busia alone collects taxes of about Shs 30 billion per month.
•	There are delays at the post due to a lot of traffic, inadequate infrastructure and the verification and parking yard being over stretched.
•	The Kenya Revenue Authority and Uganda Revenue Authority share the same rood in Malaba for clearing the train, which has reduced the transit time at the post from seven hours to four hours.  
•	Kenya uses a computer system known as Simba and Uganda uses ASCYUDA and they have been interfaced to reduce on the transit delays. 
•	URA is expecting two scanning equipment from China and we were informed that one will be put at Malaba and the other at Busia.
•	The convoy system, which still exists in Kenya, will be stopped as soon as the cargo-tracking system is in place.
•	We also noted that there are no weighbridges on the Ugandan side.
•	The committee further noted that there are joint verifications between Kenya Revenue Authority and Uganda Revenue Authority, which has improved on the documentation process.

In Pakwach, Mr Speaker, we noted that:

•	The station has dilapidated structures, which cannot handle heavy trucks and the bridge, which is the main link via River Nile needs to be repaired.
•	It was also noted that this is the nearest railway station to Juba and Kisangani, which towns need bulk transport hence the need for railway transport.

KATUNA:

•	We noted that there is no parking yard despite the heavy traffic.
•	There are no storage facilities, as the operations are not yet fully computerized. 
•	The sanitation situation is very poor.
•	The structures at the post are all dilapidated and need urgent repair.
•	No distribution of temporary travel documents at Katuna despite the high demand at least by the time we went there. 
•	No banking facility at Katuna.

MUTUKULA:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we noted that:

•	This is the major link to the central corridor.
•	The post has no power supply from the main grid despite the fact that it has to use a computerized programme.
•	The post lacks a parking yard.
•	No weigh bridges at the post.
•	There is no banking facility.

The main objectives of the project are:

To enhance transport, logistical services and efficiency along the transport corridor by reducing non-tariff barriers and uncertainty about the transit time.

It is also intended to strengthen trade growth in the region by securing an effective East African Community customs union.

It is intended to streamline the trade and transport functions in the project countries of Eastern Africa, to increase efficiency and promote productivity in the region.

The components for this project are:

•	Support to East African Community customs union implementation.
•	Institutional support for transport facilitation.
•	Investment support for trade and transport facilitation.
•	Support to Kenya and Uganda Railways concession.

Mr Speaker, we have appended the list given to us and these will be the components to cover Appendix I.

The Ministry of Works and Transport will be responsible for: 

•	Transport facilitation
•	Improvement of cross-border crossings
•	Inland container depot and
•	Support to the Kenya-Uganda Railways concession.

Uganda Revenue Authority will be in charge of:

•	The electronic national cargo tracking system
•	The East African customs union.

The loan amount $26.4 million

The loan is concessional and in line with the government’s debt strategy. The terms are standard IDA with a maturity period of 40 years, grace period of 10 years and a service charge of 0.75 on disbursed and undisbursed amounts and a commitment charge of 0.5 percent on undisbursed amounts.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that Uganda is a landlocked country whose economy depends on the East African ports of Mombasa and Dar-es-salaam.

We also noted that the northern and central corridors in the regional trade sector performance is also very important.

We further noted that non-tariff barriers need to be streamlined and these include the convoy system in Kenya, the weigh bridges, roadblocks, check points, delays in cross-border clearance and movement. 

Immigration management needs to be streamlined.

There are many cumbersome procedures of clearing at border posts, which cause unnecessary delays.

We also noted that the proposed regional cargo tracking system would inevitably help transport and the trading community immensely. 

The improvement of the northern and central corridors will improve on the transit time.

The harmonisation of border operations will lead to efficient utilisation of the resources.

On the cargo tracking system in the region, this will depend on the community based voluntary information system, as we were told and might need legislation to come to this Parliament.

Also the proposal to establish an inland container terminal in Kampala will be a blessing to Uganda.

We noted that weighbridges are important not only for revenue collection but also for the maintenance of the road works. 

The committee was informed that two scanners will be installed at Malaba and Busia posts and these are coming in from China.

The railway line as per the concession agreement has not targeted passenger train transport.

Also our committee noted that the performance bond issued for Rift Valley Railways in favour of Government of Uganda by UAP Insurance of Kenya expires on 31 October 2009 and this bond is of only $3.0 million. 

We also noted that the railway line of Tororo-Mbale-Pakwach is going to be opened but Kampala-Kasese and the Greater Kampala Passenger Service Lines have not been highlighted for re-opening.

The performance bond by RVR does not clearly provide for automatic renewal in case of expiry. This might be exploited or abused.

The committee noted that the minister had moved a motion to have a partial risk guarantee of $15 million as part of the proposed resolution and it is not reflected in the credit agreement. We took this to be abnormal. The committee was informed that negotiations for PRG were still going on.

We noted that the project has components that can be implemented without the partial risk guarantee. As regards the completion of the negotiations for the partial risk guarantee, the committee will get these documents and scrutinise them accordingly.

The concession agreement as signed by Government of Uganda and RVR and the interface agreement both of which were signed in April were amended substantially by another one, a direct agreement signed on 30 October 2006.

We, therefore, made the following recommendations:

•	This credit facility is timely with the efforts of the regional integration and it should be given the support it deserves in order to take off.

•	The stakeholders in this project should start sensitising the community on the importance of proving the information for the electronic cargo tracking system. The proposed legislation to the effect of cargo tracking information required for the implementation of the project would be made mandatory.

•	The sanitation infrastructure at border posts should be repaired urgently to create a fair working environment and all border posts should be supplied where possible with power from the main grid.

•	Travel documents across the country should be harmonised and the loopholes therein sealed to promote cross border trading.

•	The proposal to extend the railway line to Juba via Pakwach should be supported early enough.

•	The performance bond should be revisited to be of ten percent of the conceded assets value because it is the known practice. The conceded assets value is close to $300 million. The performance bond should be amended to include a provision for renewal within 12 months before expiry. We are proposing to include that the guarantor should notify Government of the failure by the concessionaire to renew within six months to the expiry if not already renewed in 12 months. Failure of the guarantor to notify Government should lead the bond to continue being in force. 

•	The partial risk guarantee should be considered on its own merit and the resolution brought by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be amended to delete the paragraph referring to the partial risk guarantee. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we are proposing the components to be catered for to be under: 

•	Component one: Support to implementation of the East African customs union. 
•	Component two: Institutional support for transport facilitation.
•	Component three: Investment support for transport facilitation.
•	Component four: Support to the concession of the railways.

All this totals to $26.4 million. 

Mr Speaker, under component four -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I thought you could refer us to these annexes because going into details may not be possible.

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, there was a problem of people mixing up the issues. That is why we felt it important that we specifically -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you can refer us. When you make a point you can say look at annex so and so for the details. I think we can follow. That is why you gave us these details.

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, this one is not annexed but it is in the concession IDA agreement and I wanted to read it for the Hansard. 

Support joint concessions of Kenya and Uganda will include: 

(a)	Assisting in restructuring assets of URC, training and retaining URC staff in their new role.
(b)	Building the capacity of URC and Ministry of Works and Housing and monitoring the environmental and social effects of the railways concession.
(c)	Improving the assets of URC including rehabilitation and reconditioning of the two wagon ferries, that is MV Pamba and MV Kaawa, under a dry dock.
(d)	Carrying out a feasibility study for upgrading of about 500 kilometres of Tororo-Pakwach railway line.

Two is the implementation of the abbreviated resettlement action plan.  

Mr Speaker, we also recommend urgent repairs of the grounded vessels and the implementation of the findings of the commission of inquiry into MV Kabalega. We also recommend that the Kampala-Kasese line and the greater Kampala passenger train be studied in view of reviving their services.

Lastly, in our recommendation, the committee on infrastructure should study further the entire process of concessioning of Uganda Railways Corporation and inform Parliament accordingly.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends to this august House the approval of the credit facility of only $26.4 million based on the benefits and the sensitivity of the areas it is addressing. The PRG of $15 will remain not approved. The committee would like to thank all the stakeholders for the cooperation they extended to us during the meetings and field visits. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and the committee, for the report.

4.30
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to comment on these loans that we have been accumulating here in Uganda particularly to implement various projects. We have actually realized that most of the loans that we approve go to projects that have been designed from outside and we go ahead and implement them without questioning them. 

In this case, when I was looking at the project component, I discovered that around 37 percent of the cost was going to administration. In the normal practice of project design, when the administration cost exceeds ten percent whoever is involved in approving, propagating or disseminating information on that project should do so cautiously. I am glad that they brought this project to us to approve.  

Mr Speaker, they are asking for $26.4 million. I think they had a problem because the reason why the chairperson had to read the agreement was because they sent it before the approval of this project so that we would agree to support things like technical support. What technical support do we need in this matter? Don’t we have the expertise in our ministries who are earning a Government salary to do this work? Then there are other things like feasibility studies that are costing $1 million. Can Uganda, a country that is crippling with health and poverty problems, afford a feasibility study of $1 million?  

Let us look at the common man in Buyaga Constituency that I represent. They are asking to start a district and the government cannot raise Shs 200 million to start a district and then you give $1 million.

THE SPEAKER: This is Kagadi.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, Sir, when we are discussing matters of approving money, I am talking on behalf of my constituents and my children tomorrow who will be paying for this loan as it is going to expire after 40 years and I will not be here. My son or my daughter will be here and he will question why I sat here and I did not speak about this.

Mr Speaker, I think in my own wisdom that we should go item by item regardless of the agreement that was signed. We should not bind to useless things that are going to put this country in a direction we do not understand. We are focused and we want to move forward.  I would think that we approve items like the national cargo tracking system, weigh bridge, border crossing improvement and those joint border posts like Malaba, Busia, Mutukula then Katuna. There is something which –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean honourable member that this House should go into details of the works to be carried out?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: There is another item that says additional studies. What are they studying? You are doing feasibility studies and additional studies. What are you doing? Even up there is what they are calling monitoring and evaluation. In that component what are you trying to do? I thought in monitoring and evaluation there is a lot of studying. Really, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg that we just approve what I added up and it comes to $18 million and we proceed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.36
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee who did a good job but never came up strongly on the issues they observed.  

Concerning the concession, the period of concession is about 25 years but the guarantee of the bond is for three years. What is this we were going to do? This is complete theft, if I could put it that way, because after three years anybody could declare anything. 

If you look at the terms of the loan they are saying 0.5 percent on undisbursed amount. I thought we had what we call the implementation plan and the implementation plan will specifically state how much we are taking in a specific year and if we do not utilize that in that year then that should be what should attract the surcharge. You cannot surcharge the total amount simply because you have not been planning. I do not know which technical officers we have who really do this for our country. I am giving free advice.  

Mr Speaker, we have the audit report of 2004/2005. It reads: “Unutilised balances by the Government of Uganda on borrowed funds is about Ugshs 1.8 trillion”. We have unutilised the balances yet we are going for more money. Why don’t we utilise the already unutilised balances? Our borrowing is aimed at consumption. The best thing is not to borrow -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting to this House that a loan that was procured for Kagera Bridge should be used on Karuma Bridge as long as the money is still there? Is it possible?  That is not possible.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are right. If you borrowed money to do something and you have failed to use it, the best thing is to cancel that deal, take the money back and plan a new stock but not to have a stock you have not used and add on another one. We have a portfolio that is not operational or being utilised. I am happy Prof. Kamuntu is saying “No” when he is on that side but when he was this way he was saying, “Yes”.

MR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, some of the money that we have is borrowed for long periods of time. It is not to be used instantly. We have loans for five years and loans for six years. If these are outstanding- I do not know if the honourable member is suggesting that we disregard our agreements and use this money at once. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am happy the Minister of Finance knows that some loans are for five years while others are for a short period. However, the penalty is for money that should have been used and has not been used. For your information in 2004/2005, you had a penalty of Ugshs 7 billion for non-utilisation of the money that was due for utilisation, and you are a Minister of Finance who is responsible for the utilisation of this money.

Mr Speaker, concerning the net present value, we who are laymen in economics, for a project to be used you must see that the net present value is positive. I have read the document but I have not seen the net present value of this project. Therefore, I am not yet convinced that this project has positive value. It could easily become like Tri-Star because the net present value has not been shown.  

Mr Speaker, they are saying that the money is going to be administered in Uganda but the Insurance Company, which is giving the bond of Ugshs3 million, is from Kenya. You are saying you are building local capacity yet at the same time building capacity in another country.  

Mr Speaker, concerning the Partial Risk Guarantee, I am so surprised that the government put it in the resolution instead of putting it in the contract. Supposing they refuse, what will happen?  The best thing would be to, first of all, concretise the agreement on the Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) before Parliament can pronounce itself on it.  Suppose it fails, what happens? 

I would like to add to the committee’s report that concerning the insurance- I know we are going towards an East African Federation, but we should also think of Uganda, that is, we should have an insurance firm issuing a bond from Uganda.  

Secondly, we should have the bond equal to the period of the concession, not three years as you are talking about because anything can happen after that.  

Thirdly, the Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) should first be concluded. Once the agreement is done, you can come and we deal with it.

I agree with the committee on the issue of the performance bond being equal to 10 percent of the assets. I would urge that the bond we are going to put in place should be equal to the US$ 30 million and not US $ 3 million, which is only 0.1 percent of the assets if we are really Ugandans and we really think for the peasants in Uganda.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I request if the House could agree that the Minister of Finance goes back, concludes all this, puts it in paper and then comes here. Only then shall we give him the go ahead.  The reason is quite simple. You have a table here that my brother was reading from, the Uganda Component and Costs. Component four is: “Support to Concession of the Railways US$ 4 million”. If you go below it, there is technical support and investment support, feasibility study, that my brother has mentioned and marine services support. Surely, where are we going? Is this consumption or production? 

I want us to borrow money but we have over-borrowed money for consumption. You hear workshops and seminars; the CAOs are going to die on the road. You recall the early child nutrition, which was a disaster. It even made our children malnutrition instead of making them better. I would request that we go back and study these components. Mr Minister, the other time when you were on the other side you were talking well.  I would request that you talk well now.  Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I just want to seek some clarification from the chairperson of the committee and the minister on this agreement. First of all, I support the argument or the reason behind bringing this loan. However, there are flaws and the committee has raised it in the report.  The committee came short of saying, no, let us not approve until a, b, c is done. They were just being kind. 

I just want a clarification from the chairperson since is an expert on insurance. Is it possible for a Ugandan company to get secure insurance outside Uganda when it is operating here?  I just need a clarification from you.

Furthermore, the issue of having the Partial Risk Guarantee (PRG) in the resolution and not in the agreement is a serious one. That alone would have stopped the committee from approving this loan.  I request the minister to let this be included in the agreement before this loan is approved. 

The issue of the performance bond is another serious one, which needs to be addressed before this House approves this loan.  

And finally, from the way I get it from the committee. In recommendation 8.13, reads that: ‘The Committee on Infrastructure should study further the entire process of concessioning of URC and inform Parliament accordingly”. I get it from you that there is a problem in this. 

Now, if we are approving this loan before this comes in, I do not know if it is legally possible, why doesn’t this Committee on Infrastructure handle this matter first before we approve the loan? I need this clarification. I would beg that this matter be addressed before the House approves this loan.

4.49
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mine is a simple observation on recommendation and maybe a clarification from the committee.  In the body of the report, it is reported that some activities are taking place on the other side of the boarder of Malaba and Kenya - a joint processing of documents, I thought that by the nature of the East African Customs Union Act, 2004, it would apply in the same way to Katuna, because it is a sort of a regulation within the Act. I do not know what sort of legislative proposal is needed by this Parliament as per your recommendation 8.3.  

Another point is, I would urge Members – this is not clear, the report did not mention the support to marine services. I think it is really needed. As you know, we have cargo passing through Lake Victoria where the business community has been facing a problem, and right now, it can act like a tariff barrier. This should be addressed clearly.  

I need to know from the committee chairperson whether he was talking of support to marine service or repair grounded vessels? I would have no problem with this, it should come out clearly.

Another observation is on the infrastructure, recommendation 8.13, on the assets. I do not know whether they internalised well the agreement, because if the agreement was made and the assets were handed over, then I see a problem here if Parliament comes in. 

So, I also seek a clarification from the committee on how Parliament can come in - if the agreement was made and the assets were handed over, what should Parliament do?  Thank you.

4.52
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, District Woman Representative, Tororo): I want to give an observation here on the recommendation of the committee that they should add the use of railway haulage on the roads as compared to the trailers to save our roads. 

We note that at Malaba, because there is no weighbridge, when the transporters reach there, they again park heavy loaded lorries which spoil our roads. So, I would like to urge the committee to emphasise the use of railway haulage as compared to the trailers. This would also reduce on the accidents on that road.  Thank you.

4.54
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Western Region): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for bringing this resolution to Parliament. I believe it has been timely in view of our efforts of moving towards Regional Integration in East Africa.  

But, a few weeks ago, I watched the Minister of Trade and Tourism, hon. Janat Mukwaya, presiding over the initiative to establish an inland port at Malaba. This is one of the strong components, which we are supporting in this report.  May I know from the minister whether the funding for that facility is different, and is government taking another avenue to look for sources of funding for that facility, which is not part of this loan?

Secondly, a few months ago, the Government of Uganda and the Government of Kenya agreed that the management of the railway service in the two countries be managed by the South African Company. But the component in this report about the railway transport system takes a very big percentage of this loan.  May I know whether part of this loan is going to complement the private investor from South Africa who is going to run the railway system network both in Kenya and Uganda?  Otherwise, I would be comfortable and support this loan once some of these issues I have raised are cleared.  I thank you.

4.57
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas I support the borrowing of money to improve the infrastructure and enhance the capacity of tracking cargo in the region, I think one of the important factors that are not properly addressed is harmonisation of procedures within the region.  What I mean is that the cranks of having this loan, the technology and the infrastructure is to have the capacity to transport goods and services within the region with as few barriers, both tariff and non-tariff barriers. 

Mr Speaker, if you look at the present situation, there are very many barriers within the region that affect the movement of cargo, for example, the question of transit parking yards. Transit parking yards have been put in place, especially in Uganda. We have transit parking yards in Masaka, Ishaka, Ntungamo and here in Kampala. Transporters are compelled to park their trucks at these yards and pay money. The process of parking and waiting is a cost to the transporters, and that cost relates to a cost to the final consumer. The element of transit parking yards is a phenomenon only existing in Uganda. 

As we look at enhancing technology and infrastructure, we should also look at the procedures. We should look at things like the weighbridges. I was surprised that the chairman of the committee was saying that the weighbridges are revenue collecting centres. Actually, the money generated from those parking yards is nothing compared to the damage that is done to roads by the overloaded trucks. The people responsible in government should look at a way –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you my honourable colleague for giving way. In 2002, the government had come up with a policy that was counterproductive. As we entered the East African Customs Union, we said the major component of removing a tariff barrier is free movement of trucks, cargo and people day and night. As I talk, trucks are now free to move from border to border. We had a problem of terrorism by then, but currently trucks are moving day and night, unless a driver feels that he wants to rest in a certain place. We had that same problem, but it is over.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some colleague is asking where we are. 

Mr Speaker, the truth of the matter is that even up to now these parking yards are in place; private investors own them. There is no reason why motor vehicle owners should park in these yards. The point I was trying to make is that it is a cost; having vehicles park and pay a fee at the parking yards increases the cost of the goods to be paid by the final consumer.

Mr Speaker, related to procedures within the region, one other factor that increases the cost for transporters in the region is the fees, especially the insurance fees, payable by Ugandans transiting through Rwanda and Burundi. Whereas with the yellow sticker one is supposed to transit through Rwanda and Burundi without paying more money, it is a fact that in Rwanda and Burundi the PTA yellow sticker is not honoured. Once you have a problem in Rwanda and Burundi, you are compelled to pay and compensate a third party before you are allowed to transit. 

The point I am trying to make is, whereas it is good to borrow and enhance our technology and infrastructure, it is important to look at the transit procedures within the region. It is important to remove the non-tariff obstacles that transporters face within the region, which is a cost to the final consumer. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.03
MR OLEGA ASHRAF (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Mr Speaker, we should thank the committee for work well done. They have come up with very important issues regarding transport in our region. As I talk now, the amount of cargo being transported on our roads is actually too much for the roads. In West Nile, roads that have been put in place are actually worn out now. If we could have this railway line from Tororo through Packwach to Juba repaired and reactivated this will reduce the amount of cargo these trailers move with on our roads. I think the intention of this loan is a good one.

Secondly, I can see there is something to support marines. Not long ago our people used to die in our waters, but if some fund is directed to support marine services, it will improve the situation and accidents will reduce. 

According to me, this loan should be approved because it is meant to improve the volume of trade in this region. Africa does not need aid; we need trade. If you can improve trade in Africa this habit of begging will stop. Some of the issues here can be rectified if we can put a mechanism in place to check how this money can be used. Why do we bother? Why don’t we allow this loan to pass? 

Mr Speaker, the intention of this loan is correct. Since this railway issue is mentioned, I am really concerned. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.06
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support government in getting this loan. Let me, first of all, talk about a few things my colleagues have alluded to. People have been questioning the percentages being charged on this loan.  

Mr Speaker, the Parliament of Uganda cannot change standard terms of IDA. We either take the loan or we do not. We cannot just change the terms. It is even stated here very clearly, that this is in line with the government’s borrowing strategy. So, I do not understand why Members should stop this loan, which is badly needed for the development of our country.
 

Mr Speaker, this loan is going to assist us a lot in our integration in the East African Community.  One of the major tasks for us as East Africans is to see that we integrate into the East African Community so that we can move.  This project is going to do exactly that.  Now why are you opposing it?  Don’t you want the community?

Mr Speaker, we have also been told that –(Interruptions)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, hon. Member.  Mine is just simple information to the effect that probably other MPs who are opposing the loans have their mandate and are under instructions.  So, I do not know how someone can have the mandate to challenge another person’s mandate whether to support or oppose the motion.  The people of Aruu may think differently from the people of Luwero.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think what the hon. Member for Katikamu raised was that there are certain conditions in these kind of loans which you do not change and yet somebody was suggesting that we delete the feasibility study.  This issue is not one sided; this is what the hon. Member was saying, that there are certain standard terms which you cannot as individual change.  I think that is the point he is making.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I do not want us to come here and assume that we cannot discuss these things.  They are discussable.  We are telling our colleague that he should not assume that we have rejected the loan.  What we are rejecting are the terms: If the undisbursed charge commitment is 0.5 percent, it should not be on the whole amount; it should be on the amount which was due in that period and that is common in such agreements – (Interruptions)

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, the standard terms of the World Bank are that you pay 0.5 percent on the undisbursed amount after a certain period of time has been reached, and these are the terms, which are being brought before the House.  I think that it is totally out of order to think that Uganda can change the terms of the World Bank, which are standard. They are well known to all the loans we have been receiving for the last 50 years.  I think we should spend our time a little better than this.  Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, IDA terms are agreed between member countries in the Board of Governors, World Bank and IMF.   The IDA terms are: You have a period of the loan for 40 years; you have a grace period of 10 years; you have a service charge of 0.75 percent and you have a charge on undisbursed amount.  When they talk about standard, it simply means that Uganda as a country can change these terms in the Board of Governors of the institution where we are members.  But it would be a waste of time to begin talking about changing these terms in this House, Sir.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, arising from the clarifications that were presented to this House by the two ministers, would this exercise now not be an assignment left to the Executive?  Why should it be brought before this Parliament?  Because each one of them is saying we are wasting time, therefore, the best thing is for Cabinet to take its decision and inform Parliament that we have now finished our job.  That is the clarification I wanted to make.

THE SPEAKER:  The main purpose of this debate for authorisation is to consider whether the project for which the loan is being sought is worthwhile.  That is it.  If you think that we are going to benefit from the project - some of the conditions are standard not only for Uganda but any body falling under this loan has to follow this.  So, we cannot say that we do not need the consultant or the monitor. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Ugandans have been very proud of having helped Southern Sudan to be liberated.  This project is even proposing to extend the railway to Sudan.  So you are going to gain a lot in this trade.  Now, do you want this trade to be taken by other countries when you are here?  We must move very fast so that we can gain in all spheres and get as much as possible from Sudan.

MR OKUPA: Honourable Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to impute bad motives on us when we have just asked questions to be clarified?  No one has come here and said we are not going to approve this loan; I have not heard any person say so.  We are only saying, can these things be clarified to us?  So, is he in order to impute bad motives on Members who have asked clarifications such that they are able to either support or say, take it back and sort these issues?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think his contribution in respect to that point was in respect to those, according to him, who are opposed.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Mr Speaker, I am glad that when he was presenting, he said that we are going to enjoy the benefits of going to Sudan, and this is why I said that we should not borrow for just the sake of borrowing but only borrow when we need the money.  

For instance, we want to carry out a feasibility study.  He has already said that we do not need to carry out a feasibility study in order to study something that is known.  What are you looking for?  I want you to go to Arua Park and find out.  When you reach there, you will not need Parliament to approve money to do a feasibility study.

DR SURUMA: The opinion, which is formed by an ordinary man on the street is not a substitute for a professional feasibility study –(Laughter)- The feasibility study is an extremely serious requirement to determine the viability of a project - an expensive project. We cannot spend millions of dollars on a project when we have not done the feasibility study; it would be a waste of public funds –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, just a few minutes ago, the same Minister when we were debating on Tri-Star said he did not understand the cost of processing and producing textile products using materials which are imported from outside this country. Now, he is saying feasibility study is very important. Is he in order, therefore, to try and ignore the position, which he had stated before that Tri-star was implemented without a feasibility study and this one now requires feasibility study and there is money for it? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, in respect of Tri-star, the Minister did regret that it was an oversight.  Now he is saying that feasibility study is not about going to Arua Park but the people giving the loan have to be convinced before giving the loans, and it has to be done professionally. I think that is the point the Minister was saying. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, as a Member of the Committee, I want to inform Parliament that as from the Sixth Parliament, Seventh and Eighth Parliament, if you are to rank the loans that we have approved in this House, this loan ranks number one because it is to promote trade in our country. 

This loan, I want to inform you, Members, is so critical if Uganda as a country is to develop. This loan is going to premise Uganda as a country to compete favourably and effectively in terms of trade in this region. In this loan, there are so many things that are going to happen. Can I enumerate them? You have them even in the report.  The report is so clear but Iam wondering why other Members are not in position to understand it. So, Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to Members, especially Members of the Movement because this is within our manifesto –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Member has very good points but they are missing in the report. Maybe, if these issues were in the report we would not have challenged it, but it is because you are a Member of the committee. When we look at the report, the Member never signed it . Is he now presenting a minority report in favour or against? Is he in order to get up and give us information, which he should have given in the committee where he is a Member?

THE SPEAKER: No, this is an assessment. Let us really profitably use the time because eventually we shall decide. 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I think hon. Okot Ogong has really put it right about the trend, which is going to be enhanced by this loan. 

Let me also talk about these performance bonds; somebody said that they should have been got from Uganda companies. When you are asking for a performance bond, you ask for an acceptable performance bond whether it is from Europe, Asia or wherever. It does not matter as long as it is acceptable. So, somebody should not come here and confuse us that it should be coming from Ugandan Insurance companies. I agree with the Members who have said that this performance bond should be raised to 10 per cent as a normal procedure.  

Let me also touch briefly on what some Members do not want to see in this table of the loan we are going to get. They are talking of feasibility studies. How can you refuse a feasibility study? How are they going to look at these posts like Katuna and others? We need to go in these projects with knowledge not assumptions and opinions; opinions can be right; they can be wide and wild. We want to go there with knowledge so that money is properly utilised.  

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I appeal to all of you that we be one, support this loan so that our country can move ahead. Thank you very much.

5.22
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  At times I wonder whether street vision is not better than old age version or vision, which may be expiring very soon before even this loan we are intending to get comes into effect. 

We have lots of problems in this country about this thing called feasibility study. It seems in this country anything to do with feasibility study has to begin from across the Nile. If you critically looked at that table and contrast it with the statement on page 6, you would find that actually the feasibility study has already been done. 

I quote bulletin 4.4.  it reads: “This is a major link on the railway line to the North. With the anticipated business boom in the Southern Sudan, this railway line needs to be repaired and put to the standard.” The first bulletin under that reads; “The station has dilapidated structures-” How would they know that it has dilapidated structures if they had not done a feasibility study? If a feasibility study is anything beyond this, why until now do they have to come and put it there - all along they have not been seeing that the structures are dilapidated?  (Interruptions)- Excuse me, I beg for your protection -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification as to whether feasibility studies on this loan have observed the aspect of micro economic stability. This is because the moment you open up railway transport in Uganda you may lose the money you get through taxes on fuel.  So, my crude economics tells me that we would be in more trouble because will lose the taxes of Ugshs 100 per litre since people prefer railway transport to fuel transport.  So, I have a right to be informed by Dr Suruma so that by weekend I am well abreast.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, we are talking about revamping the Northern railway line, and here we are talking about a feasibility study for revamping the Northern line costing US$1 million. You have explicitly put it clear on page 6 about what is happening on the railway line. Would it not be wise for you to put this money into actual work of trying to make the railway work other than trying to say that you are going to do a feasibility study for revamping the railway line?  The people of West Nile are more interested in action of putting the plates back other than having to do a feasibility study –(Interruption)

MR  TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way.  I would like to inform you that in most cases when you study the projects that have been brought by the World Bank, or are being funded by the World Bank, they put these jargons to hide certain information because they want to give jobs to their people.  They just want us to approve and not to refuse. They use them as technical –(Interruption)

MR  BYANDALA: Is it in order, Mr Speaker, for the honourable member to come here and start telling lies that it is the World Bank, which makes up there projects?  These projects are made by the Government of Uganda officials who seek money from the World Bank; the World Bank does not design projects.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that a feasibility study is an attempt to estimate the benefits, the costs and the expected profits of a project.  It is a professional serious work and not merely observing whether a station is dilapidated. That is not a feasibility study.  A feasibility study is an extremely serious work that is done before any serious project is undertaken.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we conclude this. I will give you another opportunity next week.

PROF. EPHRAIM KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, Uganda as a country is a shareholder in the World Bank. Much as we have very small shareholding, we are still members of board of governors and World Bank.  Consequently, I would like to inform the honourable member that the World Bank does not impose- in any case Uganda being a member of the World Bank, the bank would not be imposing anything on the Government of Uganda.  For that purpose the distinguished member would want to distinguish between something which Uganda is not a member of and something for which Uganda is really a shareholder.  

MS BAKO: Thank you. I know for sure feasibility studies are very serious studies and they may also be very serious money eating studies as well.  Mr Speaker, it is not extremely untrue that some of these terminologies are put in place so that some people are protected from eating monies. I happen to have been one of the participants in the mid term evaluation of the NAAD projects in this country. If you can have an opportunity to look at what happened, then you would understand that the honourable member is not about to lie.  Otherwise, the issue about having to do a study when even at one point in time the Northern line up to Gulu was rehabilitated and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us really conclude this issue.

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, it is always in your wisdom that you decide accurately. Thank you.  These loans –(Interjections)- the Northern line most definitely needs to be acted on. We will not be interested in seeing so many studies other than real action. If we are to approve this loan, do less of the bookwork this time. We expect action.  

If you look critically you are giving the terms here, “investment support for transport facilitation.” in other regions. When it comes to support to the concession for the railways for the case of Northern Uganda it is feasibility studies for revamping railway line. I think we need to act  at this moment in life and in time before history judges us so harshly and before we become a curse other than a blessing. We need to take our country as a whole.  We do not want to have a Uganda that has a visible divide.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable member, it appears this motion has generated a lot of interest. There are a number of issues that have been raised that the ministry will have to address; and there are many people interested who have not been able to make their contributions.  So, I have decided to adjourn the House we continue with the debate on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.32 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 27 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

  

