Tuesday 23rd February, 1999.    
	
Parliament met at 2.25 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES SPECIFIED OFFICERS BILL, 1999

MAJ. BUTIME:  I beg to move that the Bill entitled 'The Salaries and Allowances Specified Officers Bill, 1999', be read the first time. I be to move.  

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL BILL, 1998.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we had started on this Bill and we ended on Clause 11. But as you are aware,  when the Chairman of the Committee presented the report, he went further and gave the background to the kind of amendments which the Committee had suggested.  So, I would imagine that there may not be any need for detailed explanations for the amendments which the Chairman is going to present to you.  But if there is any clarification that is required, it will be given.  I hope this will help us expedite the business of the House.

MR. KIRENGA:  When we adjourned, my amendment was being debated.  I do not know whether it was exhausted so that we can put a vote to it.  Otherwise, the debate was still continuing, until somebody raised the question of quorum.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  When we adjourned, I was explaining to the Committee of the whole House that there was a misunderstanding between what is in the Bill and what hon. Kirenga was raising.  The Member was concerned mainly about Ugandans being denied an opportunity to appeal to the High Court if the Minister would reject an appeal on them on certain matters which actually as Ugandans they have a right to.  We, in the Bill, are talking about work permits and permanent residence.  

I have just discussed this matter with the Member and we have agreed that I raise the following amendment.  That,  "every person aggrieved by any decision of the Minister under Part IV and Part V of this Bill," -  Part IV,  Mr. Chairman, deals with registration of citizens and issuance of national identification numbers and cards.   Part V deals with passports.  In the case of a Ugandan, if a Minister was to reject an appeal from that Ugandan - "he should have a right to appeal to the High Court." And the decision of the High Court shall be final.  

But in the case of a work permit and permanent residence by an alien, the decision of the Minister should remain final and we harmonise that one by moving that any person aggrieved by any decision of a Minister under Part IV and Part V of this Bill may within 30 days after the decision is communicated to him or her, appeal to the High Court against the decision of the Minister,  and the decision of the High Court shall be final.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kirenga, is that the position?

MR. KIRENGA:  I do not know whether I read 30 or 13 days, but I think it was 30 days.  I have no objection to the position as explained by the hon. Minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 11 be amended in terms as read by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to).
Clause 11 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.
Clause 13.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman, the Committee found that we should describe who the citizen by birth is and transfer the Clause from the Constitution to here.  So, delete Clause 13 and insert the following new Clause. "The following persons shall be citizens of Uganda by birth. (a)every person born in Uganda, one whose parents or grand parents is or was a member of any indigenous communities existing and residing within the borders of Uganda as at the 31st day of February 1926 and set out in the Third Schedule of the Constitution and; (b) every person born outside Uganda, one of whose parents or grand parents was at the time of birth of that person a citizen of Uganda by birth."  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  This is transplanting from the Constitution to the Bill; I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I beg to seek clarification on a point of procedure so that I can introduce an amendment which should have been 13(ii).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  13?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Yes, Mr. Chairman;  or whatever number that will be given.  But it is an amendment under (ii), Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think the procedure is that, if this is a new Clause, we shall consider it after we have dealt with the Clauses that were originally in the Bill.  Unless it was proposed to replace an existing one.  If it is to replace an existing one, then we would deal with it here. But if it is a new one, it is dealt with after we have exhausted the current Clauses in the Bill.  So, I hope we shall remember and consider it.  But let us be clear on this.  Is it replacing something or is it a totally a new one?  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  It is a totally new one. So, we can stand it over and -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please remind me,  in case I forget. 
I put the question that Clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.
                 
 (Question put and agreed to).

MAJ. OTOA: Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I would like to propose an amendment on Clause 14 (i).  I want the sentence, "shall be presumed to be a citizen of Uganda by birth,"  to be deleted and be substituted with the sentence, "shall be registered as a citizen of Uganda on attainment of 14 years."  The whole Clause will now read, "A child of not more than five years of age found in Uganda whose parents are not known shall be registered as a citizen of Uganda on attainment of 14 years."

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I quite remember that this was a subject which was seriously debated in the Constituent Assembly.  I had a background on why such a person was presumed to be a citizen by birth, because you found him in Uganda, you do not know who his parents are.  So, this is a constitutional matter which was settled when we dealt with the Constitution.  We cannot change it now.

MAJ. OTOA:  I just wanted to make it sound a little bit better by not making a presumption, and putting a criteria of making somebody a citizen of Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, in fact many people had that view which you are expressing, but at the end of the day the Constituent Assembly decided and it became part of the Constitution that in such circumstances, the child would be presumed a citizen of Uganda by birth.  When we are dealing with a Bill, we cannot actually change the Constitution and put it that way.  

MR. KIRENGA:  I want to inform the Member on the Floor - in addition to what you have told him - that this is a reproduction of the Constitution.  Let me read him the Article 11, Clause (1) "A child of not more than five years of age found in Uganda,  whose parents are not known,  shall be presumed to be a citizen of Uganda by birth."  And this is actually what has been reproduced.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is it clear hon. Member?

MAJ. OTOA:  You see, my concern here is not to smuggle in something to amend the Constitution.  What I am against is the word presumption.  But, I withdraw the Motion.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  The Committee proposes that Clause 15 sub-clause (ii),  we delete 'from two years' to the end of the paragraph,  and insert 'five years or more.'  The reason is that, we want to avoid people marrying by convenience.  Also in (b) sub-clause (ii), we delete 'ten years' and insert '20 years.'  The reason here being that we should be careful with the people we give citizenship, we should study their character, so that later on, they do not let us down.  That is why there is that period,  so that they are studied.  I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think let us start with the first one.  The first one is on marriage.  The Chairperson is saying that the period when this person becomes a citizen should be extended from three to five years - to frustrate marriages by convenience.  

MR. KIRENGA:  I am opposing that amendment, because of the constitutional provision.  In Article 12 of the Constitution, Clause 2(a) says, "every person married to a Ugandan citizen upon proof of legal subsisting marriage of three years or such other period prescribed by Parliament."  

My question here is, the Constitution has already stated a period of three years or another period.  Have we got a right to substitute it?  Although I think three years cannot be altered,  we can prescribe three years or five years.  There are two periods: three years is already given by the Constitution, but Parliament can prescribe an additional period, but the three years should be there.  That is how -(Interruption). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think what is in that Constitution about the three years, is to the effect that you do not consider proving the marriage for purposes of considering citizenship until a period of three years has expired.  But the purpose here is that for granting citizenship,  it should come after five years.  I think there is no contradiction.  Well, I am not supposed to debate, but that is how I understand the provision.

MR. MED KAGGWA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I fully concur and wish to add that hon. Kirenga should not deprive what the Constitution gave to Parliament and that is the power to vary that period you have referred to. So, the five years can pass, we are competent.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that those in favour of the amendment by the Chairperson say 'aye',  to the contrary 'no'.
     
        (Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And the second was 10 to 20 years. 

MR. KIRENGA:  I do not know whether I have the same interpretation in that the Constitution has put the period of residence at 10 years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you read it, please?

MR. KIRENGA:  This one says, "a person who has legally and voluntarily migrated to and has been living in Uganda for at least ten years."  That is what the Bill says.  And the Constitution Article 12 Clause (2) says,  "The following persons shall,  upon application,  be registered as Ugandan citizens - (b)"every person who has legally and voluntarily migrated to and has been living in Uganda for at least ten years or such other period prescribed by Parliament."  The Bill has stated ten years,  which is okay.  But in the amendments by the Committee,  they are trying to change the period prescribed by the Constitution from ten years to 20,  because of the word "or."  

Again in my submission here,  I think Parliament has granted 10 years.  We should not change it.  If we are to change it maybe we can make it less.  Although I think the argument is the same as the previous one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think the interpretation is the same.  I now put the question on the amendment that the period be extended to ten years.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 15, as amended agreed to.

MR. KIRENGA:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  When you were putting the question you said ten years and the House said, 'yes'.  That is what I saw.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I said, 'varying from 10 years to 20 years';  those in favour say 'aye' to the contrary 'no'.  And you said, 'aye'.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Clause 17,  delete Sub Clause (4) and (5) and insert the following,  "A person who wishes to be granted citizenship by naturalisation shall make an application to the Board in writing in the prescribed form and shall comply to the requirements of the sub-section (5) of this section."  In our report we saw that this application,  instead of being in a Schedule,  should be a substantive Clause.  That is why we are moving this section to be a substantive Clause in this law.  I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: There is Clause 5 which has some amendments which we deleted, but then we have some amendments on that.  The qualification for citizenship are that he or she, (a) has resided in Uganda for an aggregate period of 20 years; (b) has resided in Uganda throughout the period of 24 months immediately preceding the date of application; (c) has adequate knowledge of a prescribed vernacular language or of the English language; (d)is of good character.  And (e), he intends if naturalised, to continue residing permanently in Uganda.  I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I support the amendment.  But I would like to propose an amendment for (d), to read, 'he is of high moral character'.  We replace the two words 'good character' with 'high moral character' so that it is consistent with what has been used earlier on when we described the nature and the character of the individuals.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I hope the proposed amendment to the amendment has been understood.  The hon. Member is saying that there are Clauses which we have dealt with before - according to his submission - that have used the phrase 'high moral character.'  He is proposing that for purposes of consistency, we use the same terminology.  I do not know whether this is true or not,  but if it is for consistency,  maybe it may not be a problem.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I do not have a projection on that. 

MR. KIRENGA:  The phrase 'high moral' is not proper when we are discussing things like giving citizenship.  We are not only going grant citizenship to priests,  and the religious.  Anybody who has got a good character,  even if he goes to discos and he enjoys himself, should be granted citizenship.  Rather,  he should qualify.  But if we are going to look only for those who have got high moral character, we might exclude those who have got three or four girlfriends but really  qualify.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No.  Hon. Kirenga, the explanation was that already in the Bill,  you have used 'high moral character',  and he was saying that we should be consistent.  And I do not know if it is true that when he used high moral character he intended to apply it to the priests, and nuns,  but I think he was just pursuing the question of consistence.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am a bit uneasy about using the phrase 'high moral character' in this particular case.  I cannot quite understand the context under which we actually passed the other one which is being referred to.  I wish this would be made clear before I support it.  Because, it is so difficult to determine high morals.  Who is going to decide on this?  And in any case, are all Ugandans of high moral character?  Why should we subject other people who want citizenship to this particular requirement, when we know that not all of us citizens are of high moral character?

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also feel very uneasy about that term, 'high moral character.'  And I wonder what will be used as the bench-mark to decide that one does not have high moral character.  I tend to differ from hon. Kirenga who imputed that people who go to discos do not have high moral character.  I sincerely believe there are genuine Ugandans with high morals who go to discos.  And therefore I find the term rather superfluous and very difficult to define and measure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Okumu-Ringa it seems your struggle for consistency is causing a problem.  Can we proceed?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Whereas this could have been a good bench-mark,  if Members so desire - that it is going to set a high standard  - I am prepared to withdraw it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question on amendment of sub-clause (5).

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. RWAKOOJO:  I was looking through a Clause for definitions and I looked for naturalisation and I did not find it there.  Could it not be proper to define what it is,  because some of us or everybody may not understand what it is?

MAJ. BUTIME:  Under Article 13, the Constitution does provide for citizenship by naturalisation.  And it says that "Parliament shall by law provide for the acquisition and loss of citizenship by naturalisation."  The Constitution provides for registration and leaves the issue of naturalisation to Parliament.  And we are handling the question of naturalisation in this Bill,  Clause 17 as follows, "The Board may grant,  to any alien,  citizenship by naturalisation subject to the Provisions of this Section.  (1)The Board shall issue to a person granted citizenship under this Section the certification of naturalisation",  and then it goes on and on, up to 18.  It is clear therefore that that one does not have to be explained in the definitions.    

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: When you look at our Constitution, I think there are three types of citizenship we are following.

One is by birth; the second one is by registration and the third is by naturalisation.  And for all these, there are no definitions for them in this section,  because they are already catered for in the Constitution.

MR. RWAKOOJO: I do not know whether I am asking too much, but I know 17 is talking about naturalisation.  And it is true what the Chairman is saying about the other forms of being a citizen,  but would it be asking for too much if they were put in the definition?  What does one have to do to be naturalised?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think what they have told you is that they have used the stamp, lifting it from the Constitution. Apparently the Constitution did not make a definition of this particular term which they use in the Constitution.  Now are you suggesting that when making this Bill, we should go ahead to make a definition? You see, it becomes a problem,  I think,  to them.  Can we, when sitting here, try to define the terms used in the Constitution, by Bill?   I think that is the question, and therefore they are leaving it to you, you read the details in that particular Clause, you will understand what is naturalisation.  But we do not want to assume the powers to define terms of the Constitution when making this kind of Bill.
  
MISS. BABIHUGA: Mr. Chairman, I think hon. Rwakoojo has a point.  The provisions under Section 17 are not really focused in defining what sort of a person would apply for naturalisation and what the whole process is like.  They just used the term and put the provisions for such a person.  But who would such a person be?  I would find it very difficult to support the inclusion of this Clause unless it was really clear about what sort of a person it is.  Because, Mr. Chairman, you know that many people are craving to live in Uganda because of the peace that is in Uganda.  Who is this person who must be naturalised?  Thank you.

MR. WAMBEDE:  Thank you very much.  Let me give this information.  On the same sheet where the Committee has proposed amendments, that is Clause 17, it goes on to (5) to say, "The qualification for naturalisation are that he or she has resided in Uganda for an aggregate period of 20 years" - then you go to (b), (c), (d), (e).  Those are the qualifications that we are putting forward for naturalisation.  In other words, somebody who has lived here and who meets all these conditions.  Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I think what they are saying is that by elimination, he has not become a citizen by birth, he has not become a citizen by registration, therefore that person who has become a citizen of Uganda other than those two is a citizen by naturalisation.  And as I have said, this Parliament is fearing to start interpreting the Constitution because we may make a mistake.  I think that is the problem.  But the hon. Member for Rukungiri said hon. Rwakoojo has a point,  how would you define 'naturalisation' yourself?

MISS. BABIHUGA: If hon. Wambede is telling us that a stranger will come here in Uganda and enjoy the benefits of this country illegally for 20 years before this process comes into place, then it is wrong.  I do not think that there should be a person who should hibernate in Uganda only to be naturalised later.  Therefore, it would have been proper for the Committee to bring a proper interpretation before this House,  so that we pass this bit of the law aware of the kind of person we are dealing with.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MAJ. BUTIME: Maybe I was not understood.  Citizenship by birth is already in the Constitution. Citizenship by registration is also clear in the Constitution.  The Constitution left the question of naturalisation to Parliament.  That is what we are dealing with now.  The Committee is saying that that person who should be naturalised,  should fulfil the following.

One;  he has resided in Uganda for an aggregate period of 20 years.  So, if you come here from Ceylon, you live in Uganda for 20 years, you cannot be registered as a citizen.  You are not a citizen by birth, but you qualify under naturalisation,  if you have lived here for 20 years.

Two; that you have resided in Uganda throughout,  for the period of 24 months immediately preceding the date of application.  That is, after your 18 years of stay here, you should make sure that you do not go out of this country for at least 24 months before you apply.  That is the qualification number two.
  
Three; you have adequate knowledge of a prescribed vernacular language preferably Runyoro, Rutoro or any other language.  So, you should have an idea of a language in this country.

Four;  good character.  And five; you intend, if naturalised, to continue residing in Uganda permanently.  Once you have attained those, you should be considered for naturalisation by the National Citizenship and Immigration Board.

Hon. Rwakoojo wants us to say, 'naturalisation means somebody who has stayed in Uganda for this period,'  and that is what we are saying.  So, really I do not know what exactly you want to be prescribed,  or what you want to be explained in the definition section.  But this is what we think should qualify somebody to be referred to as a naturalised citizen.  As for losing citizenship, that one will come when we move on.  That is an amendment which was brought in by hon. Kagonyera, but we are not yet there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we are not in a general debate.  The stage at which we are  is a Committee Stage and at this stage, we only consider Clause by Clause.  If there is an amendment, one Member would propose it.  In this case, if there was a person who thought he had a definition, he should have brought it by way of an amendment.  But I do not have that kind of amendment, so I cannot entertain this general debate when we are in Committee stage.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I propose to amend Section 5(a) that the person should have resided in Uganda for an aggregate period of 50 years -(Laughter)-  -(Interjection)- Mr. Chairman, it was a slip of the tongue.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Members, this is how we moved.  We moved an amendment listed No.47, we pronounced ourselves on it, and we passed it.  We pronounced ourselves on amendment 5, and what we were going to do was pronounce ourselves to the Clause as amended.  So, at this stage we cannot go back to a matter on which we have pronounced ourselves. When we were pronouncing ourselves on 17 as amended to stand part of the Bill - when we are dealing with the Clause of the interpretation - that is when we should have given a definition,  but this was not done.  

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Mr. Chairman, I find it strange that the requirements for getting citizenship by registration and by birth should have the same qualification as those for naturalisation.  In view of the lax policy that we have on the refugee status in our country, Mr. Chairman, I had a feeling that we should make it difficult so that only persons who cannot otherwise go back to their country are naturalised in Uganda.  We run the danger of getting every refugee becoming a citizen of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I understand we stood over Clause 3.  This means that after we have exhausted other Clauses, we shall be able to consider whatever you may have in mind - because it deals with interpretation.  As for her problem, since we have already pronounced ourselves on the amendment, we cannot go back.  So,  now I put the question that Clause 17,  as amended,  do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 18

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I would like to get clarification on 18, Sub-section (1), paragraph (b) which reads, "Voluntary service in the Armed Forces or Security Forces of the Country hostile to, or at war with Uganda".  The clarification I am seeking is, are these personnel defined as security forces or security agencies?  If they are security agencies, then I would like to propose an amendment,  because those people could even be more dangerous to the security of the State,  than those involved in actual armed conflict.  I am seeking that clarification.  Thank you.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: I think if the hon. Member went ahead and read (b), that would answer his question.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   I now put the question that Clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 19

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I propose that to move Clause 19, Section (2), we delete (a), (b) and (c), and in their place add that, "subject to the Provisions of this Section, the Board may by order deprive a person of his or her citizenship by naturalisation if, the Board is satisfied that," -  you remove all that and you say, "you deprive him according to the Provisions of the Constitution." 

The reason I am saying this is that I recognise that Section (b) is as is provided for in the Constitution, is very, very unfortunate.  I think Ugandans should borrow a leaf from elsewhere in the world.  We are not the first people to allow people not born in Uganda, to become citizens of this country.  If you go to the United States or Britain, there are many people of Ugandan origin who enjoy exactly this same privileges and rights,  as people born in those countries.  

I find it unfortunate that when a person has qualified to become a Ugandan citizen, you continue to remind them that after all he is not  citizen.  I think these people should be subjected to the same laws as every other Ugandan citizen is.  Article 21 of our Constitution prohibits discrimination,  and treating these people in this manner is an act of discrimination.  

I would like my Colleagues to appreciate the fact that the world is a global village today.  In the United States,  there is only one thing that a naturalised American cannot enjoy,  and that is to become the President of the United Stated - that is all.  Everything else a naturalised or registered American citizen enjoys,  the same as a person who is American by several generations.  

MR. KAGGWA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A minute ago, the Member holding the Floor was complaining about our discrimination in the status of people granted citizenship,  and a minute later he is saying it is not done in America yet he referred to it earlier and said that you cannot be President there,  if naturalised.  Was I about to hear him say that they should have let him also bid for that post,  since there is no discrimination there?   That is the clarification I want to have.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  What I am saying is that in a country like the United States,  you are subjected to the same laws as everybody else.  We also have provisions under our other statutes, so if you are a citizen by naturalisation and you commit a criminal offense,  you should be treated accordingly.  If you commit treason,  you should go to the gallows, but you should not lose your citizenship.  

Some of these sentences sound a little bit too political to affect citizenship.  It may serve the purpose of today but look at them!  For example (a) says that when one has shown himself or herself,  by act or speech,  to be disloyal or cause disaffection towards the Government of the day!  Now this disaffection, to be affectionate means to love and we do agree that even today - in spite of the fact the NRM Government is a very good one, there are many people who do not love it.  And it would not be a good enough punishment for them to just lose their citizenship.  So, I really do not like things that are very political,  especially when they only reflect the politics of the day.  Even this thing about war you know, Mr. Chairman, that some of the more famous people in the world -(Interruption).

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I rise on a point of procedure.  With due respect to Prof. Kagonyera,  the issues he raised are very pertinent but in the absence of a proposed amendment,  it turns into a debate which becomes difficult for us to follow.  Could we have an amendment so that we follow procedure?  If there is no immediate amendment,  we can stand over this.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Are you saying that this amendment is not supported by another person?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, we do not have the amendment, so to support it or not to, may be difficult.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: At least the Chairperson has the rules, and they say so.  It is also supported by hon. Kirenga.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for helping because I had this amendment typed and circulated last week.  I was going to justify my proposals for the amendment,  when I was interrupted. 

I was going to say that some of the famous citizens of this world are people like Che Guevara.  Che Guevara is a very famous citizen of this world;  if we are choosing world citizens of the millennium,  he may be one of those.  Che Guevara went all over the place and fought to free other people.  And I find that it is in order for people, if they think there is a problem in another country,  to be associated with the situation.  I would like a liberal approach to this,  and allow people to exercise their citizenship and if they go wrong, be subjected to the Penal Code and other rules.  

To have Ugandan citizens tethered because they were naturalised,  is like we gave them with the right and took away with the left.  People do not become Ugandans because they are angels they can even be framed.  Recently there is a young Ugandan in America who was charged with rape of a girl in a city he did not live in.  Had he been unlucky,  this man would have been sent to jail for more than 12 months,  and if he was a naturalised Ugandan he would lose his citizenship! 

If you read Thomas' trial, there is a guy called Roger Casement who was charged and sent to the gallows for treason against Britain.  Everybody pleaded against the verdict to no appeal.  Several decades later,  Roger Casement was found innocent and the argument was that he could not have committed treason to a country of which he was not a citizen.  So, there is a lot of injustice that goes on in these aspects of citizenship,  and war.  Therefore I think Ugandans should develop a thick skin;  if you want to fight,  go ahead but if we get you like this Tucker - we are going to try you according to the law.  With all those reasons I have given,  I move that Clause 19(2) (a),(b),and (c) be deleted.

MAJ. BUTIME: Thank you very much.  I was looking for Prof. Kagonyera this morning to harmonize this matter.  Therefore, I agree with him on Clauses (a) and (c)  being deleted.  That is what I wanted to tell you.  
However, I want to persuade him to leave Clause 2(b) intact for the following reasons.  It is first of all a constitutional requirement.  Article 14, "a person may be deprived of his or her citizenship if acquired by registration,  on any of the following grounds - (b) voluntary service in the armed forces or security forces of a country hostile to,  or at war with Uganda."   I was proposing that because of the seriousness of (b) in our Bill.  If a citizen who has been naturalised into a Ugandan violates part (b), he should lose his citizenship.  And I would persuade the hon. Member to agree with me.

MAJ. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to seek clarification from the Minister as to why such a person who has helped the enemy to fight Uganda cannot be subjected to the other laws which apply to all other citizens;  and if he is found guilty he is sentenced to death or punished according to the law.  Why would we have to deprive him of the citizenship?  Why do we not let the laws of the land apply?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe, hon. Members, let us look at the Constitution,  because I listened to the hon. Member for Rubabo and then the Minister's concession;  I think the whole thing comes from Article 21.  Article 21 prohibits discrimination, although the Constitution has allowed a certain discrimination,  that is why a person who stands for President of Uganda must be a citizen by birth.  So there is that discrimination,  permissible by the Constitution,  so we cannot challenge it.  

But the discrimination which the hon. Member was talking about was what was reflected in (a) and (b) which the Minister has considered and it should be deleted because it is against the Constitution.  

The issue of (b), which the Minister wants us to leave intact, is different.  14(b) reads, "voluntary service in armed forces or security forces of a country hostile to or at war with Uganda".  So the Constitution says that person will his citizenship.  But when you look at 19(2)(b),  it is wider than what the Constitution provides.  Maybe what can be done is to audit this (b) and only leave that portion which provides for that person in service with security forces.  But trading this for the other,  I think it is outside the Constitution.  The point is that some parts of the clause were contrary to the Constitution.

MR. KIRENGA:  In view of the fact that Article 14 of the Constitution provides the grounds upon which citizenship by registration may be granted, I am wondering why the Minister did not think it proper to have the same reasons for loss of citizenship by registration and naturalisation.  As for naturalisation, he should add may be one more ground such as 19(b) - the one we have just been considering.  Because as I see it,  the same grounds used in Clause 18 of the Bill should also apply to loss of citizenship by naturalisation.  And if you want to add others, you just include that,  "in addition to these grounds of loss of citizenship by registration, citizenship by naturalisation may also be lost for another ground which should be 19(b)".

MAJ. BUTIME: I wish to move that what actually is reflected in the constitutional registration that can cause one to lose his citizenship be lifted reflected here,  for loss of citizenship for registration.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question to the amendment of hon. Prof. Kagonyera.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I put the question to the amendment as moved by the Minister that we just lift what is in the Constitution to substitute it with what is in the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to propose that under 19(5) line 2, we add the word 'that', I think the word 'that' was missing.  It is a matter of drafting,  but it should be noted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, you have any objection to that.  I put the question that another 'that' be inserted in the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 19 as amended to stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   I now put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 21.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Under Clause 21, the first line,  unless the Chairman may convince me otherwise, I would like the phrase 'full age' to be inserted.  That is the first line which reads, "If a citizen of Uganda of full age," unless this phrase is explained otherwise, I would like to propose that the word 'full' be deleted to be replaced with  'age'. I beg to move.

(Question put and negatived).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I beg to propose that clause 27(a) - the last line - be amended to read, 'this part of this act.'  We should add the word 'this' to replace 'the' so that it is consistent with drafting.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 27 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 27 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32.

LT. COL MUDOOLA:  I am proposing that Clause 32 be deleted and redrafted.  The reason for my proposal is that, it is a very important Clause and should be prominently featured in the Bill.  I am proposing that it be split into two, 32 (i) and 32 (ii).  If you allow me,  Mr. Chairman, 32 (i) will read, "there shall be a national registration secretariat under the direction of the Board,  and shall consist of Immigration officers and such supportive staff as may be necessary,  acting on behalf and subject to the direction of the Board."

(ii) will read,  "every applicant for registration as a citizen, or for national identity card under this part, shall be dealt with by the National Registration Secretariat."  My proposal is basically to give prominence to this Secretariat,  so that when you are looking for it in the Bill or in the Act, it is prominently there.  I beg to propose.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Of course, Mr. Chairman, I have just got his amendments today,  here when we were in this House.  But to explain to him offhand, under the current system of restructuring, if you create a new Secretariat for registration of Ugandans, you are really creating another department altogether in the Ministry.  That is an administrative matter which should be left to the Minister of Public Service,  if he so wishes.

Secondly, in the Clause which is now already Clause 7,  on page 9, Mr. Chairman, "the Commissioner shall act as treasury to the Board and shall perform such functions in relation to the meetings of the Board as the Board may delegate."  There is another Clause coming where the Commissioner shall appoint inspectors and Immigration officers to run the Secretariat and the day to day - (Interruption).

MR. MED KAGGWA:   The procedure I am raising is, should the Minister labour on when the amendment of the Floor is incompetent;  because it was not seconded.  So, there is nothing to labour about.  It is incompetent,  so I do not see why the Minister should even labour on.  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Well, hon. Members, at least you have heard what the Minister has said.  Last time when you were considering an amendment of creating a Deputy Commissioner, you received an explanation from the former Minister of Public Service which convinced you that due to the restructuring which has been done, this kind of thing which will take us back to what has been restructured.  We should halt it.  In view of this and the other technical problem, I put the question -(Interruption). 

MR. WANGUBO:  If the Minister says that by repeating that, we shall be creating a new Secretariat, why is it then that it is repeated in this particular aspect;  if it has already been established elsewhere?   Why is it repeated under 32?  He says that every application for registration of a National Identity Card under this part shall be dealt with by a Registration Secretariat which shall consist of Immigration and blah, blah, blah,  which he says is already established elsewhere.  Why do we repeat it here?  If he does not require a new item like the hon. Member has suggested, then it should not have been repeated here either.  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  When you look at the draft, it does not differ from my proposal.  My proposal simply highlights it, gives it prominence.  Unless the Minister is saying that if it is hidden like it is in the original draft, there will be no officers to handle it, I am requesting the Minister to consider this position.  Otherwise I fail to understand the argument of the Minister in as far as the drafting is concerned.  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  What you are saying?  Apart from you using capital letters on national and small letters on the other ones,  you are talking about the same thing.  What you are only trying to do is give it emphasis.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I am not a lawyer myself, but I think if you use the phrase 'shall be,' you are creating a Secretariat.  Because here it says, 'there shall be a Secretariat.'  But here it is saying that the Board will use a section which is not really established independently.

(Question put and negatived).
Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Chairman.  On Clause 36, the Committee feels that this should not apply only in the Public Service but also in the private sector;  so we add at the end, 'or in any employment in the private sector in Uganda.'
               
(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 36 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I would like to propose that under Clause 38 (4), we increase the file from 100 currency points to 250 currency points,  and we also increase the imprisonment of, 'not exceeding two years', to, 'not exceeding five years or both.'  

The reason for this is that the National Identity card is a very important document and anybody who may have access to it and misuse it could be detrimental to the security and well being of the State.  So, I beg to move the amendment particularly with regard to these facts.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is it seconded?

MAJ. BUTIME:  First of all, a currency point is Shs 20,000;  that is what you will find in the schedule. We have said 100 currency points,  and 100 by 20, that is Shs 2 million.  Hon. Ringa would like it to be 250 by 2 which is Shs 5 million.  I think Shs 5 million is too high a figure for anybody to earn.  

The problem will be that the judge or the magistrate will not convict that person, because he knows very well that that money will not be easily got.  So, we left it at Shs 2 million to show that we are very serious on this matter.  But what hon. Okumu wants,  I think that would defeat its purpose.  And I would like to persuade him to know that a currency point is actually Shs 20,000.  If you multiply that by what he is proposing, the figure you get is too high!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question to the amendment.
             
(Question put and agreed to).
Clause 38.

MR. WANGUBO:  Amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Have you written it?  Do I have a copy?

MR. WANGUBO:  No, you do not.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  With your permission, Mr. Chairman, considering that quite a number of our citizens or would be citizens could be illiterate, I would want to amend this by deleting (a) and (b) and instead say, "if one fails without reasonable excuse, then he should either be deported or allowed to leave the country."  That could be even an indication that he is not interested in being a citizen.  Why should he be penalised for becoming a citizen?  So, I would like to amend that he should be allowed to leave the country instead.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So, what is the amendment?

MR. WANGUBO:  The amendment is that, "if one fails without reasonable excuse, then he should be deported."

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Where is this amendment?

MR. WANGUBO:  Article 38, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   Because, you see, if it is 38 (1) then you have to first delete, then insert.

MR. WANGUBO:  I wanted to delete part (a) and (b), so that we leave 38 with a different penalty instead of the (a) and (b).  This is because by giving penalty (a) and (b), you are forcing one to register,  short of which you give that penalty.  But I am saying if one fails to pay, -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is it seconded?  It has aborted.
I now put the question that Clause 38 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 39.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Clause 39 in paragraph (a), delete 'prescribed fees' and insert 'prescribe a nominal fee.'  I beg to move.

MR. KIRENGA:  I want to be clarified,  because the Bill says regulations made under section 82 of this Act may, (a)prescribe the fees to be levied upon the issue of a National identity card.  Now, the hon. Member is saying that we should say, 'prescribe a nominal fee.'  My clarification here is, if we leave nominal fee as distinguished from a fee, what difference will it make if the Minister puts the nominal fee at Shs 2,000 or if he puts a fee  - without the word nominal - at the same amount?  What difference does it make?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You see, what you are saying is unless he is going to define what a nominal fee is, you would rather leave it administratively for the Minister to decide the appropriate fee.  Are you going to define nominal fee?  Let us hear from the Mover.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  When we reported, we said this could be prescribed by the Minister.  But when we talk of the nominal fee,  it should not be very high.  It should be a symbol,  like the land nominal fee - like we concluded it in our law.  We said there would be a nominal fee to be paid to these land tenants.  So, we do not expect it to be very high.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But the problem is that once you put it in the Bill, say a nominal fee, it will require you to challenge it and say,  'this is not a nominal fee.'  But what is a nominal fee?  It causes a problem for nothing really.  Let us dispose of his proposed amendment, then we can move to yours. Hon. Minister, what do you say about this?

MAJ. BUTIME:  I would like to persuade the Chairman to drop that word, because the use of the word nominal is not proper.  Nominal means a fee below the actual cost of that identity card.  So, Ugandans will go and find out the actual cost of an identity card,  and it will be let's say Shs 4,000.  Nominal will therefore be below that,  something like Shs 1,000.  

The original intention was to make a contribution to the printing of the identity cards. If you are going to use the word nominal here, it is really going to be a problem,  and I would prefer that the Minister who will be in charge will be human;  that when he prescribes this fee, it will be a reasonable fee. But if you put the word nominal, it will tie the hands of the whole system and it will be very difficult for you to issue this.  I would like the Chairman to persuade him to drop it and leave it as it is.   Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I find this very difficult, because when we were in the meeting with the Minister, he fully agreed that we charge a nominal fee.  Now he comes down and says we delete it!  As a Committee we decided that these identity cards should be given out free of charge and he persuaded us that we should allow the people to pay a nominal fee.  I would believe that the people should pay lower than the cost of the identity cards,  and the Government subsidises them.  That is actually the whole purpose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:   I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived).

MR. MED KAGGWA:  I rise to propose deletion of part(a),  to do away with the fees completely,  and we go back to the original position of the Committee.  So I propose that.  The ordinary people in Kawempe South and Nangabo,  much as they appreciate that the national identity card will be part of the security measures of our country, they are too hard put and hard pressed to be asked to contribute to something that they may not afford at all.  If the State is of the view - as indeed the Constitution has said - that we should have national identity cards, I think it is only fair and fitting that the State issues them for free at first,  and whoever loses it can be asked to pay.  

I make a distinction between passports or travel documents for that matter,  and a document that is going to identify me.  I appreciate the issue of the cost, but this will not be the first cost we are incurring.  It can be budgeted for, it can be phased.  Because I foresee a situation where an ordinary person may not be able to pay for this identity card, what are you going to do?  Are you going to give it free, are you going to punish that person;  what are you going to do?  So I feel this should be free of charge for the first time and thereafter,  replacement should be at a cost.  So I propose.

MR. ONGOM:  I rise to support the amendment.  If the people of Kawempe South cannot afford you can imagine that the people of Omoro will even be less able to afford.  In the first place, the whole idea of a national identity card is unnecessary anyway.  So if people are going to be forced to have it, then the Government that needs it may as well pay for it.  I am saying not necessary anyway, because if anybody wants to avoid to do something bad either to the State or the Government, really the possession of a national identity card will not stop him or her.  And really to me, it is an unnecessary cost to the population,  particularly the poor people of Omoro.  I support the amendment.

MRS. BABA DIRI:  I stand to support the amendment.  That is, we should not pay any money at all for the national identity cards; because I represent a very poor constituency, these are people with disabilities.  You can see them along the streets,  always begging, and they may not have the money to pay for that important national identity card.  

Secondly, when we were voting in 1996,  they never asked for money for the voting cards.  Why not provide these national identity cards free of charge?  I support the amendment.  Thank you very much.

MR. RWAKOOJO:  There is no such a thing as a free card.  We are either going to pay directly or indirectly.  You are either going to get this money out of your pocket or you are going to pay it in form of indirect tax on either sugar or salt or something else.  If we borrow that money, we are either going to pay that loan or our sons are going to pay for that loan.  So let us be honest with each other and say, 'we pay.'  If we cannot afford it today maybe we will afford it tomorrow.  But you still have to pay.  Either way we are going to pay.  Saying that we want it free, there is nothing free about this one.

MR. TOSKIN:  I would like to support the amendment.  First of all we must understand that the national identity card  is not really a priority to our people at the moment.  It is not a priority as far as our people are concerned.  We are only trying to ensure that we normalise;  you know it will help us very much as a Government if we have our people registered.  

As for persuading the peasants,  they are  already being chased around to pay poll tax and now you are going to follow them again to pay for national identity cards?  I think we are likely to cause a lot of problems to the population and the peasants. For Kongasis, it is even a special thing.  Just next door in the neighbouring Kenya where the national identity card was instituted much earlier, they get it out free of charge.  If you go to tell them that in this side of Uganda, in order to get a national identity card you are going to pay, then I can see a lot of problems coming in.  'Let me just cross over and get it free,' they will say.  So I would like to support the amendment as suggested.  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME:  We decided on this matter of costs involved in the production of national identity cards.  This matter was discussed in the last financial year.  We could not find money to include in the 1998/99 Budget, the Shs 16 billion required for the printing and production of an identity card.  And therefore, we had to drop the whole project altogether,  because of unavailability of funds.  

This House has demanded that these identity cards be produced.  The East African Community itself is bothered about Uganda's failure to produce a national identity card.  Kenya already has, Tanzania is at an advanced stage, it is only Uganda which is remaining.  The understanding which we got from the Ministry of Finance was that,  'yes, in the coming Financial Year we should embark on the production of an identity card,'  but that the people of Uganda should make a contribution towards this national identity card.  

We are also saying that even the Member of Parliament is going to benefit if we make all of them free of charge,  whereas really a Member of Parliament can afford to buy his identity card at five, even ten thousand.   While we think of the people we represent, we must also think of the capacity of this country to produce.  You are talking of nine million to ten million identity cards to be given free of charge to people, even those who can afford!   There can be a modality of how the people who cannot afford right away can be assisted.  But you should not say that this one be given completely free of charge.  

I would like to persuade the House to appreciate this particular matter and leave it at a contribution level whereby the Minister could prescribe.  But if you just leave it like that, I think it will take us longer and we may even fail to produce a national identity card.  And I would like to persuade the hon. Members to disagree with hon. Kaggwa of Kawempe South's view.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KIYONGA FRANCIS:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I just would like to add more on support of the amendment.  First of all I would like the Minister to know that there are many people who are being arrested and imprisoned because of failing to pay taxes,  including graduated tax.  And why do you not get this money which people have already paid in taxes and print these cards?  Because every Ugandan now is paying taxes.  Why do you not offer that service?  So I would like to support the amendment.  

Let people be provided these identity cards freely.  Because,  Mr. Chairman, if we do not do that,  then you must be prepared to have a population without identity cards.  People can choose not to pay and how many of them will you arrest for not having cards?  In the place I come from -  Karamoja - people are very liberal and they will not really mind not having these identity cards.  So let us help them and provide these cards freely.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question on the amendment by hon. Medi Kaggwa.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 39, as amended agreed to.

Clause 40.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Immediately before Clause 40, insert a new Clause " Every Ugandan citizen shall have the right to a passport or other travel documents."  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  That was a new clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.  We shall consider it after we have considered the others.  You see we are saying Clause 40 because we have to go by our book.  Now, we go to Clause 40 in our book, is there any amendment you want to insert?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Immediately after Sub Clause (4), insert the following "an application for a passport shall be in form of A or B in the forth schedule of this Act."  I beg to move.

MAJ. BUTIME:  We looked at this amendment this morning and I have the following to say and persuade the Chairman.  First of all, the system we have now is that you have to fill two forms in Uganda.  Form A for citizenship verification,  and form B for an application for a travel document.  Those are the forms we have today. When this Bill comes into Law, those two forms will not be required because you will already have been registered as a citizen.  So you have an identity card number.  

Secondly, you will already be carrying a national identity card.  And at every stage you fill a form which is already in the schedule here.  So when you go to apply for a passport you will not need these two other forms which you have now, but you will proceed to fill another form altogether.  Where I agree with the Chairman is that we now introduce form D, Mr. Chairman.  

There is a prototype here of form G, and it will now replace the two forms,  A and B,  which the Chairman would like to have.  Form D will now be on the Third Schedule and there is, therefore, need for only one form, which is form A as a proposed amendment. And from the process of uniformity in the Bill, all forms should fall under the Third Schedule,  including the proposed form A which is proposed to become form G in the Third Schedule.  Really this takes care of what the Chairman wants to do, and I would like the House to support that.

Form G talks about the applicant, the surname, names, sex, place of birth, date, identification number, national identity card number et cetera.  So, I would like the Chairman to agree that, 'yes, forms A and B will not be necessary at that time, but there is form G which will replace what the Chairman is looking for.'  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe we should hear the Chairman's reaction to the appeal.  

MAJ. TUMWINE:  I heard the hon. Minister referring to form G,  and the purpose why these Forms had been attached to this amendment ahead of time was to enable this House to look at what is contained in these forms that our people are going to fill so that if anybody has a quarrel or a question to ask on some of these forms, he can raise it.  Even when you looked at some of these forms, some Members had some points to raise on what is contained in these forms.  

Without going into details, now he is talking of form G, which he has just summarised;  and in theory, even in practice, we cannot really get what it says.  Is it correct for us to proceed without knowing what form he is talking about which will be demanding our people to fill and fulfil those regulations that we have not looked at?    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Actually, what you are saying is that may be the forms you are referring to may not get the approval of the House.  Is that not what you are suggesting?  Why do we not be contented with prescribed forms,  other than talking about specific forms which will not -(Interruption).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: There have been uncoordinated movements with my Minister,  because he did not brief me about this new form G.  This was an ambush. Principally, I think we agree that this form should be in this Schedule;  I think that is the whole essence. So, Members can look at it and may be we can put it as whatever prescribed form in this Act.  
MRS. NAMIREMBE BITAMAZIRE:  The Minister has been talking about forms A and B being put together into form G.  But I just want to give a probable warning and seek for clarification;  what he is referring to as form A, which copy we have, has got Section (3)  about married women.  The section says that married women are supposed to state their maiden names, the husband's full names and the date and place of marriage.  I am wondering from a gender aspect, is that information of any critical importance or are the married men also going to provide that type of information?  I am just wondering what exactly we are seeking in that Section of form A?
  
If there is a form G to be made, I am suggesting that that information should either apply to men and women or it should be deleted altogether.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Minister.  When you talk about a form in which you are going to specify an identity card, what type of identity card is it?  Is it going to have a photograph or you are going to identify somebody by his genetic coat?  If you are going to do that, are you going to have computers at all centres for this information to be able to be verified?  Mr. Chairman, I doubt whether the Minister has been listening;  he has been talking to somebody else.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Let us first dispose of the amendment.  It seems he is suggesting what he wants to drop.  He wants to drop the amendment so that when we proceed, we are aware that the amendment which the Chairperson of the Committee had suggested is no longer being pursued.  Is that not the case?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Actually, Mr. Chairman, when I look at this form G, instead of saying A and B, we could put G so that an application for passports shall be in form G in the Fourth Schedule of this Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members,  we are just considering this Bill.  We have not reached the stage of considering the forms which you are now referring to here.  But if you look at Part VIII of this Bill - Miscellaneous - Clause 80 which we shall consider, I think it is the solution to most of the problems we are facing now.  If you look at 82(2)(i),   because it prescribes the forms to be used for the purposes of this Act.  This is a general provision which will solve most of the problems that we have.  

At the moment we are tackling the Schedule yet we have not got to it.  How do you know that may be when we reach the Schedule,  the form we have called G or A will not be there?  Why do we not really get contented and move on, and as we move then we can revisit these provisions eventually?  

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I withdraw the amendment.

Clause 40.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 40 do stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to).
Clause 41.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 41 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).
Clause 42

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to propose an amendment to Clause 42, which at the moment reads as follows:  "Any passport issued under this Act shall be valid for the period not exceeding five years and may be renewed for further period of five years such that the cumulative validity is ten years."  As I understand it, it probably means that after ten years,  you will not have any passport.  Because of that, and because we know that we have already passed a Clause saying that a citizen is entitled to a passport - whether he is 40 or 100 years or so, if he needs a passport, he will have it, whether he has had it before or not.   Therefore, I would like to move an amendment that -(Interruptions).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Ongom,  I thought that you were referring to the life of that passport book, the maximum duration of which is ten years.  After ten years, you can get another book.  

MR. ONGOM: If that is the interpretation, then it is not quite clear in the Bill,  because a passport is a passport, not just the book.  What gives you authority to move?  It could be a book or it could be any other prescription.  But what this means here is that you can renew it only once;  that is what the import of this Clause here is - that you renew it only once.  Now, what happens after that?  It does not say that you get a new book.  So, can I move an amendment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please!

MR. ONGOM: That we delete 41 and substitute it with "any passport issued under this Act shall be valid for a period not exceeding five years, but may be renewed for the period of five years at a time."  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you.  I would like hon. Ongom to clarify to me why, after he had looked at these provisions so closely, he felt there was a need to renew the passport?  Because for me if the passport has been issued for ten years and the pages are still available, why should I go to the Passport Office to renew a document which is still valid?   What is the significance of five years?  Is it just that you want some money from me and ten years is going to be a long time before you receive money from Uganda citizens?  If you could help me delete that Clause of renewing the passport after five years when the passport is valid for ten years!  If it is used up in one year, I go and buy another one;  if it is used up in two years, I go and buy another one.  But if my passport is not yet used up and it is still valid, I do not want to go back to the Passport Office - to do what?

MR. ONGOM: Thank you,  hon. Karuhanga for asking for the clarification.  As a matter of fact, I had wanted to delete the whole Clause because in any case, if the passport you have gets used up,  you go and buy another one from anywhere, so why have the validity bit?  I wanted to delete the whole thing.  But the Minister, when I discussed with him, he said, 'but we need the money.' (Laughter).  That was his explanation.  

Otherwise, I was going to delete the whole thing - and if that is what hon. Members want, I can amend it to say, 'delete,' -(Interjection)- that is what I am saying.  Once you are issued with the passport, it is valid forever - that is what I mean - it should not even be limited to ten or any other period of years, as far as I am concerned.  But the Minister wants some money, so that is why I agree with him.

DR. RWENDEIRE:  It is just a piece of information for hon. Ongom.  One of the reasons why five years is used is that for some of the citizens who get the travel documents,  when you actually submit your photographs, after five years, your official features will have changed almost completely and you will need to have a renewal of the passport.  Mr. Chairman, that is one of the major things.  So, if hon. Ongom could help on this particular one, I would really support the ten years.

MR. ONGOM: In fact part of the reason why I agreed and made an amendment as I have done, is exactly what hon. Rwendeire has stated that may be after five years, your official features will have changed and therefore, I said, you cannot renew after every five years as necessary.  But the Minister convinced me on the money part of it.  

MISS. AKELLO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to be clarified.  May be I misheard him, but I thought I heard hon. Ongom saying that the only reason he agreed to the amendment was because the Minister wanted the money.  And he is now turning around to say that he understood that features change after five years.  Which is which?  

MR. ONGOM: Thank you, I think the question has been answered by other hon. Members.  I have now considered both.  My only objection is that I do not want a situation where a passport is going to be valid for only ten years,  as it is indicated in the Draft at the moment.  The Draft is not clear as to what happens after ten years.  That is why I said, it should be renewed for a period of five years at a time.

MAJ. BUTIME:  There is no doubt that hon. Ongom he looked completely different ten years ago - especially with the grey hair he has now.  If he went out with his very passport which he had then, he may have a lot of problems because he has really changed from what he was when I saw him ten years ago, and therefore, Dr. Rwendeire is right.

Secondly, I categorically deny that I discussed in private with hon. Ongom and my reason was that I wanted money. I could not have said that because, Mr. Chairman, even if this House was to pass that the passport continues for 50 years, it is the Minister of Finance who decides on how much the passport costs.  Really it does not help him.  

But we are talking about changes on the face of the person, changes in technology, changes in security features of a passport, changes on the face of the passport - all of these things change.  You will travel with a passport which is totally finished and you will end up having a lot of problems.  That is why we would like to say that money put aside,  as hon. Ongom would like this House to believe,  we are saying that after ten years, your face will have changed, technology will have improved and it may not be easy for you to use a 15 year old passport to travel outside this country.  You will find it very difficult and that is why we thought that after ten years, which is really judicial here in Uganda, one should go and get a new passport anyway.

As for hon. Karuhanga - since he travels every week - for him he will come and get a new passport every other month,  because he is a Member of Parliament; he is a businessman; he is a lawyer,  and he is not the one we are talking of.  We are talking about the passport that it will change; the face will change after ten years.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I am really standing up to support hon. Ongom's amendment which I proposed to him and he accepted for a very good historical reason.  I am very mindful of the position the Minister has explained of changes in physical features of the passport after 5 years, changes in technology,  and whatever he is talking about.  I want to remind the hon. Minister that Ugandans have suffered a lot when it comes to renewing passports. Whether the Minister shakes his head or not,  this is a fact and I have got examples to prove it and I will proceed to do so.  

Once upon a time in this country, many Ugandans went into exile and while there they wanted to renew their passports,  and it was a nightmare. A friend of mine called Bananuka used to work in the Passport Office.  A few friends sent passports to him to renew which he did, and he was killed for renewing passports of Ugandans who were in exile.  I have never forgotten my friend Bananuka for dying for renewing a mere passport.  Many, many, people - including myself - while in exile had to go to great lengths to get our passports renewed.  A number of them went to forgers in order to get the signature of a certain person called Karisa - they perfected it and used it on international travel documents.  

Many of our citizens have become citizens of other countries because they failed to renew their passports. As a result,  they had to beg and take on citizenship of other countries which citizenship we have now said they cannot hold a dual one. They have lost Ugandan citizenship forever.  We should have regimes which treat Ugandans of all description,  of all political persuasion - whether they support the regime or not,  but once they are born in Uganda - because it was not your decision to do so - you are a Ugandan and you are entitled to a passport and that is a constitutional position.  But being forced to go through all these problems in order to renew a passport,  I do not find it very comfortable.  

Secondly, to get a passport in itself - for a Ugandan citizen - is a nightmare.  You could tell me to pick a passport from the Post Office at Rushere, but my God!  I look forward to that day, and I hope it will be.   And to go back and get it renewed after five years is not easy because Ugandans are not as you say, travelling every week like hon. Karuhanga who is a lawyer, who is a business man.  It is not the case that Ugandans do travel like this every week.  My wife has used about three pages in her passport it is now ready for renewal,  and it was only renewed last week.  I do not see how many Ugandans would finish their passports,  or what would make them look so different in five year's time to deserve to go through the - first of all the fees -(Interjection)-  no, they said that they are renewed after five years.  If it was to be renewed after 10 years I would absolutely have no problem with that.  (Interjection)- no, they say the passport is valid for ten years but will be renewed after five years,  and I would not like it to be renewed after five years  because it puts us in that situation.  

I want it to be renewed after 10 years and if you can accept that, that is the amendment we are supporting. We want to renew the validity of our passports after ten years.  After ten years a Ugandan who has been in exile will have found citizenship somewhere else,  if he does not want to come back or if he wants to come back,  he will have found a change of Government.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Karuhanga,  you said you are supporting the amendment because you have agreed with hon. Ongom to change the proposed amendment you are talking about!

MR. ONGOM: After his speech - before I sat down - I actually agree that we change the sentence to read as follows: "Any passport issued under this Act shall be valid for a period not exceeding 10 years but may be renewed for a period of 10 years at a time." 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question, because you see the amendment we have is this, "any passport issued under this Act shall be valid for a period not exceeding 10 years, but may be renewed for a period of 10 years at a time."  Is that the amendment?

MR. ONGOM: Yes.

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would simply want to replace the word "may" with the word "shall" on the second sentence.  So that the statement reads, "any passport issued under this Act shall be valid for a period not exceeding 5 years but shall be renewed for a period of 10 years at a time."  'Shall' is more binding than 'may'.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought it is the owner of the passport that requisitions the renewal.  If you use 'shall' it means that even if I do not want to,  it has to be renewed.  That is why they used 'may',  so that is if you want to renew your passport,  you go and renew it.  Now, I put the question to the amendment by hon. Ongom.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 42 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  I propose an amendment to Clause 43 by including the words 'gazetted by the Government',  between the words 'countries' and 'specific'.  May you allow me to read it?  "A passport issued under section 40 of this Act shall be valid for all countries except for any countries gazetted by the Government and specified in the passport in respect of which he stated not to be valid."  The import of this gazetting is to ensure that somebody -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Well, the amendment is that he wants the country to which a passport owner should travel to be gazetted so that the people know to which country they cannot go with a Uganda passport.  That is the proposed amendment.

(Question put and negatived).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 43 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47.

MR. KIRENGA: I would like the hon. Minister to clarify to me on Clause 47(d).  If I may read it,  "The board may order the withdrawal or temporary seizure of a passport from any holder in the following circumstances - (d)subject to the Constitution any other circumstance which in the opinion of the board would be prejudicial to the interest of the state or the holder of the passport."  Mr. Chairman, I think here we are giving the board too much power, if we say they can withdraw a passport.  If it is in the interests of the holder to withdraw it, what are these circumstances?  Should we not specify them,  because the board might give itself too much power and think of any - even awkward - circumstances.  Can I get clarification, Mr. Chairman?

MAJ. BUTIME: There are circumstances which have already been given here under which it may be withdrawn. They are (a), (b) and (c).  But then when you came to (d), this is a dynamic world. There are changes going on every time, there are drug traffickers, there are trans-national criminals, there are inter-state problems, there are people who can face danger in another country but do not know, there are security services which would like to restrain a Ugandan from going somewhere else,  they do not want to inform you about their particulars,  and this part was actually discussed sometime back.  Really these are the circumstances that the board may look at and decide that that person should not travel or that passport should be withheld.  

And it says that where the passport is withdrawn under this section,  the holder or any person responsible for the withholding shall return the passport to the board,  and then afterwards you can appeal - we have talked about that. The passport cannot be taken forever because it is yours, you will just be restrained and then the passport is handed over back to you.  You cannot put everything here.  It is not possible to put all the 30 or so reasons which will arise next year,  those which will come in 2001, 2002; it is not possible.  Therefore you leave this one to the board which is going to be made of people of high moral character and proven integrity,  to advise the Ugandans on this particular matter.  And I think hon. Kirenga knows this very well,  having once been a Minister in charge of the Constitution; things are dynamic and the world is not stationary.

MR. KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In view of the concern of hon. Kirenga, we can have an appeal to the Minister,  because I can appreciate his concern.  Earlier on,  where the board has taken a decision and one is dissatisfied,  we provide for an appeal to the Minister.  In this particular case we have left it entirely to the board,  and I see that we should remedy hon. Kirenga's concern with an appeal to the Minister who really takes political responsibility for the department.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you propose then,  because you are just seeking clarification.

MR. KAGGWA:  We could use the provision in clause 11(1),  "any person aggrieved by any decision of the board under this particular clause may within 30 days appeal to the Minister against the decision." So, that the decision is not left entirely on the civil servants,  but also the political leader. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you read the amendment?

MR. KAGGWA:  "Any person aggrieved by any decision of the board," - I think it should not be under this Act but under this section - "may within 30 days after the decision is communicated to him or her, appeal to the Minister against the decision."

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, why do you not put it after 47(d)?  You are saying that we provide that any person aggrieved shall appeal to the Minister within 30 days?

MR. KIRENGA: It seems to me that Clause 11 takes care of that because it says, "any person aggrieved by any decision of the board under this Act", the whole Act it seems.

MR. KARUHANGA: We had discussed this very Clause in the general debate when hon. Omara Atubo brought it up.  I explained to him by way of clarification, gave him the particular circumstances,  and he promised that he would be here and he was going to make an amendment to this, but he is not.  I do not want to be the devil's advocate,  being on this side and that side, but being a legislator,  there is something I see that is a little bit impracticable.  

I would have been more satisfied,  and I am sure hon. Omara Atubo would not support me in that amendment,  if we withdraw the word 'board' and put there 'Minister.'  The reason why I think it should be in the opinion of the Minister not in the opinion of the board is,  I go to the airport,  I hand in my passport for travel and then an immigration officer says, 'you are not going out,'  and then he tells me, 'it is the decision of the board.' Now, where am I going to get the board from?  But I can call the Minister.  

So I was thinking,  the power to withdraw your passport - if the board decides so - they should use the Minister's office.  They should convince him that we as a board, we are going to withdraw the passport of a Ugandan citizen,  and this is a political decision.  -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Karuhanga do you see the advantage of these decisions being down at two levels;  the level of the board and level of the Minister?  Because if you take it to the level of the Minister,  then your fate is closed.  Whereas if it is done by the board they will give reasons.  They will say, 'because of this and that, we are withdrawing your passport.'  If you think it is not fair,  you appeal to the Minister.  I think you have more advantaged by using a two tier system than by using one.

MR. KARUHANGA:  My view was different,  and it was different for this reason.  A citizen of Uganda is at the Airport to travel,  and he is informed by an immigration officer that, 'sorry you cannot travel,  we have withdrawn your passport.'  You say, 'why'?  He says, 'the board has decided.'  Now where do you go?  If you go to the Minister he will say, 'I do not know about ut, go to the board.'

I was thinking that if the board has advised the Minister to withdraw,  the Minister takes political responsibility.  I do not know,  but others could see it differently - like you do, Mr. Chairman.  I could be mistaken,  but I would rather know that it is hon. Butime who has withdrawn my passport, then I go to his office and he tells me, 'you are not going anywhere Karuhanga, because we have found out that when you get there, you will be killed.'

MAJ. BUTIME:  I wish to inform hon. Karuhanga that I feel that if you are at the airport and you are informed that your passport has been cancelled by the board, you go back and appeal to the board.  If they still insist, then you can go to the Minister as a court of appeal.  That is why we have stages.  As a lawyer you should know better that if you go to a lower court and you are not satisfied, you go to a higher court.  So, I feel that if you are refused to travel because of a certain aspect and your passport has been withdrawn, it should not mean that your life has ended.  You go back to the system and appeal. I would feel that you should still go back to the board, other than reverting to the Minister straight away.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Med. (Mr. Karuhanga rose_).

MR. KARUHANGA:  I thought that was information to me Sir, and I wanted to respond.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You are still continuing?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Because he gave me information.  What I wanted to bring to the attention of the House and to my Friend Hashaka is that, the question of the board listening to the grievances of a person whose passport has been withdrawn at the airport has too many complications for an individual to confront.  First, the board sits very few times. 

Second, if it has no quorum, it does not sit.  I would like to be assisted because practically, a person should not be inconvenienced by being told,  'well, the board is not sitting.  You wait until the board comes.'  Or, 'the board sat, there was no quorum', or, 'the board sat and you did not appear on the agenda.'  And you know it can go on for a year.  While if I had the chance to go to the Minister, the Minister would conclusively tell me, 'sorry, you will get your passport next month.'

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You see, hon. Karuhanga, the situation is the board has made a decision, your passport has been taken away,  you are aggrieved by what the board has done;  then you appeal to the Minister?  Suppose it is the Minister who has finally taken the decision, what are you going to do?  

MAJ. BUTIME:  Even before you travel to the airport you will have been given information that, 'my friend, you have problems, your passport is being withdrawn.'  But what really happens is that when you reach the airport and you are informed about this passport withdrawal, the nearest person you can contact - who is always around - is the Commissioner for Immigration.  That is an available officer,  any time.  You cannot get the board, because in the board, there are many people.  We are talking of - I think we passed the number seven.  So, you cannot say that the board says, 'Karuhanga shall not go today.'  And the board sits and waits for Karuhanga to reach the airport, so that when he appeals, they are there seated.  It cannot be.  They will not be there.  
I would like to exclude the Minister being the one to immediately contact, because Ministers can have political problems with the traveller.  He can really nail you down;  he says, 'Karuhanga cannot go.'   The board is better because they are many, they are liberal, these are people of integrity, they are from all regions of our country and they should treat your case very well.  Once they nail you, you are really in trouble, because they are many and they are diverse and they come from all parts of the country. I think that will be a better system and I think Ugandans will be handled better that way,  than just leaving it to one man,  the Minister. (Mr. Karuhanga rose_).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Karuhanga, you have a response, please?

MR. KARUHANGA:  No, I want to withdraw my position, because now there is an introduction and a new explanation which has come my way.  It is now clear and I hope that if a situation like this arises, the Commissioner will refer to the minutes of this meeting.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:    On Clause 48,  Members will agree that these are very serious offenses and they need a strong arm.  Our people should be punished quite severely for deterrent things.  So, the Committee suggests that in sub-clause (ii), delete, "from fine not exceeding,"  at the end of the sub-clause and insert,  "fund of 400 currency points and imprisonment for at least five years."  I beg to move.

MAJ. BUTIME:  I would like to say that really it is not an expression of uncoordinated movement of troops,  but we did not get the final report of our Committee.  We got it when we were coming to Parliament and that is why we are finding ourselves trying to compare notes here in the House.  What we have noted,  Sir, is that the fines under Clause 48 should be fixed and that the number of years for imprisonment,  as written in the Bill,  should be the minimum.  

The proposed amendment seeks to oust the Judiciary's discretional powers of sentencing, because normally they do not exceed five years.  But what the Chairman is saying s that they should be at least five years.  In other words, five years is guaranteed.  But this is the role of the Judiciary and you cannot usurp the powers of the Judiciary.   The penalty should not be obsolete, since there are always mitigating factors which lead the magistrate or the judge to take that decision.  They are not standard, they are different at any given time and that is why we are talking of exceeding this, not exceeding that one.  

That is why I thought that I could persuade my Chairman  to leave what is proposed in the Bill,  because we shall have problems with the Judiciary,  and I think it was well thought out.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ONGOM:  I am considering that there seems to be lack of coordination between the Minister,  and the Chairman and his Committee,  and considering also that we really do not have quorum, do you not think that we should adjourn to allow these two bodies to coordinate themselves so that tomorrow, we have an easier way through this?  In other words, I draw your attention to the fact that we have no quorum, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Well, can somebody propose that the House resumes and the Committee reports there to?  

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Tom Butime):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report there to.  I beg to move.

                (Question put and agreed to).

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS  (Maj. Butime):  I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the National Citizenship and Immigration Control Bill, 1998,  and passed it with amendments,  up to Clause 47.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS  (Maj. Butime): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee be adopted. I beg to  move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee be adopted.
                   
(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  we have ascertained the numbers of Members present,  and it appears that there are some merits in the observation earlier made.  It is unfortunate, because we wanted to finish this business,  but that is the position.  In the circumstances, I adjourn the House to resume tomorrow at 2.00 p.m, prompt.

(The House rose and adjourned until 2.00 p.m. on Wednesday, 24th February, 1999).

