Tuesday, 22 February 2005

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I welcome you. I hope you had a peaceful weekend. I want to welcome back our friends who were able to go to Barlonyo in Lira District to remember our fallen brothers and sisters.

In the gallery we have a visitor, Miss Martha Hunt, from California. She is in Uganda to carry on development projects together with the hon. Rev. Kabushenga, in Kanungu District. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause).

For some time one of our members has not been visible here, namely the Member for Mbarara Municipality. Today I have received a communication from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the effect - maybe I should read the letter; it is addressed to me. It says;

“I am happy to inform you that of the 13 directors appointed by the Commission of African Union on 20th July 2004, two are Ugandans. They are hon. Winnie Byanyima, Director, Women Gender and Development; and the second one is Godfrey Mugumya, Director, Peace and Security.” He has attached the information, a sort of instrument of appointment of these directors. I think you should join me in congratulating our sister and brother for this appointment, and we wish them well. (Applause)

And this is a letter connected to the absence of hon. Winnie Byanyima. She last appeared here in November and she came to me applying for a one month’s leave to go to Addis Ababa for orientation before she would take a decision whether to accept the job or not. I believe this was the job for which she had gone for orientation. I gave her leave for one month. She should have come back in December but for one reason or another she did not. 

In January she sent me an e-mail to the effect that she had not done the needful constitutionally because of the indisposition of her mother who was in South Africa. I sent a message of sympathy and said, “But you have to comply with the Constitution” because the understanding was that she was supposed to give up the seat at the end of December, and I reminded her to do so. Fortunately today hon. Byanyima has sent me a letter indicating that she is giving up the Mbarara Municipality seat and she thanks you – well, the letter is not included, but she has written to me vacating her seat of Mbarara Municipality.  

I want to take this opportunity to thank hon. Byanyima for the great contributions she had made as a Member of Parliament for Mbarara Municipality in this Parliament and the last Parliament. We wish her the best in her new assignment where she is going to serve the continent. Thank you very much.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last Thursday you wisely ruled that the Minister of State in charge of Privatisation would make a statement –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, why do you not give me time to finish what I want to finish? Honorable members, on the Order Paper you have seen there is something missing and that is the statement, which I expected from the Minister in charge of Privatization. So, we should adjust to include it among the statements after the administration of oaths. 

And what I do not see again and what I expected to be included most likely because the statement has not been sent to us, is a statement by the Minister in charge of Security. He is to brief us on what is happening with a number of groups that are emerging. One of them, mentioned by hon. John Kazoora, is being organized by Mr Kakooza Mutale. The other one as you have seen, FDC also promised to declare that they are going to form theirs, and you also heard that UPC is also having theirs. So, I had asked the Minister in charge of Security to make a statement, so you include something about this. If the statement is not there, somebody will tell us why it is not there.

I have also received a communication from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that it has set aside Thursday 22nd to receive amendments from interested Members of Parliament, on the Constitutional Amendment Bill, 2005. So, you are reminded, if you have any amendment, to take them then. 

As I indicated before, according to our rules, I expect that if you have any amendment, state such amendment with the committee so that they can have time to deal with such amendment. So, please, if you have any, feel free to submit the same to the committee. 

2.39
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Mr Speaker, I have noted with great concern that from time to time whenever the Order Paper comes here, sometimes it is listed among business to follow that there is a Bill of this or that, which by no previous warning we do not have. 

THE SPEAKER: What do you mean? Is this particular Bill relevant? As of today, what Bill do you not have? The Seeds Bill received the first reading; you ought to have received a copy. It is true you might have received many Bills; you might have forgotten it at home, but it was given. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, actually that was a preamble to my concern. My principal concern is the matter of the Domestic Relations Bill. It comes out on top of business to follow sometimes, then it rescinds again to the background.

THE SPEAKER: Which one?

MR AWORI: The Domestic Relations Bill. It seems to be suffering from a case of I do not know how to call it, amnesia or something. It comes up to No. 2 and then it rescinds –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Then again that is not the case in point because if the Domestic Relations Bill received its first reading, you ought to have got a copy. Again that is not a good example for supporting your case. 

2.41
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad to note that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has designated a day for us to present our proposals. However, we received this Bill and some of us had a fit of shock when we looked at some of the proposed amendments. We are just recovering from this and we request that we are granted an extra seven days such that when we appear before the committee we make useful contributions. I beg –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have no doubt honorable members that the committee would accept this appeal because my view is that if we can solve our differences in the committee, it would be easier to steer this Bill through the plenary. So, if you want to be given more time - one day, two or a week - for you to assemble the amendments you have, I also appeal to the committee to give you more time to think about it.

2.42
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Mr Speaker, allow me to raise a matter of some concern to my people of Oyam North. In the year 2003 government came up with a policy of assisting secondary school students whose parents are in displaced peoples’ camps. At the beginning government was dispatching Shs 47,000 per student per term for that assistance. However, on Sunday I received a copy of a letter, which with your permission I ask that I read to this House. It is from the Ministry of Education and Sports, Embassy House, Kampala and it is addressed to:

“The Headmaster,
Ngai Senior Secondary School, 
Apac

Fees for students in IDPC:
Your school is hereby advanced Shs 1,263,8000 as the second part payment for the third term 2004 for fees for students in IDPC.  

Please, note that the payment is for 164 students at a rate of Shs 7,700 per student. You are instructed to operate the funds according to the school approved budget estimates and the IDPC implementation guidelines issued by the Ministry, in August 2004.

Uma Angula Francis 
For Permanent Secretary

Cc:  	RDC, Apac
CAO
Area Member of Parliament
DEO, Apac”.

As I was saying, my understanding, when this policy came out, was that government was trying to assist the poorest of the poor by sending their students to school. Any person who has been to these IDPCs would note that the people who are there can hardly raise Shs 5,000. I want to know if this Shs 7,700 per student per term is going to take care of all the fees that is necessary to send a student from these IDPCs to any school in Uganda. And if it is not, is the same policy still in operation? Because my understanding is that it was not a propaganda gimmick by government; that government was really serious in assisting these people. What is going to happen now? 

I cannot see any parent from these IDPCs topping up the Shs 7,700 shillings per term to cover the other fees, which are required. Most schools in our area charge Shs 65,000 per student per term. And that is school fees without school uniform and without food. What is going to happen to these students? Can this House ask the Leader of Government Business to tell us what government policy is now, in respect to students who are in these IDPCs?

THE SPEAKER: We should deal with this and then proceed to other issues.

2.47
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I regret to inform you that the Minister of Education and Sports is not here but we do have the former Minister of Education and Sports, who is our Attorney-General. I have no hesitation in prompting him to answer that question. 

2.48
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr. Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honorable members. I would like to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister for the confidence he has in me in trusting that even if I officially handed over the ministry to another colleague, I am still in position to answer for it. 

I regret to inform you and the House that I am not in position to answer this question because I need an update on what is happening to Education since I left. (Laughter) I undertake to communicate this question to my colleague the Minister of Education and Sports and I think that she should be in position to respond on Tuesday next week. I thank you, Sir.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I thank the Attorney-General for that undertaking but permit me to express my utter disappointment at the shabby way the Leader of Government Business has handled this matter. We are dealing with the livelihood of our children, the livelihood of thousands and thousands of children of Uganda.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I have served this Parliament diligently. I have always made it clear that people should not ambush us and that if they have an urgent question they can alert me or they can alert the relevant minister. Is the honourable member in order to incite this Parliament and myself by saying that I was shoddy; when I took an appropriate method of handling a question when I was ambushed? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think considering the circumstances of this case you have tried your best by giving an assignment to the Attorney-General to do the work. However, at the same time this was not a question of ambush as I see it. As I said I think yesterday or so, hon. Ben Wacha must have been in the constituency because of the Barlonyo incident and when he got this, or when his constituents saw him, they brought their plight to him by giving him a copy of the letter. Taking the matter as urgent, that is why he has not ambushed you but he has just brought it to you. You have ably handled this matter as the Leader of Government Business by giving an assignment to a minister to answer. 

2.51
MR OWORI OTADA (Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent public importance according to rules 40 and 41(b) of our Rules of Procedure. I have seen my friend, Dr Suruma, in the vicinity and I want to thank him because I associate myself with the reforms that I was told by the media and other sources that he has advanced for the benefit of our government. And the matter, which I am raising, touches directly on our thin resource envelope, which we are operating as a country. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to the operations of MONUC, which is the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). As we are all aware, we all sympathise with our neighbouring brothers and sisters, but I would like to say that the operations of MONUC under Resolution 1291 of the year 2000 of the 24th of February that same year of the UN Security Council, their operations were okayed under that resolution and they started operating flights into this country beginning around March 2003.

Between March 2003 and August of the same year these flights, which belong to private operators, were paying all the necessary fees that are chargeable by the Civil Aviation Authority. These fees include, but are not limited to, navigation fees, meteorological services, communication fees, air traffic control services, search and rescue services, fire and rescue services, marshalling services, bird hazard control and security services.

Then came a turn around of events on the 8th of August 2003 when our then Minister of Foreign Affairs signed on behalf of government a memorandum of understanding at the United Nations headquarters, exempting the United Nations from paying any fees related to incoming and outgoing flights. This made MONUC and their operators refuse to pay those fees that I earlier on enumerated. I would like to point out that these aircrafts are for private business people. They are Antenovs and so on. I have information that these people negotiated their contract with the United Nations, including those fees, which they are supposed to remit to the Civil Aviation Authority and which they have not been remitting.

Mr Speaker, as at 31st of January of this year these fees had accumulated to the tune of Shs 7.8 billion and nobody is responsible for this. The CAA has made efforts to recover the fees in vain and, therefore, they are helpless. I would like to also point out the fact that these are very heavy aircrafts, which carry between 300 to 600 metric tones and you can imagine how they are pounding our runway for free without paying anything. Yet we know that CAA right now is grappling with a loan from the Swedish Government, which they got to fix the runway. MONUC and their activities are pounding away at the runway and our roads, as they transport this equipment.

As I conclude, I would have thought that this country did not need to lose a lot because Entebbe is just being used as a hub to assist our friends who are in problems. The host country should not suffer as if it is the country, which is directly benefiting from those initiatives of the United Nations. I would like to believe that CAA has a right to claim this money. 

I would also like to believe that if government has undertaken to waive this money in a memorandum of understanding, which I would like to lay on the Table, signed by our then late friend and colleague, Wapakabulo; I think that government must make an undertaking to pay CAA because of the waiver. This agreement also at the end talks about a review, if necessary. It gives opportunity for a review and I think that if there is need for reviewing this document, then it must be now. Otherwise, the operations of MONUC, we all thought were supposed to be short-term but turned out to be long-term. They are still operating and we are losing and nobody is saying anything about it.

Finally, I would like to say that this has been brought up in a good spirit on behalf of our neighbouring friends because we wish that peace reigns in their land. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to lay this on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: This is a matter for Foreign Affairs, and the Ministry of Communications, because I have heard of supervision. Is it to be answered now or some time in future?

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You are quite right to say that this is a matter, which affects the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications because the Civil Aviation Authority is a parastatal under the ministry. You are aware that under the recent reshuffle hon. Tom Butime has been posted to us as the Minister of State responsible for Communications, under which Civil Aviation Authority falls. Unfortunately he has not reported but his portfolio is being held by Minister Nasasira. So, I will pass this information over to hon. Nasasira and ask whether he knows about this problem -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, Mr Minister, hon. Nasasira is in charge of his ministry so he cannot be taking up the portfolio of hon. Butime. When he is doing it, he is not taking the assignment of hon. Butime. He will be answering as a senior minister in charge of the ministry.

MR AWUZU: Thank you for that clarification but I will inform him that this question was raised in Parliament and he should endeavor to inform Parliament about the right position.

3.00
MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague raised only one aspect of the concern. There is another aspect, which the minister I hope will address, that is the matter of security and smuggling which has been going on under the nose of MONUC and the Civil Aviation Authority. As a matter of fact, two or three weeks ago a MONUC hired aircraft took off from old Entebbe airport under the nose of civil Aviation Authority and crashed 10 minutes later because there was an element of criminality involved. Nobody was checking on the cargo, nobody was checking on the mechanical condition of the aircraft, nobody knew where it was going and all these details.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the hon. Awori to say that this aircraft crashed because of evidence of criminality? So many other aircrafts have crashed; is it because of criminality? Is he right to mislead this House that this aircraft crashed because of criminality? Whether it took off from the new runway or from the old runway, there is nothing to indicate that this aircraft crashed because of evidence of criminality. Unless he is willing to prove that there was an element of criminality, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: As a minister in charge of this sector, have you done the necessary investigation? If so, what are the results?

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As is the case with all aircraft accidents, even if an aircraft just skids on the runway and crashes, just like the case when the Vice-President was going to London, we institute a full investigation. A committee has definitely been set up to find out the cause of the crash of this aircraft. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, in that case maybe what he says could be part of the cause. You do not know. (Laughter) We would rather leave this matter, please. Let us leave this matter. 

3.02
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we speak now the climatic conditions in the country are challenging our ability to govern this country. I would like to ask the Minister of State in charge of the Environment to come up with a statement in this House and inform the country what action the Government is taking to address the current climatic condition. 

Mr Speaker, the weather is so bad that the normal temperature, which is between 23 degrees Centigrade and 26 degrees Centigrade, is now different. The temperature has gone up as far 38 degrees Centigrade, and this is very serious. If you read the information on the Internet, climatologists have stated that this current state of weather was experienced 120 years ago and that this condition is not only experienced in Uganda. Leaders in other countries have already carried out studies to establish the causes, and have developed plans of action to address this. 

When the minister makes a statement, we would not like to have in his statement that, “Rain is about to come in the coming season and, therefore, farmers should prepare because that is God’s plan”. We would like concrete, precise and concise action that government has in place to address this problem. I was in Tororo over the weekend and the women, our mothers and sisters, can no longer assess the traditional vegetables they used to pick. All of them have wilted, the plants are drying up and wilting, the animals in Southwestern Uganda can no longer access water even from the dams, similar to Karamoja, and the situation is very serious. I hope the Government will respond appropriately.

THE SPEAKER: Not today but I think action will be taken by the minister to brief the country, through Parliament. Oh, are you ready?

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague, hon. Ekanya, for raising this matter of public concern. What he says is true and it touches the hearts of all of us. Currently, and since four decades ago, the globe is experiencing a phenomenon known as climate change and global warming caused principally by industries that are pumping industrial gases, which are changing the chemistry and the physics of the atmosphere to such an extent that temperatures have gone up. The icebergs in the Northern hemisphere towards the Northern and Southern Poles are also melting thereby increasing the sea levels and covering small island states. This is a matter of very serious concern.

While I accept to give a comprehensive weather and climate update and forecast, it is within the powers of this House to implement Article 249 of the Constitution, which enjoins Parliament to make a law to establish a commission known as the Disaster Preparedness and Mitigation Commission. While I cover the scientific part of it, the mitigation measures will be covered by the office of the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Sir, I beg that you give me three weeks to do this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, we have a procedure of raising these matters.

3.08
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On a separate note I would like to stand here to express real concern on behalf of the traders of emivumba (old clothing) from Lubaga South, many of whom are also members of Kampala City Traders Association known as KACITA. There is cause for alarm. I would like to seek an explanation from the Minister of Finance about why he has, up to now, not come out to assist these traders. 

There is a calamity, which has come up as a result of the Customs Union tariffs. Traders who used to pay Shs 24 million for a container of goods, are now paying over Shs 47 million; this is almost 100 percent rise. Mr Speaker, you know that a good number of these traders had acquired loans from the banks with very high interest rates, and they are saying that if the Customs Union and the East African Community came to get them swallowed, the Community would rather not be. As they were planning to demonstrate in Kampala I said, “Why do we not try and air your views before honorable members”, although I am an expert in getting these things done. 

So, I rise here to request the Minister of Finance to give a comprehensive explanation as to why these traders have not been bailed out. Foreigners are using the opportunity to masquerade with all sorts of businesses related to the same trade. And the traders’ counterparts in Kenya have been assisted. Why does the Uganda Government not assist them as appropriate steps are being made to normalize these tariffs? We would like to have an explanation and with your permission I have data here related to the complaint of these innocent traders, which government should seriously consider. Allow me to lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, this disposes of this particular business after the communication from the Chair. If you have any point to raise tomorrow, you will see me then we shall afford you an opportunity to raise it. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, this statement is from Kampala City Traders Association also known as KACITA. They give data related to the taxes, which are becoming unaffordable, and many of them are going out of business. So, other than let them demonstrate, this is their government, this is their Parliament. Listen to them, Government. I wish to lay it on the Table.  

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Dr Ezra Suruma.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, on your behalf I want to warmly welcome hon. Ezra Suruma to Parliament. (Applause). We congratulate you, Dr Suruma, upon your appointment as the Minister of Finance, and the House expects heavy rains from you. (Laughter). So, feel free. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.18
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for giving me an opportunity to make this statement, which is an important statement, regarding our planned immunisation programme in Northern Uganda. I would like to begin by apologizing to the Members of Parliament from that part of the country because yesterday we had organized a discussion but unfortunately it coincided with the memorial service in Barlonyo so we could not have it. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, my ministry is planning to carry out sub-national days in 15 high risk districts in the North and Northeastern Uganda, on the 27th and 28th of February 2005.  

The major reason is that Polio is in our neighbourhood, Sudan, and we want to stop Polio from re-appearing in our country. The districts in question are: Apac, Adjumani, Arua, Gulu, Kitgum, Lira, Masindi, Nebbi, Pader, Kotido, Yumbe, Moyo, Moroto, Nakapiripirit and Katakwi. 

This is the eighth year running without any reported case of Polio in Uganda. (Applause). 

It is gratifying to note that Measles’ cases of ill health and death have been reduced to more than 90 percent and 95 respectively since the mass Measles campaign of October 2003. 

Maternal neonatal Tetanus has been eliminated in Busoga region, and reduced to significant levels in the country. These commendable achievements are due to the combined efforts and commitment of government and our development partners. 

The World Health Organization has reported 124 Polio cases since December 2004. This includes provinces bordering Uganda; these cases have been reported in Sudan. Our country is at risk of importing Polio from Sudan. It is well know that more than ten countries that were previously Polio free and had kicked out the disease have acquired Polio through importation from neighbouring countries. It is not only our geographic proximity to Sudan that exposes us to Polio, but also the insurgency in many of the above districts compromises delivery of health services. 

Although the national immunisation coverage has steadily increased, this is not the case for districts experiencing insurgency. This has resulted in 60 to 70 percent inadequate Polio immunisation coverage. The population in the camps, particularly the children, has increased susceptibility and vulnerability to infectious diseases. 

Our risk analysis of the above-mentioned districts puts them at a higher risk of Polio importation. The district league tables show the immunisation coverage in not improving fast enough to ward off any Polio importation. This insufficient coverage has directly led to an accumulated pool of non-immunised children, about 750,000 in the last four years, who are not protected against Polio.  

Mr speaker, in view of the above risk factors, my ministry has sufficient justification to carry out sub-national immunisation days to protect our children against any eventual importation of these crippling diseases through our porous borders. 

The first round will be on the 26th to the 27th of February 2005, and the second round will be on the 7th to 8th May 2005. All children under five years, who are about 1.5 million in the above districts, will receive Polio immunisation irrespective of their immunisation status. All children between nine and 23 months will receive Measles vaccines. Health workers have been asked to use this opportunity screen and give appropriate due or missing routine doses.

Let me take this opportunity to thank our development partners for the support they have rendered to this exercise. The exercise will cost Shs 2.2 billion, and 90 percent goes to districts’ preparation and implementation. We are all stakeholders and we have to protect our previous investments in Polio eradication.

I wish to appeal to members of the House and particularly those Members of Parliament from the above districts, to mobilize communities to take children for immunisation. In the same breath I wish to appeal all districts’ political, civil, religious, cultural leaders and community leaders to be role models and also mobilise their communities for this exercise. 

To the parents and caretakers, I urge you to take your children for immunisation. I appeal to the media to inform and educate the population to take advantage of this exercise. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

3.25
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the ministry responsible for health in this country for the good work they are doing. I would also like to thank government.

At the time that they were carrying out the immunisation for Polio there was a lot of concern that the vaccine would be dangerous to the Ugandan people. I am happy that today the minister is effectively reporting that Polio in this country has been eliminated. 

I would also like to thank our development partners for the assistance they have continued to render to eliminate dangerous diseases in this country.  
As we get peace in Southern Sudan, there are a number of interactions between Uganda and the new Sudan. Therefore, this additional immunisation of the people bordering Sudan is very timely. It is also at this very time that a number of people who have been connected to the LRA are surrendering and coming back. They are coming to interact with the people who have been staying here in Uganda.  Therefore, it is very timely that we carry out this very important immunisation. We can assure you and we can assure the Minister responsible for Health that we who come from those districts neighboring Sudan will mobilize the people and we shall participate to ensure that this exercise goes on very smoothly. 

I would like to get clarification from the minister in regard to the date. The 8th of March is the International Women’s Day. Would having this immunisation take place on that day not interfere with the exercise? Otherwise, I welcome the exercise and I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is May, not March.

3.30
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I congratulate the Ministry of Health, their staff and the Government of Uganda, and our development partners for this effort in this direction. However, I was thinking that while all these districts are really considered risk districts and need to be attended to, if we take up the issue of movement of people arising from insurgency, there is also movement of people extending to districts in the Teso region. I would imagine, therefore, if we are to really consider trying to fight Polio, the Teso region should also be considered as one of those areas, which are at risk.

Secondly, I would like a clarification from the minister arising from a matter in paragraph 3 on the page 1. The second sentence reads; “It is gratifying to note that Measles’ ill health and deaths has been reduced to more than 90 and 95 percent respectively since the mass Measles campaign of October 2003.” That statement, to me, does not convey any meaning. Could the Minister clarify what exactly is meant there? 

3.35
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the statement and the mobilisation information they always give out over the radios. However, maybe the minister should help us and clarify on the persistent reports we have been getting in the media for the last one year - and the last one was on Sunday - about the National Drug Authority allowing in fake drugs particularly from Nigibo Company, somewhere in China. Some people might fear to join the exercise thinking these are some of the drugs that are going to be used. 

So, I would like the minister to at least come up with a comprehensive statement also about the saga concerning the drugs from Nigibo, which were allowed in by the National Drug Authority and yet they were fake drugs. So, I want the minister to clarify on that.

3.37
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since I have not done so formally and on behalf of my people, I would like to start by congratulating the minister for his recent promotion to the rank of Major General. I would also like to thank the ministry, government and our development partners for the efforts that have been put into particularly preventative medicine and protection of the children.  

I note in the minister’s statement on page 3 that he made reference to the Shs 2.2 billion available for this exercise, 90 percent of which will go to the districts for preparation. I also note in the last paragraph on that page, his appeal to Members of Parliament to help in mobilisation. The Minister knows the situation we, Members of Parliament, are in. Given the importance of this particular exercise and the need to make sure that every person who should be immunised is available on the days of immunisation, has the minister considered facilitating the Members of Parliament from these districts? 

He should fix a date for the regional immunisation week when all the Members of Parliament from these districts can go back. The fact that they will spread all over the districts will create a serious mobilisation effect and publicity so that everybody participates. Has he considered including in this preparation the facilitation of Members of Parliament to participate?

3.40
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to also thank the ministry and the minister for this programme and I want to take note of his statement on page 2, which talks about the fact that although the fear comes from proximity with Sudan, fundamentally the problem is the insurgency that has made the districts mentioned here to be more susceptible to Polio. Therefore, I want the ministry, besides this particular programme, to think about general health services in the camps.

If you go to the camp, for many of us who go camps, and you see the children and women in camps and the health conditions of the children and the people living in camps, if it were not because of some of the interventions by the non governmental organisations, we would not know how those people would be surviving.  

I am grateful that actually the ministry recognizes that the insurgency makes the people in camps very vulnerable and the health services are not adequate. Therefore, I want to know from the ministry what additional programmes are there to make sure that there is sustainability of this programme and other health services, more especially in the camps. 

The situations in the camps are very bad. Also the general health services vis-à-vis the camps, you find sometimes that the health centre IVs are very far from the camps. Actually the way the health centre IVs in Kampala and other areas are facilitated is the same way the health centres are facilitated in the insurgency areas, irrespective of the population in those camps. So, what is your policy to ensure that you either double or triple the services in health centres that are nearer to camps where people are more concentrated, people are many and they are not accessing health services and, therefore, leading to problems like this? Thank you.

3.42
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for this statement. I have two points of clarification but also one area of concern. 

Now, the clarification is, the areas undergoing this sub-national vaccination are bordering Sudan a high risk country, but how about DRC which seems to me to be another high risk country?

Secondly, we know that when vaccination takes place the immune response depends on the health status of a person or animal vaccinated.  

Now, from my sister here from Apac and we know, anyway, the nutrition status in these camps is not very good.  Are we taking care of that that the immune response might actually be poor?

Finally, my concern hon. Minister is the accuracy of this report, because the heading says: “Ministerial Statement to Parliament on Sub-National Immunization Days (SNIDS) and Other Accelerated Diseases Control Strategies”.  This statement is only on sub-national immunization, what are the other control strategies you are talking about?  

That is one, the other is on page one, hon. Eresu has already pointed out one mistake where you said that disease ill-healthy and death has been reduced to more than 90 per cent and 95 per cent respectively.  

But, also look at the next one, he says Maternal Neonatal Tetanus has been eliminated in Busoga region and reduced to a significant level.  I do not think he wants it to be reduced to a significant level, he want the other way round.  

Now, when it comes to figures on page 2, the second paragraph from the bottom, you say that national immunization coverage has steadily increased.  It has resulted in 60 to 70 percent inadequate polio immunization coverage.  Now you can explain, but this is going to be in the report three to four years down the line, they will take it as fact. Now what exactly do they mean?  That is another mistake. 

Then on page 3, I know it says that you are going to have two rounds of vaccination. One on the 26th and 27th February, the other one on 7th and 8th May.  Now, I take it that it means May, but it could also mean March because, normally vaccinations the first dose is given and then the second dose is given about two weeks later. It varies from disease to disease.  So, do you mean May or March?   Now, for a report, which is full of errors, it could be either.  

Finally, the map on page 5, you see, we notice that they were trying to write Nakapiripirit and obviously other districts were written there but then they put black.  So, it is like writing with white chalk on a white paper nobody can read it.  So, the names of the districts were written there and then they painted the whole area black so it was counterproductive.  

Honourable Minister, I know it was not your fault that this is a Ministry that is very well funded and we expect professionalism in that Ministry.  I thank you very much.

3.47
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I thank my Colleague especially hon. Nkuuhe for pointing out that error; I will not touch that one. 

But at least the Minister should go back and reconcile the figures plus the map because the figures they are somehow doctored and they make the warped statement – they do not give the accurate figures.  If you look at the paragraph raised by my colleague honorable Eresu and hon. John Nkuuhe, these figures do not tally.  

The other thing I want to add on briefly, is the fact that here you are quoting ugshs2.2 billions –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, you see honorable member, when you say doctored what do you mean, does it means you have accurate figures?

MR SEBULIBA: Doctored, I mean they do not tally. For instance, Mr Speaker, when I refer you to page one, he talks about 90 per cent and 95 per cent coverage.  Then when you come to second last paragraph on page 2, they do not give the actual picture of what he was giving us in the last paragraph on page one.  

When you look at the map at the end of the report they tend not to tally. That is what I mean by somehow doctoring them to suit the consumption of this House.  That is why he should give us a real clear picture on these results. 

Then the other aspect I wanted to touch on, Mr Speaker, is about the Ugshs 2.2 billion.  When I read the report this one concerns only Uganda and bits of the neighbouring areas. But is the Ministry working in isolation of other countries since this is a World Health Organization thing also; how has the Minister taken necessary steps to include in other countries?  I am not saying that we should pay as Uganda, but making a concerted effort for the region of Africa or Africa as a whole such that we do not only immunize our people in northern Uganda or even the rest of Uganda in total disregard to our neighbouring countries.  

Remember, Mr Speaker, even we are forming the East African Union and at the same time, we are moving into wider regions. How has the Ministry come out to liaise with other countries, such that ours does not end up going back to square one where we are treating an isolated situation disregarding others as if we are living on an island.  

How has the Ministry come out and the Minister to coordinate with other member States such that we do not repeat the same thing again? 

3.50
DR RICHARD BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by thanking the Minister and the Ministry for a good job and planning.  

I equally want to request – but since not everybody here is medic and very closely associated with medical reporting, I would request that in future reflecting the success should not only be in percentage but help the non medic to reflect it in graph and in specific numbers; so that they know the success because, everybody would understand the graph and the numbers, which have reduced from what to what; that is one.  

Two, Mr Speaker, of late all districts have deteriorated in recording deaths and births, this in itself I would request the Ministry of Health to liase closely with the Ministry of Local Government to give a special impact on this so that the society know where the humanity is raising.  

We thank you very much indeed for the success so far reflected, but I want also to report that for the routine immunization going on, apart from these specific days, the healthy workers have quite a big problem on transport to do the outreaches. 

We are very grateful indeed for the ambulances distributed everywhere, but then they cannot be used effectively for the routine outreach.  There is still a bit of complaint because of allowances for the health workers in the outreach.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Ministry, the Government and donors for backhanding this important Ministry in looking for the funds and funding this very important exercise of expanded immunization.  I thank you.

3.57
MR REX AACHILLA (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of Health for the continuous job that he has been performing in the Ministry.  

Secondly, I would like also to thank the Government of Uganda for this concerted effort, and likewise thank our development partners for the support they give to this country.

My concern is on page 3 of the Minister’s statement.  Looking at the schedules, the first round is taking place on the 26th and 27th of February; I am not worried of the date for May.  

We Members of Parliament from Kotido District were very much involved at the time of mobilization on immunization for measles in our region.  While we were there, honorable Minister, the main issues that were very clear, and which our staff on the ground faced, was that there was apparent poor facilitation; the aridity of the place was a bottleneck to the success of the programme, drought in its nature.  

Now as we speak it is going to be a major problem where there is famine, many of our shepherds and pastoralists have moved away from near accessible areas, they have moved very far and it is not very easy to reach them; and these people have moved away with children who should benefit from this programme.

We are also aware, honorable Minister, that with the support that you have been giving to Kotido District, there is an apparent outcry of the people of Kotido District in respect to transport. 

 I am here in possession of a letter, which the people of Kotido have written to the Inspector General of Government asking for an urgent appeal to save Kotido District from total collapse.  

One of the issues they have raised is that, and I read verbatim: “Service delivery to the people is at a standstill, with the district having only two vehicles; two new DANIDA RSPS II vehicles recently acquired.  

The district yard is full of parked vehicles; 17, which were destroyed, six of which were crushed in accidents by the LC V Chairperson himself.  

As a result of this mess, Government programmes cannot be monitored now in the District.  Officers have to use public transport, buses, to come for workshops and other programmes in Kampala.”  

Honorable Minister –(Interruption)

MR WANANZOFU: About 1,700 Karimojongs are in the Northern part of Sironko district, and they are not anywhere in a camp; they are just in the bush and they are with about 700 children.  Most of them are dying of heat and hunger, and there are no roads that reach this place called Kata region.  

I am wondering and I want to inform the honourable Minister that, even via Nakapiripirit to that region, there is no access road.  How are we going to do effective immunization in areas bordering Nakapiripirit?  Thank you.

MR AACHILLA: Thank you very much, honourable Colleague.  Honorable minister, you can get it very clearly from the point I already told you, that our problem is how to access these areas. 

The second major problem now is that, we do not have means of transport.  It is very clear from the districts that they do not have vehicles.  

A place like Kotido there are only two project vehicles operational, and we have the debt of running this programme on the 26th to 27th of this month.  How possible is this?  Can we get clear assurance that our children, the poor Karimojong children, are taken care off so that they do not miss the programme?  I thank you.

4.00
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Ministry for once again organizing the national immunization days.  

I have three areas of concern. One is actually on page one, in fact the last sentence where the Minister says, “Maternal, Neonatal Tetanus has been eliminated in Busoga region and reduced to a significant level in the country.”  I would like to suggest that the Ministry produces a little bit more comprehensive report as to the status of these diseases per district.  

First, I am happy that it has been eradicated or eliminated in the Busoga region, what is the status like in other districts; and what could have – I mean, you are just saying, “reduced to a significant level,” what is the status like and what is the plan to eradicate it in other districts as well?

Mr Speaker, I would like to overemphasize the fact that the districts, which border international borders need to have a very big focus because as of now we may not be aware of the efforts, if any, from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC); and as my Colleague had put it, I still have a lot of fear, not only for measles and polio, but for other diseases considering that the Eastern DRC has been under conflict for some time; and these kinds of plan for disease control should really target districts bordering neighbouring countries.

On page two, Mr Speaker, I was rather dismayed with the kind of language used in the report.  In paragraph two alone, the Minister is talking about importation of polio.  It is mentioned twice in that paragraph.  In the last paragraph on the same page, it is again mentioned twice, “polio importation”; it is as if it is an institutionalised system.  

I would like to urge the Ministry to adopt a little bit more scientific way of reporting.  Why don’t we call it cross-border transmission, for that matter, because this is rather misleading?  It as if some taxes have been paid to get the polio in -(Laughter)

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to once again thank the Ministry for the efforts it is doing, but call for a little higher surveillance system for all the diseases, especially in those areas which have been under conflict and bordering neighbouring countries.  I thank you.

4.02
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the Minister for this important programme.  

Mr Speaker, polio is a very dangerous disease, which if not prevented, its effects cannot be reversed. I therefore urge my Colleagues, that whatever loopholes may appear in this paper, should not divert our attention from a very important programme that the Minister is trying to bring .

I have, however, one problem, the Minister indicates two different periods when this immunization is going to take place.  I am sure these two periods would target the children who are already in the risk areas. 

My problem is, what happens to children who might visit these areas either before or after the immunization, because if the problem is already there and the visit from Kampala, for example, chances are that they might come back with the infection. What do you do with such children?  I thank you Sir.

4.04
MS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala Central):  I thank you very much Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable Minister for ably realizing that if this problem reoccurs, then we shall have severe consequences.  

My only concern is the recognition that the high risk infected area is the Northern part of this country, which I really agree that the bordering Sudan makes it very vulnerable.  

I want to mention that we have a lot of internal migrations within this country.  Many people have moved from the Northern part of this country and they are residing within the areas of Kampala, notably, Kinawataka, Kikubamutwe, Mbuya, Luzira among others. 

I do not see any proposal for yet another coverage, may be the Minister presumes that the routine coverage may be able to sufficiently cover this arrangement but considering that many of the people who have just come in are always relatively vulnerable they also do not seek these services very quickly.  I want to find out what the honourable Minister has in place for situations of high-density areas, particularly those in Kampala.  Thank you.

4.05
DR SAM LYOMOKI  (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for having caught your eye since I have taken sometime to speak in this House- (Interjections)- for sometime I have been an endangered specie, but I am now very safe.
 
Mr Speaker, I just wanted to comment on four brief points on the statement.  The first point is that we need as Parliament to thank the Minister of Health for the work that they are doing in the sector of health in this country and for us as workers, we do respect the political leadership in this Ministry and I thought I would make this statement because I heard some honourable Members commenting on some loopholes within the statement. 

I also want to inform my honourable colleagues that the honourable Minister especially the political leadership has done so much and for us we highly regard them. They have managed to bridge the gap between the technical and the political aspects within the Ministry and there is a lot of confidence especially in the work they are doing.  

Some honourable members have alluded to some so- called loopholes within the statement, but if we are looking at this statement from a technical point of view, personally I am a Public Health expert that is my area before I joined the Trade Union Movement and I would pass this brief statement as a very good statement.  Apart from some few typing errors, for instance in the first statement which read “deaths has been reduced to more than 90 and 95 per cent. I think it was a typing error, which meant the deaths reduced by that amount.

Mr Speaker, on the second statement we see the issue of cross border transmissions and some two weeks ago we were discussing cholera and we were against the same problem from Kenya.  

You may also recall that sometime cross border linkages brought a problem when we were trying to eliminate Malaria within Africa. I think it was also a problem of difference between the health regimes in different countries otherwise Malaria would have been eradicated some time ago under the World Health Organization initiative. 

I would, therefore, request the Ministry of Health to try and find away how we should be able to handle the issues of health across borders, to find away how we should work with other countries to handle issues of health, otherwise, whatever miracles or whatever efforts we put in as Uganda, these efforts can be easily reduced to nothing because of other practices in other countries. 

 I have been able to attend different meetings discussing the performance of Health ministries across these regions and in all these meetings, it has been very clear that Uganda has done very well, that is why you find at the borders we have people coming from other countries to attend to our health system, taking advantage of the hospitals across the borders from other countries.  So we should have a situation where we try to handle that factor otherwise it would be a problem.

The last issue I wanted to raise is to appeal to colleagues to rally behind the Ministry in order to demystify because what has been a problem with this type of effort of immunization has been the certain information that has been within the public, some people end up not coming for immunization trying to –because of certain myths and other things that should be demystified and it is the politicians who maybe able to talk to the populations to understand more, otherwise it might be difficult for the health workers alone to be able to pass this information without support from the political leadership.  Thank you very much.

4.08
MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I also want to thank the Minister for his brief and precise report.  I wish to congratulate the Ministry for the achievements in areas of immunization. 

But, Mr Speaker, I am wondering why this important report has delayed up to this moment, yet we knew some of these cases in the neighbouring Sudan some time ago and the Minister is calling up on us to participate in mobilizing the communities for activities that will take place about three days to come, is it not already late really for us to participate in mobilizing the communities for the first round of the immunization programme; and apart from the facilitation my colleague, Prof. Latigo, talked of, are there security measures taken to assist us to mobilize those communities around the borders.

You remember in 2003 when we participated in campaigns against measles, the leadership from Yumbe, the two Members of Parliament, the District Chairperson and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) were practically arrested in the area inside Uganda, which the SPLA claimed that it is their territory.  Are there, therefore, some security guarantees that when we participate in such mobilization we are going to be safe?  That is what I wanted to raise.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.10
MRS MINDRA JOYO (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I commend the Minister for the report he has made, and I am very grateful for the Ministry as a whole for the efforts they are making to fight against these communicable and preventable diseases.  

Now, Mr Speaker, my concern is, I would like the Minister to clarify to us that these diseases are being sort of imported from the neighbouring countries.  Here it has been said on page 2, that World Health Organization has reported 124 polio cases since December.  

Now, when we last carried out the immunization activities in 2003, in my district in Moyo, we did carry out the immunization near the boarders regardless of whether the persons were Ugandans or Sudanese; and in Moyo around Logoba area and Lefuri, the people easily mix, the Sudanese and the Ugandans, we do not segregate each other because we have become more or less in-laws, relatives and uncles.  

But now I would like the Minister to clarify, since we want to do an effective work, have they carried out a survey such that the population within those border areas is estimated and the amount of drugs being given is more or less sufficient, it will cover a reasonable number of the population required?  

We said last time that we were kicking polio out of Uganda; apparently we have kicked it just to our neighbours and it is coming back.  Perhaps now World Health Organization and the Government must make a more comprehensive programme to fight these preventable diseases.  

It is true in the past Sudan was not a peaceful country.  But now, Mr speaker, with peace coming to Sudan and the population mixing freely, would it not be better for World Health Organization, Government of Uganda, to organize a more comprehensive immunization programme so that while we in Uganda are immunizing within maybe in the same month also in Sudan they are immunizing their children, Mr Speaker.  

There is an organization called Medicin San Frontiers, which was first operating in Northern Uganda and Moyo in particular; they have now moved into Sudan.  Maybe such an organization could also be used to carry out the immunization, even if we cannot do on the other side like Congo, but at least on the Sudan side we may be able to work jointly so that this disease does not sneak to and flow between the two countries or the neighbouring countries in Northern Uganda.  Those are my points.  

I am very happy in Moyo we have good service by the Ministry of Health, we have Health Centre 11 in almost every Parish and we are very grateful to the Government for that.  Thank you.

4.13
DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would also like to thank the Minister for highlighting a real problem in our country and this is a problem, which has a potential to be completely eliminated if we carryout immunization.  

It is the policy of the World Health Organization to eliminate polio, just as it did with small pox – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I want to inform you that also Rotary International; and I am a member of Rotary Club.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Everybody is praising the effort of the Government. I am here to point out the weaknesses of the Government in carrying out the polio eradication effort.  

First of all, these mass immunizations followed by periods of quiet two years does not eradicate any disease.  Our purpose is to elevate the percentage of the children immunized to about 90 per cent, and that will control the disease.  

A special effort should be made in those areas where there is insurgency especially those children who are in camps; and if somebody went to those camps to immunize those children, our coverage would be higher than what it is now.  

As far as I know the medicines are provided by the World Health Organization free, all we have to do is to mobilize and carryout the immunization through the Ministry of Health.  

There is no reason, if we can really mobilize the people or induce the health workers to carry out the immunization and let this be a continuous process, let the medicines be available at the dispensaries and health centres so that as part of the immunization of diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, polio and measles, that should be a continuous process. 

There should be a refrigerator at every health centre and there is a schedule for immunization; when a child is born, immunization should be started.  

In my days when I was practicing, no child born in the hospital left without being immunized against tuberculosis, I hope the same thing is continuing; and the thing about polio is that you use what is called attenuated virus, that virus is alive but it has been weakened, and when you drop it under the child’s tough, it actually passes out and it is one of those diseases where contamination of drinking water increases immunization.  

For example, if the water in an area was –(Interruption)

RTD CAPT. BYARUHANGA: I thank Dr Mallinga for giving way.  His Excellency, the President is on record to have said that every child you see crippled now got crippled during the UPC regime and the Movement has managed it.  As the Chairman of the UPC caucus, could you explain to us the magic that could not have happened?

DR MALLINGA: All I can tell you, my Brother, is that that is completely a lie.  I was at a football match last Saturday and there was a child who was under 10 years who had been struck by polio; and as I travel along the Iganga-Mbale road, I see quite a number of children who have been crippled by polio. 

There are two things I would like to point out here, it is wrong to politicise this disease, which is crippling children.  There was much more effort during UPC days to control- (Laughter)- I am serious, to control diseases like polio, measles, cholera; cholera did not exist in those days, but now cholera is almost the annual disease in this country.  

Trypanasomiasis is killing people in Karamoja; it had been controlled. It was a disease confined to certain areas and there was a research station in Tororo, but this Government thought to it that it was closed and these people used to go out to the field to control trypanasomiasis.  So what are they claiming?  This is an effort of the World Health Organization, which they are trying to take away from the World Health Organization; they have a tendency of claiming what they do not do.

MR SEBALU:  Thank you very much for giving way.  A while ago you just said that a disease like that should not be politicised. I am wondering whether you are not politicising it yourself.

DR MALLINGA:  Absolutely not, I am just trying to point out that this Government has preferred to spend money on the military rather than in the health sector.  

Look at the statistics when UPC was in power, what percentage of the money – what percentage of the budget went into health and education and agriculture.  This is all our money – the budget is spent on the military. 

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I did not want to interrupt my colleague for good neighbourhood, but is it in order, Mr Speaker, for a colleague, hon. Dr Mallinga to start talking as if he is in a public rally when actually we are handling a very serious matter and we do not need to address the House as if we are on the public rally.  Is it in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not know, but somebody referred to him as a Chairman of UPC caucus and I think he is, but please conclude.

DR MALLINGA:  I am now concluding.  The hon. member who is criticising me just said that people come from outside Uganda for treatment.  We know for a fact people are going to Nairobi, people are going to south Africa, so where does he get the basis to say that people are coming from other countries into Uganda for treatment.  

The health sector has been neglected, and it is one of the reasons people should reject the Kisanja so that health sector can be rejuvenated again in this country.  Thank you very much.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the members for taking interest in this important subject and for giving some good ideas to take up after here.  

I would like to begin by saying this was only a statement because it was referred to as a report and the inadequacies here and there were raised, but this was meant to be just a statement about the sub national immunization days in one part of the country.  

Secondly, we had intended to go into details as I said at the beginning when we were going to interact with the hon. Members at Hotel Africana yesterday unfortunately it was not to be.  But we have all the information and hon. Nkuuhe who is interested in statistics, we can really facilitate you with a lot of them. I am sure you might need them in your research work elsewhere and we are willing to give them to you.  

Hon. Omach, I think there was – you misread the date, the second period is in May not in March and I am happy that you support the exercise as someone who comes from the border.  

Hon. Eresu, the technical people have carried out research on the ground and we are working with the local people in the districts.  So the decision to go into these districts is based on really the findings of the technical people, and I think in some of these Teso areas, a lot of immunization has already been going on and in fact they did very well so we know - they even got prizes for good coverage so we know that the people are safe.  

There was a typing error by writing to, instead of by, but the reduction is by more than 95 per cent in terms of sickness and death.  

Hon. Byaruhanga wanted to know whether national drug authority is not importing fake drugs.  There is no fake drug that has ever been imported in the country and, or has ever been reported to have been imported. 

What happened, BIDCO which hon. Byaruhanga is talking about – they talked about a factory not having been approved for good manufacturing practice, but when the drugs which were imported from the company which is in question and whose case is still in court and I cannot go into the details of it. 

When they were taken to South Africa and tested, the report I have by the different bodies that investigated is that the drugs were good and that is why there has been pressure by the companies that the drugs should be released or else Government will pay costs. However, - (Interruption)-

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Health.  Is the Minister aware that as we speak now, there is a court case in the High Court of Uganda implicating two senior officers of the National Drug Authority namely, Dr Nganwa and Dr Lule all of them accused of peddling and collaborating with a Chinese company to bring here fake, expired drugs, are you aware about that?

THE SPEAKER:  No, you see hon. Lukyamuzi whereas we may not go in detail of Nganwa and so forth. I think the Minister mentioned that there is a court case in respect of which he would not like to make a contribution.  

The central issue in this matter was the quality of the drug, which he was reporting that a report from South Africa has said it is okay.  We are not dealing with Nganwa; we are dealing with the drug.    

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI:  Much obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Is the Minister also aware- (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI:  No, no, no.  I am not giving away this time, hon. Lukyamuzi, because I explained that the issue of the case in court is about importing drugs from a factory, which does not satisfy good manufacturing practices. But the drugs from there are good, so there is no question of fake drugs.

Honourable Prof. Ogenga Latigo raised -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order, and my standing for a point of order should not alarm anybody.  Is the Minister in order to make us assume that the results of inquiry now in court are positive until court pronounces so?  

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, the court cannot verify whether the drug is good or not.  This can be done in laboratories, which are not in the court. He has told you as far as he is concerned he has a report, which is to effect that the drug is good.  Do you have a contrary report?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, I have a contrary report and I can bring it –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us not be the court, honourable member; let us be relevant to the issue.  The issue is about the quality of the drug.  What you are talking about is a court case against Dr Nganwa, that they will REXdecide whether it was from an approved company or not.  

They are talking about quality; the concern of the honourable member was the quality of the drug.  It was not the source, but the quality of the drug.  We should be able to see the difference.  Please, let us continue.

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Honourable Prof. Ogenga Latigo wanted to know whether Members of Parliament from the districts going to participate in this exercise can be facilitated. My technical people have informed me that facilitation is being considered for intra-travel within the districts.

THE SPEAKER: What type of facilitation, because I must know this?

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Transport, Mr Speaker, and this is what we wanted to discuss yesterday with them.  

The other question, Mr Speaker, honourable members wanted to know the development partners who are involved in this exercise, and they include, of course, World Health Organization, UNICEF, European Union, Ireland, USAID, DANIDA; they are involved in this exercise.

Honourable Nkuuhe wanted to know why Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) is not covered.  But as I reported, we get most of our information from World Health Organization and the threat is coming from Sudan where 124 cases were reported, and that is why we are moving to Sudan.  If the threat shifts to DRC, we shall move there.

DR MALLINGA: Some Moslem Communities have a problem with the polio immunization drugs.  They think there are pork products in the drug, which is used for immunization, but that is not true and people should be assured that there are no pig products in the vaccine for polio.  This has been a problem in the Sudan and also in Northern Nigeria.  It is important to point that out, especially for our Moslem community in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for that useful information.  Honourable Nkuuhe again wanted to know other strategies, which are involved.  But as I said earlier on, this was a mere statement about this activity, but there are other activities going on.  

I had a piece of paper here showing all of them, including child days and so forth, which will be going on in the districts.  There will be immunization, there will be deworming, there will be hygiene and sanitation exercises; there will be community mobilization and others going on.

Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba was asking about the 60 per cent and 70 per cent coverage, and the 95 per cent.  Again this was the problem, this information was not giving details, because if you want to get details every Monday we have statistics given for every week; and if you follow in The New Vision, you will see every Monday we have statistics, and that is where they get the percentages from this; but the statement did not intend to give a report 

On the statistics of every disease, that also goes for hon. Bulamu. I think he was giving the same explanation.  But in case the honourable members, like hon. Sebuliba, want details, we are happy to prepare and give you a picture of all the diseases and statistics available, but we can do it between ourselves like we have done on some other matters.  

For areas, which have transport problems, we intend to buy motorcycles for those areas that are hard to reach.  We are planning to buy motorcycles for outreach purposes in order to carry out our immunization programmes.

Then honorable Epetait, the terminology is not ours, it is WHO; they are the ones who use importation and it is the practice that we use the same terminology in order to be understood.  But we can discuss with them your new innovation when we attend the World Health Assembly in May.  

It is the common terminology and I was seated next to honorable Kagonyera, he has very good explanation, which I cannot attempt to explain, but he says importation and transmission are different, but they had an interaction. I think honorable Epetait is satisfied.  

Honorable Ben Wacha, we are going to have immunization of children in May.  As I said, there are other programmes going on and all children will be covered.

Hon. Zziwa wanted to know why people are moving, but we have programmes for areas, which are hard to reach like Kisenyi and so on. We have special programmes for those areas where these people are migrating to and we shall cover them.

For security, yes, we are working with the UPDF and Police during this exercise. They are part of it and there will be total security to make sure that the exercise is conducted peacefully. 

I want also to inform Members that there are teams already doing their work across the border and my sister from Moyo should not be worried. 

Sudan and Uganda are also carrying out immunisation concurrently. That is why we are picking on these days, and we would like to continue doing that simultaneously to make sure that there is no problem. 

As for hon. Mallinga, I use statistics. So if you think that during UPC days there was better immunization, you need to find statistics because they show different situations, but immunization has improved since NRM came to power. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have a statement from the Minister of Security on Kalangala Action Plan and on other vigilantees being – Can we get a report or statement on what is happening, because this is a decision made last week?

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I want to apologize on behalf of the Minister of Security. I suspect she is handling an acute security matter, that is why she is not here, but I will cause her to respond as soon as possible. 

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for his answer. This is a serious concern to the public, and since your directive last Tuesday, I have consulted some senior ministers as concerned citizens of this country, they are also agreeable that an explanation should be given. Now when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister says he will cause her to explain as soon as possible, he leaves it vague and yet he is known for giving time frame.  Can we know exactly when this explanation will come to the House, Mr Speaker? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, we expected a statement today, Tuesday, and the Prime Minister says the Minister can – Can we give a date, so that we know when the statement comes. I suggest Tuesday to give one week for the Minister to prepare that statement. 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like guidance from you on this matter. Is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister really aware of what we are looking for, because as a Leader of Government Business, at least he can give us some clue that indeed the concern has been taken by the Government.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, I did say last time, I am the one who said the Minister of Security should answer today; he is answering for the absence of the Minister. So, the Minister in charge of Security is the one to respond to what honourable Kazoora raised last week.

MR AWORI: My concern is that once you are a Leader of Government Business, all the business pertaining to the Government should be at least, in some capacity accessible. 

THE SPEAKER: No, according to our rules, when you ask a question, you direct it to the Minister in charge. But let us leave it at that. Why should we toss over this? The Minister is expected to make a statement next Tuesday.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the concern raised by the Prime Minister and the promise that the Minister will come and give a statement. But we need this statement earlier because of the following reasons. In some districts threats from RDCs are already in gear. 

In Kabale District, the RDC has started organizing and addressing rallies particularly in my constituency telling the people that all means will be used in the coming elections to make sure that certain people, whether they are liked or not, shall not be allowed to come to Parliament. They have already started organizing training youths under the cover of cadreship to do this work. 

I therefore, would request, Mr Speaker that the Minister really comes here maybe tomorrow or the day after tomorrow but not two weeks, to give a statement so that we give him the information that we have in our constituencies. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, the duty of Government to protect you does not depend on a statement, which we require the Minister to make on this particular subject. Whether a statement is made or not it is the duty of Government to ensure that there is peace and people enjoy their freedom.  But if you peg it on a statement, then you are giving away the protection, which you are entitled to. So, Government should continue all the time whether a statement is made or not to protect you and to guarantee your right. But since I have already decided that a statement maybe made on Tuesday, I have no reason to review my decision of that particular date; a statement will be given on that day.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. By the time we adjourned for Christmas and when we got back here, we have been consistently asking that the House be updated on the progress of the implementation of the recommendations of the Select Committee on the humanitarian situation in northern Uganda. As you observe the progress here in the House, whenever something is asked, we are having it answered piecemeal. 

Mr Speaker, last week when we made a request for this statement that has been made, we did state the same thing. I am now wondering why there is a response to every other request that came on the Floor since we started and not to this particular request. Mr Speaker, could you probably put it to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: As you appreciate, hon Alaso, this is not relevant to the subject that was on the Floor.  But I quite appreciate your concern especially the contribution you made in producing that very important report. Therefore, although it is not relevant to the issue before us, I take it now and ask the Minister – is it the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness that is supposed to be reporting on this?  If so, let him –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is the Office of the Prime Minister actually, because there is a coordinating bit to it. Not only that, Mr Speaker, the trouble is that there are so many urgent issues that we really ought to follow up, and I believe that if the Prime Minister comes here and gives us that report, we will be able to know the way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I am always disaster-prepared. I did ask hon. Amongin Aporu to make that statement, and in fact hon. Alaso must have been aware that I did ask her. But you see, we do not want to give you shoddy answers. We have to prepare –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I have been consistently around in this House from the time we resumed up to today and I have not heard that. Is it in order for the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, whom I hold in such high esteem, to even try to imagine that I have not been in this House, when I have been consistently around? Is he really in order? Can he provide evidence that I have not been here?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think what I heard from the Prime Minister was that he directed the minister, hon. Amongin Aporu, to handle this issue.  Where he made the direction, whether in the House or in his office, that I do not know; maybe he can elaborate on that.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. That matter was raised by hon. Alaso and I did request honourable Amongin Aporu to handle that matter, and I am certain that she is. I have not hesitation in asking the senior colleague, the First Deputy Premier, who is here to ensure that the report is made within eight days from today. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  Let us take that.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, with your permission, I seek your indulgence on this matter of the ministers responding to our concerns. On this matter of security, I am really emphatic and I am seeking your help. 

Two weeks ago, the Minister of Defence came here routinely to give us a statement on the state of security. It was a detailed statement; we sat here until 8.00 O’clock. We put questions to him, he said the following day he would come with answers; it has been the following day for the past 11 days. That is why, Mr Speaker, when the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business says next Tuesday and it is a matter of security - I am not doubting your word, but I am doubting the sincerity of the government.

THE SPEAKER: Let us try it. I am the one who said Tuesday; I will follow it up. Can we go to another item?

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof Peter Kasenene): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker and honourable members, I was asked by this House to make a Ministerial Statement on the leasing of Dairy Corporation today.  

Mr Speaker, I was not able to get all the necessary information and documentation, which were asked by the committee. However, I met the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we agreed on the following: one, that Government does not sign the Lease Agreement before the following conditions are fulfilled: 

(i) That I avail the Committee –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of procedure. Government has in the past made a number of promises, which were not fulfilled. In light of Rule 35 -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you will be accorded an opportunity to raise it. Why don’t you allow him to finish what he wants to say, and then you can raise your concerns, please?

PROF. KASENENE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We agreed with the committee; one, that Government does not sign the lease agreement before the following conditions are fulfilled: 
To avail the committee the Draft Lease Agreement, which has been made between Government and the investor for the committee to study.

(i)	to avail the committee a due diligence report on this company for the committee to study and comment; and
(ii)	to avail the committee the business plan of this company, again for the committee to study.

Mr Speaker, we also agreed with the committee that all this should be done as soon as possible, preferably in three weeks. And lastly, that after the process is completed I make a statement to this House.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to this House to allow me the time of at least three weeks to work with the committee and to make a report to this House after those three weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Bright Rwamirama, chairman of the committee, are you in agreement with what has been reported to the House?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, there is one small element he omitted. We agreed that the company, which is supposed to buy, will not proceed until the committee has been provided with adequate information and report to this House.

THE SPEAKER: Is that so, hon. Minister, you omitted or forgot?

PROF. KASENENE: No, Mr Speaker, I did not omit it.  That was the first point I made, that we agreed that Government does not sign the lease agreement before these conditions are met. So, if we do not sign, then the company cannot take over.

THE SPEAKER: So the committee is in agreement, Mr Chairman?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: We are in agreement, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Supplementary concerns to the hon. minister. Mr Speaker, I asked last time that could he take into consideration the following legal positions? One, is this thing being done under PERD Statute or is it being done under the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act?  The two are different.

THE SPEAKER: I think these are issues, which the committee is going to examine and report to us. Honourable members, I think this disposes of this subject. Our committee, which is working for us, has agreed on this, they are on record. I think let us give them time to examine it and report accordingly.

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, with due respect with your ruling, I think this House must be respected by Members of the Front Bench and in this particular case, the hon. Prof. Kasenene, he is Minister in Charge of Privatisation and his colleague, the Minister of State for Finance (General Duties) said last week that, there was a process of leasing that was going on. I am therefore, surprised that the Minister of State in Charge of Privatisation has the audacity to come and tell this House that he does not have information when the said lease of Uganda Dairy Corporation was being handled by officials in his ministry. 

I think in doing so, the Minister is not taking this House seriously and I am not going to be party to situations where this House is disregarded. So, I request the Minister to give us information because he has it. What actually the Minister is not saying is that there is no information because Dairy Corporation was being re-leased contrary to the 2nd Schedule of the PERD Act.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Wandera, are we going to do the investigation here, or our functional committee, the Finance Committee is handling this matter? This is what we have been told and the committee has accepted that this is the position.  There are the ones to really investigate and give us a report on which we shall Act, rather than scrutinizing the documents here in the plenary.  I think let us respect our committee because it is working on our behalf. It is the Chairman himself who raised this matter before us, now what do we do?

MR WANDERA: I do not intend to disrespect the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but as we know, Mr Speaker, His Excellency the President has had a strong hand in this, and what they are not telling this House is that yesterday they had an informal meeting with him. Now for us to be bogged down because the committee wants to protect the President is unfair.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, I really hesitate to raise a point of order when my brother, hon. Wandera is submitting, but I think I must because Sir, under the Constitution, this House operates among other things through the committee. The matter before the House now has been ably referred to the committee. 

Whatever feelings one may have, one may take them either to the committee or when the matter has been substantively brought before the House, can make his input. Is it therefore, in order Sir, when the matter has been pronounced upon by you, when the matter has been confirmed as being ably and competently in the hands of the committee, for hon. Martin Wandera to continue submitting on a matter that has been well settled in this House?

THE SPEAKER: I think he was to making a contribution in good faith but the matter is being handled by the committee; let it be handled by the committee, they will report.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY

THE SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, before you read, I want to inform the House that the Minister of Finance who was sworn in today, hon. Suruma, sent me a note before he left to the effect that;  
“I have just perused quickly through your report and can respond on Thursday or thereafter.”

4.54
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): MR Speaker, I was asked by the substantive Chairman of the National Economy to present a report on the National Economy and I request Senior honourable Ministers like Prof. Kagonyera not to move away because these are vital issues of national governance -(Interruption)

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you Mr Speaker. I thought you had guided this House arising from what the Minister brought to you. Would it be good enough, Mr Speaker, for the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy to wait when the Minister is around to take note and be able to answer so that we can also contribute effectively?  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what guidance I can give on this matter. Normally when the report is read it is going to be debated, and observations and comments that are going to be given will require the relevant Minister to respond. 

The position, which is here in writing, is that the Minister who is supposed to respond to the report says he wants time to be able to respond. The report could be presented but then he will not be able to respond. It is up to the committee to consider and see what to do with – but this is a note I received from – We may wait for Thursday so that the Minister responds because it is no point making observations, questions when the Minister is not responding. So, it is up to you to decide what to do. Hon. Captain, what do you say?

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, there is a Minister, in fact, for sure I know that the Ministers of State are alternate Cabinet Ministers and –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Won’t you be able, hon. Musumba, to handle the matter?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba):  Mr Speaker, I am in this House and I am at the disposal of this House at all material time, Mr Speaker.  

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I am going to move that this House listens to the report of Standing Committee on National Economy which is a critic of the performance of the Ugandan Economy.  

Mr Speaker, the committee is happy that it is presenting its report on the same day the new substantive senior Minister of Finance is being sworn in. 

Introduction: -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: If I may ask, I see it is a 46-page report, can you indicate as how you are presenting it? Are you going to read the 46?

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, the report is big, I will make a summary as much as possible. 

Page 1 of the report, there is introduction, page 2 talks about the mandate of the committee, which basically is well understood by the honourable members. 

On the bottom of page 1 there is the methodology we used to write the report. The committee reviewed various documents from the Ministry of Finance, Bank of Uganda, Uganda Debt Network, World Bank and we utilized parliamentary research services as well as the Internet.  

The Government policy from the beginning of 1980s has been focused by the need for economic recovery because of two decades of decay and strife and mismanagement. The economic recovery programme was introduced to address the major reconstruction and rehabilitation issues of vital infrastructure. 

In the middle of the report, Mr Speaker, the Vision of 2025 largely focuses on overall policy issue, which is poverty eradication. The Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) is the comprehensive development framework, which has guided the formulation of Government Policy since 1997.  PEAP is hinged on four pillars namely: 

• Creating a framework for economic growth and transformation, 
• Ensuring good governance and security, 
• Improving the quality of life of the poor, and 
• Increasing household incomes. 

On page 4, other polices include: 

• Macroeconomic stability, 
• Universal Primary Education (UPE), 
• Plan for Modernization of Agriculture, 
• Liberalization, 
• Debt Strategy, 
• National Youth Policy, 
• Gender Mainstreaming, and 
• National Health Policy.   

However, Mr Speaker and honourable members, macroeconomic policies are good (low inflation, stable exchange rate) and they are necessary but not sufficient for real economic growth and poverty eradication. Government believes that private sector led growth as hawked by the Breton wood institutions can work in a peasant-led economy.  The President seemed to have realized that this cannot work during the 2003 May pre-donor conference when he blasted the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) for having failed to help the shilling’s depreciation. The President realized that mere control of inflation, de-regulate interest rates, foreign exchange and trade liberalization have not solved Uganda’s economic problems. 

Apparently, Mr Speaker, for a long time this has been the thinking of many economists, despite Government’s insistence that these policies would work. For example, to assume that roads, electricity, water are necessary infrastructural requirements for growth, but they are not enough because otherwise we would not be seeing poverty along Tirinyi Road, which is a first class tarmac road.

Gross Domestic Product (GDP):

Uganda’s growth strategy is premised on the economic framework of providing a conducive investment environment for private sector. To achieve this, the Government contends that for high growth rates, Government has to maintain low and stable inflation, competitive exchange rates, low interest rates and a sustainable deficit. The reported annual rate of growth has averaged at six percent and inflation has remained below a single digit.

Economic Growth:

Uganda’s economy has been growing at about 5.8 percent in 2003/2004, which is below the government target of seven percent annually. In the past seven years, the economic growth has averaged six percent. Generally, the economy has increased by 41.7 percent during the period of 1997/1998, 2003/2004. 

In the middle of page 6, there are per capita figures; you will read them and internalise them.

In the middle of page 7, you will see the summary of total per capita GDP from 1997/1998 - 2003/2004 fiscal year. What is interesting on that table is that - the last column – percentage increase in per capita income in 1997/1998 had reached approximately four percent; but by the end of 2003/2004 fiscal year, it had come down to 2.2 percent.

Page 8: the Committee on National Economy has made the following observations: 

1. That despite the reported high economic growth rate of seven percent per annum, the poverty levels have remained high with about 43 percent of the population living in absolute poverty.  

2. High economic growth rates have not had a real impact on the population.

3. The non-monetary sector has stagnated at around 20 percent of GDP.

4. Owner occupied dwellings, which have been placed under non-monetary GDP, have not been classified in the formal sector; which has implication that dwellings have not been constructed on resources, which have been subjected to taxation.

Recommendations:

1. Government should develop a redistribution process that will specifically target the core people to avoid the apparent widening of income inequality.

2. The Government should develop a commercialisation strategy that will reduce the size of non-monetary output from its current 20 percent.

3. That Government commissions a comprehensive study, among others, to establish the structure of the “grey economy” that seems to be growing without being recorded as evidenced by the fast growing construction industry.

Sector Performance:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, statistically sector performance will show that from 1998 to 1999 agricultural contribution fell from 5.8 percent to 5.2 percent in 2003/2004 fiscal year. 

Similarly, the industry, which in 1998/1999 was 14.2 percent is now stagnating at around four percent.  

Mr Speaker, I want to draw the attention of the House also to the total monetary and non-monetary sector. While in 2001/2002 fiscal year, total monetary was 7.4 percent, it is now stagnating at around six percent, that is 5.96 percent, and there is an increase of the non-monetary. All these figures, honourable members are from literature books of the Ministry of Finance.

Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA):

PMA is the Government’s framework for modernizing agriculture. It is a poverty-focused strategy, whose main objective is to increase income. PMA is being implemented in 24 districts and NAADS in 16. Marketing farmers’ produce remains a major challenge to promote commercial agriculture. 

Mr Speaker, agriculture, which contributes 40 percent of Uganda’s economy has experienced slow growth in the last six years. Eighty percent of Uganda’s population depends on agriculture; most households in Uganda continue to derive their livelihood and income from agriculture. It is the biggest contributor to the economy. 

Mr Speaker, 2002/2003 annual headline inflation  averaged at 2 percent and this was on account of food crop production which led to a 21 percent drop in food crop prices. What, in economic terms, this amounts to is that peasants remain miserably poor because of poor terms of trade despite the fact that they work hard. Again what seems to be a paradox is that as far as national resource allocation is concerned, and that while agriculture accounts for a bigger ratio of 40 percent to GDP, the sector only gets 2 percent of the national budget. To-date the ratio of monetary to non-monetary output within the agricultural sector has stagnated as earlier pointed out.  

Mr Speaker, in the majority of cases, when the country recorded a high GDP growth rate, it has always been on the account of food crop sub sector as a result of adequate and timely rains when God the Almighty has been merciful. The agricultural output over the past five years has grown by less than average GDP growth rate. The slower growth rate of agriculture relative to other sectors has significant negative implication for the livelihoods of the poor since about 56 percent of the economically active Ugandans depend on the sector. 

The middle Table 3 will tell you how the agricultural sector has gone down from about 41 percent to about 38.5 percent, industry is stagnating around 19.5, and services is what is recording reasonable growth.

The last paragraph on page 11:  While Botswana gets over 100 million Euros per annum from about 2.5 million herds of cattle, Mr Speaker, Uganda with over 6 million diseased herds does not earn anything beyond 20 million dollars per annum from this animal sub sector. 

Uganda as a country, Mr Speaker and honourable Members, is not an industrial country; it is not even a mining one. The country’s comparative advantage lies in the agricultural sector, which needs serious attention by Government and honourable members. A casual look at a number of supper markets in this country including Shop Rite destinations will reveal that most of the products there are of agricultural type like chicken, juices, mangoes and so on which could easily be produced here.  

Mr Speaker, there is nothing or little being done to promote the production of high value products through processing and specialized techniques.  There is however, some minimal effort on provision of coffee seedlings to farmers with high quality planting and stock material by Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA).  

Observations: 

(i) Government allocates a mere 2 percent of the total national budget to agriculture.  
(ii) In all programmes for Modernization of Agriculture there are no provisions for irrigation.
(iii) No provision for modern equipment.
(iv) No land reform to enhance agriculture.  

Recommendations:

(i) The MAAIF develops an investment plan for agriculture. Without an investment programme and plan, agriculture will largely remain subsistence. 

(ii) PMA and NAADs be refocused to achieve the full development potential of the sector.  

(iii) National budget for the agricultural sector should be increased from its miserable 2 percent to at least 10 percent of the GDP. 

(iv) A value for money audit should be carried out on PMA and NAADs. 

(v) Coffee seedlings procured should be paid for as this is making some farmers – seedling owners, they are being impoverished.  

(vi) There is need to develop a deliberate practical intervention policy in the agricultural sector to boost production. 

(vii) Government should develop a deliberate strategy for the marketing of agricultural products.
 
(viii) A sustained price level for the food crops so as to offer fairs terms of trade to the poor.  

(ix) To offer favourable conditions for the private investors in the agricultural sector.  

Transport and Communication:

It has recorded the fastest growth rate in the economy. The sector grew by about 14.9 percent.  Posts and telecommunications has grown at a rate of 34 percent in the last five years. However, the growth in the communication sector has not led to a decrease in mobile telephone charges.  

Recent developments in the transport sub-sector include: 

• The increase in the number of used motor vehicles and used motorcycles, 
• A deteriorating rail system and network, and
• Increased air charges to cargo and passengers.

Observations: 

The committee notes that:

1. The Uganda Communications Commission has largely failed to protect the interest of the Ugandan consumer.  

2. In the agreement, the number of customers was used to determine expansion, price, quality and development of the mobile telephone network since the licensing of the Second National Operator in 1998. 

3. Ugandans have continued to suffer charges by the minute of every call made even when they used just a second. 

4. In spite a well developed infrastructure that existed at the sale of UTL, the expansion of its network and its services have been slow. 

5. The US $ 7 million loan approved by Parliament to extend communication infrastructure to northern Uganda is yet to be realized. 
 
6. UTL held 7 million dollars borrowed for Northern Uganda telecommunications without accomplishing the work for which the money was put in their charge.

Recommendations:

(i) Mobile phones should charge as per usage. If I have talked for two seconds, let me be charged for two seconds!   (Applause)

(ii) The pricing needs to be reviewed with the aim of consumer protection. 

(iii) MTN should implement all the conditions and requirements in the agreement.  

(iv) The conditions on the number of customers has been satisfied, thus the years condition should not apply.  

(v) Government should provide a report on the performance of the telecommunications loan for Northern Uganda.  

(vi) UTL should be compelled to pay interest to Government for the 7 million dollars which it held for a long time.  

(vii) Taxes on new cars should be reduced to promote purchase of new vehicles to save foreign exchange. 

(viii) Investment in railway sector should be increased to save the loans and reduce the cost. 

(ix) Uganda Air Cargo plane should be repaired to improve the cargo flight. 

(x) UCC should report to the House about its performance and implementation (including the implementation of agreements) within two months.

Road Sector:

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication has its mandate, you will see it on page 16. 

Observations:

1. Uganda has the highest construction and maintenance cost per unit in the whole of East and Central Africa, which stands at between Uganda Shs 350 million to about Shs 450 million per kilometre.

2. Uganda’s roads do not meet regional and international classification standards. 

3. The Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication has created a Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) with no known legal or administrative basis to maintain Uganda’s road network.  

4. The majority of loans approved in this sector have not been utilized, as you will see. There is a table of the loans we have approved over the years, although we are being harassed from time to time that we are holding Government loans. 

Recommendations:

i. The Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications urgently provides the House a comprehensive report on the cost of construction and maintenance of the roads in Uganda as promised.  

ii. Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications should streamline the legal and administrative existence of RAFU.

iii. Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications should update this House on the status of the ten-year road sector plan, and
 
iv. An explanation be availed to Parliament why there is less absorption of the borrowed resources.

Energy Sector:

The Rural Electrification Programme has not taken root despite the resources allocated in the sector.

The Energy sector currently faces shortage of power. That one is known even by my aging mother.  

Petroleum exploitation and drilling in the Semliki region is continuing.

Observations:

Privation of the Energy sub-sector has not realized the expected efficiency as promised and evidenced.  No private investment has been realized in this sector of power, in spite of expressed interest on Karuma and Bujjagali and so on.

Recommendations:

Government should provide a Rural Electrification Programme to the House within two months.  

Private investment in this sector should be reviewed by government to avoid escalation of power shortages.  

Other sources of energy should be developed with emphasis of renewable energy, and 
Petroleum production sharing agreement should be laid in Parliament for immediate review.

Health Sector:

The Government has made substantial investment to rehabilitate and develop comprehensive health infrastructure nationwide. 

Observations:

1. In spite of the large US$24.5 million Spanish loan, health units, which benefited from the loan are not equipped to manage the case load that the new health policy was meant to achieve.

2. Lack of adequate and qualified staff has rendered the investment in health infrastructure improvement a waste of resources.

3. The availability of drugs and their quality has further reduced the effective use of health facilities.
4.	Nutrition and early childhood loan has not been effectively utilized, significantly impacting on the health of the Ugandans who are under five years.

5. Nationwide coverage of primary health care and immunization activities have been made available, but without a commensurate improvement in the quality of life for the majority of rural Ugandans.

6. Ambulance services have been introduced in all districts, however, pick-ups cannot pass the definition of ambulance.

Recommendations:

1. Qualified and experienced medical staff should be recruited instead of being sent to the United Kingdom. 

2. Equipment should be provided uniformly to the health units to meet the minimum health standards.  

3. Nutrition and early childhood project should be reviewed.

4. The Spanish loan for Kamuli and Kisoro should be evaluated as there seems to be problems in procurement.

Water Sector:

Water quality and coverage nationwide for the consumption by people and livestock remains a major challenge. 

The Committee observed that Government has no water master plan to guide the country. 

Past initiatives to provide water through RUWASA have not yet realized the nation an optimal consumption of water for people and livestock.

Small towns project approved in 2002 has not been implemented.

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that a water master plan for Uganda should be tabled here in this House.  

Piping of water should be a priority policy of government to meet the water demands.  

Government provides an explanation within two months about Water for Small Towns.

Privatisation:

You can see the figures, honourable members, for total revenue, expenditure and so on. Government sold NYTIL to Picfare - I am not going to read that, you can see want happened, seven million dollars and the circus that went on.

The committee observes that as of 30th June 2003, Government had divested 113 enterprises; 72 were privatized, five repossessed by former owners, 15 were struck off the register of companies, 19 liquidated and two were dissolved by a decree.

Revenue of Uganda Shs 17.5 billion was outstanding and these are not being charged interest on their obligation while they are using the enterprises to make profit.

The recommendation of the committee is that we should go slow on privatisation as the desired results have not been attained. We should not privatise for the sake. 

Parliament should investigate NYTIL transaction, 

All enterprises privatised and not paid for should be charged interest on the outstanding.

Employment:

Mr Speaker and honourable members, for unemployment, the government of Uganda has implemented policies at the macro level aimed at enhancing economic growth and subsequently reducing poverty. These policies have resulted in renewed growth, but unemployment has remained a major challenge that continues to confront Ugandans.  Government does not have any specific employment policy in place to handle the problem.   

According to the national housing survey of 1997, unemployment rate stood at 7.4 percent; Kampala alone had 31 percent, while Western Uganda had the highest overall unemployment of 7.5 percent, while Northern Uganda had the lowest. 

The population in the age range of 15 to 64 is the number of people who could potentially be economically active. The total labour force was estimated at about ten million in 1997, while 52.8 percent of the labour force was female and 86 percent was the rural. You can read the rest of that page 25; we do not want to waste a lot of time.

Page 26, in the middle of the page, currently the number of Ugandans graduating at tertiary level are about 10,000. The investors who have come to Uganda have provided only 98,000 jobs (according to Uganda Investment Authority) and most of the key posts and professional jobs are filled mostly by foreigners. Most of the investors do manufacturing with little value addition, whole selling and retailing and thus making the locals unemployed.  The immigration regulations are inadequate which has led to a lot of immigrants in the country doing the jobs that could have been done by Ugandans.  Some of the investors are doing jobs like of selling pancakes, which Ugandans could do. 

In addition to the above, the Ministry of Gender, which had drafted the National Employment Policy, has never made it public. The President of Uganda continues to refer to unemployment, as “The unsettled-question is how to create wealth and social economic transformation fast enough to deal with poverty, unemployment etc”.

Recommendations:

Government should come up with an employment policy at least within half a year.

Immigration department should be strengthened to handle genuine immigrants. In the meantime, let a verification exercise be done.

Uganda Investment Authority should provide Parliament with all the investments done in Uganda and the number of Ugandans employed.

Government should carry out human resource audit in Uganda to see the capacities we have so far.

Prices:

Overview:

Liberalisation means the removal of barriers and obstacles to what should be free trade. The idea behind liberalisation is that competition can improve the allocation of scarce economic resources. The aim is to eliminate policies that distort prices and tie up markets. In Uganda, this has been achieved through the deregulation of the internal trade system and domestic prices across the board. Uganda has liberalized prices of all goods and services locally produced and imported. This has had a positive impact on the price stability.

Domestic financial market and interest rates:

Mr Speaker, monitory policy remains focused on maintaining price stability in support of macroeconomic stability of maintaining real GDP growth rate of 7 percent and 5 percent of inflation. The conduct of monetary policy faces challenges like weather changes, effects of surges in international oil prices and depreciating exchange rate that put pressure on domestic prices.  In addition to inflationary pressures, there is the task of gradually reducing the excessive reserves held in the banking system and managing excessive liquidity arising from donor funded government expenditure to support poverty reduction, in a manner that would not exacerbate instability in the domestic and foreign exchange money markets. 

In the financial sector there are 16 districts, which do not have any banking services. With the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank Limited, there was hope that these districts would ever get these services. There is little hope and the reasons advanced are that these districts are not financially viable. Government should not look at all financial viability but also social benefits that accrue when you provide a service. The costs now to transact business in these areas are so high.  

Mr Speaker, the committee wishes to observe that since 1992/93 fiscal year when Government of Uganda allowed commercial banks to engage in Treasury Bills (TBs) purchases, the interest rates have been affected by way of keeping them high. Have the financial institutions ever thought about the high interest rates as one of the main causes of poor loan repayment of Ugandans as opposed to the so-called “Ugandans culture of not willing to pay loans?” 

Uganda is one of the very few less developed countries where banks are allowed to trade in Treasury Bills with impunity at the expensive of individual or corporate depositors. Most countries sell Treasury Bills to the depositors who bid through the central bank or commercial banks. They do not permit commercial banks to do so for their benefit because they would prefer investments in Treasury Bills, because of no risk, at the expense of lending to the domestic economy. 

Banks hence prefer lending to government through Treasury Bills and earn non-taxable interest rates with low risk compared to the more risky business private sector, which in turn starves the private sector of investable scarce resources. 

Consequently, Mr Speaker and honourable members, unemployment follows and low domestic revenue - simple economics. Because of the above, banks keep interest rates very high for the private sector and, therefore, existing business cannot expand and new ones cannot start business. Unscrupulous businessmen have opened money-lending houses charging interest rates between 15 to 20 percent per month. Bank of Uganda has issued licenses to these money-lending houses and many people have lost properties ostensibly, including some of the honourable members here.  

The interest rates which were promised to us that by selling Uganda Commercial Bank will be low, has never been delivered. Now the interest rates are very high discouraging investment. This is because the cost of capital is high. All banks have resorted to investing in Treasury Bills, which are risk free. 

That Table is about the prices. I want only to say, Mr Speaker, that another important development that took place was enacting the Micro Finance Deposit Taking Institutions Act in April 2003. The law provides a framework for licensing, regulating and supervision of the micro finance business. This law, however, does not cater for licensing, regulation and supervision of the smaller non-deposit taking micro finance institutions, which reach the poor people in rural areas. The few micro finance operated by individuals in this area are for exploitation of these poor Ugandans, making them poorer.  

In addition, to-date Government has defied the Parliament of Uganda resolution to introduce a Bill for licensing - How can I go ahead there is no single minister from the Ministry of Finance; all of them have run away –(Mr Agard Didi rose_)- hon. Agard Didi, Okay. To-date the Government has defied the Parliament of Uganda resolution to introduce a Bill for licensing, regulation and supervision of small micro finance institutions. This was supposed to have been brought within six months after passing of the Act. 

Parliament approved outreach programmes for micro finance loans of US$18.5 million to reach every sub-county. These funds have not reached the sub counties. Additionally, micro finance has been over duplicated in every ministry. Why? 

Interest rates have remained high and volatile.  You read that last paragraph on page 31. In the middle of page 32, Bank charges have increased in all commercial banks and the days of clearing a cheque are four days. The bank charges increased after the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank. Did you realize that, Mr Speaker and honourable members?  For example, to deposit or to withdraw in Stanbic Bank, you are charged Shs 5000.

The committee’s recommendations:

• Government should intervene in the provision of financial services in all districts, whether they are remote like Moyo or like Ishongoro and Kaberamaido. This will help to reduce on the costs and promote savings and at the end we would have investments. 

• The Government should not pursue fiscal policies, which discourage investments. Investments are necessary for development of this country.  

• Government should try to reduce its budget deficit by cutting down on public and unproductive expenditures like the vehicles for all political leaders and civil servants.  There are some expenditures, which are not necessary. And if this is done, the borrowing from the public will reduce and hence Treasury Bills interest rate will go down. In turn, lending rates will go down too.

• The Minister in charge of micro finance should explain why he has not respected the Parliament of Uganda resolution to-date? 

• The outreach programme should reach every sub-county within two months. This is now an order from honourable members.  

• An Anti-Money Laundering Act should be enacted urgently.  

The foreign exchange market and exchange rates:

Mr Speaker, the Foreign Exchange Act spells out how foreign exchange is supposed to be managed. The current managed float system allows the authorities to monitor the market developments and intervene only to stabilize the market. Under the managed flexible exchange rate system, the central bank buys or sells the Uganda shillings or dollars as need arises. Market forces determine the exchange rate. Bank of Uganda intervenes to smooth out wide nominal exchange rate movements and ensure market stability.  

The committee is of the view that the Bank of Uganda policy of pumping foreign exchange into foreign exchange market in order to stabilize exchange rate is foolhardy because the demand for foreign exchange will never be satisfied by Bank of Uganda’s periodic interventions. 

Government attributes the appreciation of the shilling to factors like United States dollar weakening against other international currencies, high interest rates on Treasury Bills and sale of donor funds.  There was also a 20 per cent increase in Uganda’s exports from US$773.91 million in 2002/03 fiscal year to US$927.53 million in 2003/04.

The sale of donor funds, and this is a very serious observation, has been blamed for its effects on the high interest rates on Treasury Bills and appreciation pressures on the sale of the shilling or dollar exchange rate. Most Parliamentarians have blamed the high lending interest rates on the reliance of commercial banks on sale of donor funds to avoid the higher risks in lending. 

The Ministry of Finance noted that one of the challenges it faces in controlling inflation is in terms of high level of Government liquidity injections arising from increased donor funding of domestic expenditure. Each dollar of a donor fund leads to creation of the equivalent amount in shillings by the central bank for Government to spend. Bank of Uganda issues Treasury Bills and sells foreign exchange to mop up the additional liquidity generated by increased donor funds.

The committee wishes to recommend, Mr Speaker, that Government should regulate the inflow of donor funds and the intervention by Bank of Uganda in the foreign exchange rate market, taking into account the interests of exporters.  

External Sector:

This sector looks at the Balance of Payments (BOP), imports and exports. We go to the last paragraph. Mr Speaker, in the background to the budget, page 64, of 2003/04, the value of non-traditional exports fell from US$293 million in 2001/02 to US$289 million in 2002/03. In the Bank of Uganda report of March last year, export earnings of coffee was about US$12 million per month, while from non-coffee exports for the same period was about US$42 million per month, which makes a total of US$54 million per month. On average, this would put the total export earnings at about US$600 million a year.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, from the imports side, the total value of imports for the same period was estimated at about US$124.4 million per month. This is very serious, total import bill per month compared to what we earn from exports per month and out of these, total Government imports increased and you can read the figures yourselves.  On average, therefore, and on the basis of the above, the total import bill for the country is estimated to be about US$1493.5 million, which is twice what we earn from our total exports.

Mr Speaker, all indicators are that there is a decline in the rate of growth of the economy as shown from above, and the glance at the issues will leave you in no doubt that this is an economy of supermarkets stocked by products, which, if we were producing them here, that would be fine and you occasionally go to supermarkets like Shoprite and so on.

Recommendation:

There is need for Government to support economic players who are involved in the production of goods for export.  

External loans and the debt portfolio:

Uganda’s total external debt is projected to be about US$5.0 billion by end of June this year, which is an increase of about 16 per cent from the end of June 2003. These are figures from the Ministry of Finance, Mr Speaker. The external debt increased from US$3.6 million in 1996/97 to US$4.3 million in 2003/04. During this period, the external debt increased by US$651.9 million, presenting an increase of 17.82 per cent. The external debt payments, in the middle of the page, increased from US$133 million in 1999/00 to US$180 million in 2003/04 presenting an increase of 35 per cent. However, debt service after Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) increased from US$77 million, which is an increase of 25.9 per cent.  

The World Bank and International Monetary Fund launched the Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt initiative with the objective of reducing the external debt of the world’s poorest most heavily indebted countries to sustainable levels. Uganda was the first country to benefit from HIPC debt relief initiative in 1998, and it was granted US$347 million in Net Present Value (NPV) to be spread over a period of over 30 years.  

Uganda was also the first to get debt relief under the enhanced HIPC debt initiative. Assuming full delivery, Uganda received debt relief US$1,300 million equivalent to about US$656 million in Net Present Value terms under the enhanced HIPC. Under both the original and enhanced HIPC, Uganda received US$1950 million. As a result, the ratio of debt service to export declined to less than half what it would be without relief. 

Mr Speaker, even after debt relief, Uganda’s total outstanding external debt has continued to grow. The ratio of debt stock to GDP in June 2003 was projected at 74 per cent as compared to 61.9 per cent in 98/99. The debt service/export of goods and services and debt service/domestic revenue have not improved. The Net Present Value as a ratio of exports of goods and services has worsened to pre-HIPC relief levels. It increased from 150 per cent in 1999/00 fiscal year to 305 per cent in 2003/04. The Net Present Value of the debt to export ratio of 305 per cent is more than double the HIPC sustainability threshold.
  
The International Monetary Fund and IDA in the recent debt sustainability analysis concluded that, Uganda’s debt sustainability indicators had deteriorated since its completion point under the enhanced HIPC framework and warranted concern. The Ministry of Finance has also, in its last two financial years, agreed in principle that Uganda’s external debt is unsustainable. So, this song of saying, “There is growth”, growth against that background! 

Uganda has continued to contract more debts and the figures are there. Honourable Minister, these are your figures, they are not mine. In addition to that, the Committee on National Economy has six loans for its consideration totalling to US$330 million. 

The challenge is, while there is an admission by Ministry of Finance that the total national debt portfolio is unsustainable, the committee is under pressure and serious pressure to approve further loans. In some cases people have been accused for really undermining Government by delaying these loans.  It is about US$330 million; so big!  

The committee has found out the absorption capacity of the loans is very low and the figures are there somewhere at the end you will see them if you can interpret them. Majority of the loans approved by the 7th Parliament have not been utilized. Even those of the 6th Parliament have not been completely utilized. This implies that if there is an extension of the project life, Government has to seek the authority of Parliament. This has not been done. 

Among these are:

• Kafu-Masindi road hit a snag until recently when there is a small activity. 

• Fisheries loan has never taken off.

• Livestock loan, although we were told that if you do not pass it, World Bank, IDA will just close the door and we had hurriedly to whip Members to micro finance outreach plan.

• Small Towns Water project.

• Rural Electrification loan.

• Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) US$100 million.

• North-West Uganda Small Scale Holders Agriculture project. You will be amazed by the percentage disbursements.

Recommendations:

The committee recommends that: -

Government should drastically reduce on the number and amount of loans it is contracting- munasikiya?

Government and Parliament of Uganda should develop a ten-year debt strategy, which spells out the amounts to be contracted.
  
Government provides detailed loan utilisation since the 6th Parliament.

The component of capacity building in loans, which ranges from 20-50 per cent, should drastically be reduced.

All new loans to be contracted should be for the productive sector not for consumption, buying vehicles.

Ministry of Finance should harmonize various loan components, which should address similar concerns.  

Office of the Auditor General:

It is there you can read for yourself. We want to read the recommendations:

There should be a law to be enacted to allow the Auditor General to employ more staff to attract high calibre staff. 

The Auditor General should employ specialized auditors urgently in the field of engineering, environment and social services.

There is need to provide the Auditor General with enough resources to do his job. The Minister of Finance should not starve him of his money by release of funds to enable him do the job. 

Auditor General staff should not be housed in the auditee premises as this compromises them.

Poverty trends: Like other developing countries, poverty reduction is the main overall development policy of any serious country like Uganda. Uganda’s efforts to eradicate this social problem are contained in Poverty Alleviation Action Plan (PEAP). PEAP was adopted in 1997, when it was realized that the incidence of poverty was high in both urban and rural areas, as you will see in the figures. In 1992/93 fiscal year, integrated household survey had revealed that rural areas were substantially poorer than urban areas on human development indicators. 

Uganda is said to be one of those countries that have made tremendous strides towards achieving the global objective of reducing the people living in absolute poverty (one dollar per day) I do not know who determined this one dollar. A dollar in our local money here is now Shs 1,750 because that is the most recent exchange rate. That if you are living beyond that then you are beyond poverty, that you are outside the poverty bracket. Imagine if you drink a Rwenzori bottle of water, which is about Shs 500, what balance do you have out of Shs 1,700? You are remaining with Shs 1,200; can this buy lunch and supper? So, whoever came out with these statistics of one dollar – 

Uganda recorded impressive success in poverty reduction, according to these statistics, between 1992 when there was reduction in national, rural and urban poverty. This was at a time when those living in absolute poverty in the African region rose from 42 per cent to 47 per cent in 1981 to 2001. In Uganda, people living in absolute poverty reduced from 56 per cent in 1997 to 34 per cent in around 1999/00. Poverty reduced in both rural and urban areas from 60 per cent to 39 per cent and 28 to 10 per cent respectively. There was reduction in poverty in all regions with exception of Northern Uganda. But when we say poverty reduction, remember it is one dollar, which is Shs 1,750 according to our exchange rates.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the successive trends of poverty reduction that had been achieved from 1992 were reversed in 2002/03 fiscal year when the true analysis was done. ”The true analysis” you mark these words, they are carefully used and selected; meaning that the previous analysis - the people living below the poverty line in Uganda increased from 34 per cent to 38 per cent between 2000/03. In 2002/03 out of the 24.7 million people more than 9.4 million Ugandans were living below the poverty line. Levels of poverty increased in all fronts from national, rural, urban and regional levels.  

In the central region, the people living in poverty increased from 20 per cent to 22 per cent and western region where milk and honey is supposed to be flowing there was increased poverty from 26 per cent to 31 per cent. The biggest increase was in the eastern region where those below the poverty line increased from 35 per cent to 46 per cent. The Northern region had the least increase in poverty, but it still has the highest incidence of poverty.  These are figures from our planners, Mr Speaker, they are not figures from any other source. 

The increase in poverty, coupled with recent studies – these bar graphs on page 44 are in small figures and I am getting blind. The first bar chart is national poverty trends from 1992 to 2003. The first one is national, the second one – you can see they are four bars - poverty went down – I have already read figures anyway, I should not waste time on this. But nationally poverty came down from 56 per cent to 34 per cent, then it has gone back nationally. That is the figure on top of the white bar.

For the rural it came from 60 per cent and came down to 39 per cent and it is going up again to 42 per cent. From urban it came down from 28 per cent to 10 per cent, then it is going up to 12 per cent.  The increase in poverty, coupled with recent studies that have revealed that in order to halve – that is to divide by two - poverty in Africa, the economies have to grow at 7 per cent. You can read that.

The bar graph below is regional poverty trends. In the central, Mr Speaker, poverty came down from 46 per cent – I cannot read that small figure – to 20 per cent, now it is going up again to 22 per cent.  In the western region where there is milk, honey and everything, it came from 53 per cent to 28 per cent, it is now going up to 31 per cent. In the eastern region you can really see the misery there, from 59 per cent to 37 per cent now to 46 per cent.  Northern Uganda honourable members, do not even mention it, it is a catastrophe!

Let me go to observations on page 45:

• Uganda has made some progress, however let that be pointed out, but the poverty levels still remain high and worrying, and the country may not achieve its millennium development goal. 

• There has not been any significant reduction in poverty in Northern region partly because of insecurity and the recent renewed increase in poverty levels in the eastern region calls for urgent attention. Where there is insecurity it is understandable like Northern Region, you do not expect production and increased earnings and productivity to take place in an insecure environment. But three quarters of a country have been under peaceful environment. Mr Speaker, I will expect a very serious rejoinder statement from hon. Isanga Musumba from eastern region on why poverty is increasing highly.

• The gains from the recorded average 6 per cent growth of income in the last decade has not been evenly distributed as evidenced by the increasing high incidences of income inequality .

• In villages, Mr Speaker, you can observe real poverty and people go with one meal a day or none.

Recommendations:

• Government should invest in productive ministries like agriculture.  Government should invest- this abdication of responsibility, “put macroeconomic environment in place and everything will fall in, even my mother will understand that inflation is controlled” that one must stop. Government should invest in productive ministries like agriculture where more than 80 per cent of our people depend. 

• There should be a deliberate government policy to equitably distribute resources regionally.

• There is need for a deliberate and well-managed programme meant for peasants.  

On page 47, Mr Speaker, and distinguished honourable Members of Parliament, there are just Tables but which have got a lot of economic messages being sent. On the top Table 1, revenues and grants, I want only to point out the last column that revenue as a percentage of GDP increased from 13.36 in 1996 to 1997. It really oscillated like a pendulum, it increased a little by percentage points, but it is now decreasing by 2.03, 2.04 it is about 13 per cent you can see below 12.9 that is roughly 13 per cent.  

Revenue as a percentage on GDP:

I do not want to waste a lot of time on those figures because we do not have the time.

Summary of government budget and financial operations from 1996 to 1997 to 2004, you can see them page 48, page 49.  

Mr Speaker, I want to go to page 51 on the attachment, which is project financial performance report since 2001 to-date. this Table is extremely vital, it shows the sources of the donor funds, the signature date, effective date, the closure date, amount requested by government and approved by this House, amount disbursed to-date, the difference and percentage of the amount disbursed. 

I want to draw your attention, Mr Speaker and honourable members, to Area Based Agriculture for Modernization South West, Road Development Programme Phase II - I have already read them, but I want now to refocus your attention on real statistics- Urban Water Reform Implementation, upgrading Kafu-Masindi road. These loans signature date around 2000/01, but as we speak now, none of those funds have been touched. You can see zero percentage disbursed.  

Now, I want to bring you down, Mr Speaker, on Power IV Project. Power IV Project, about $87 million was approved but to-date, for power which is really disturbing us with load shedding, only 15 per cent so far has been used.  

Energy Rural Transformation project 3.7 per cent has been disbursed, Fourth Power Project- NDF, zero money has been disbursed and so forth. It is very easy to interpret.  

If you go down towards the end of the page, you will realize, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that Community Vocation Polytechnics and Rural Financial Services programme, none of those funds have been used. Although admittedly, there are some, which we passed recently like, the one we passed. It is coming to a year because this one was passed on 6 of May 2004. So, bearing in mind the tremendous pressure the committee really experiences, we think that once we have approved then these funds are quickly utilized.

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, the rest of the attachments of the report are various loan requests by government as approved by the 6th Parliament and this 7th Parliament, all these attachments as you see. I do not think it is necessary to read them. Honourable members are literate enough to see how much money, which was requested by government and passed by this House and at which date and for which function and for which activity.  

Honourable members, I want to move and thank you for this opportunity. The committee will be very grateful for rejoinder statements, comments criticisms of the report from the National Economy Committee. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. I must say, hon. Captain Guma, that this is a very well written report, a very well documented report, and you have ably presented it before us! It is a voluminous report but in no time you have been able to make your case before the House. As I have said, it is well written and it contains a number of issues for which everybody will be concerned. I do not know whether we can start the debate. I think we should give it time maybe over night, I do not know whether by tomorrow you will be in position or we take it on Thursday so that you study it. He has made a good summary, but you also need to study it yourself to be able to make meaningful contributions. Therefore, I thank the Chairman and members of that Committee for a good job! (Applause)

6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I too will join you in thanking the committee on the National Economy for this report. Sir, the report is timely, it gives the new Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development a good opportunity to personally come and present to this House for discussion his new deal, the new thinking as regards to the economy. So, this report is a good launching ground for discussion by the minister with Parliament on the way forward of the economy.  

That being the case, Mr Speaker, I want to request that the minister will want some time to study and in a meaningful manner prepare an appropriate response. Therefore, Sir, if it pleases this House deferring discussion to this matter until early next week would be most appropriate so that the input of Dr Suruma himself is made to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Will Wednesday be okay?

MR MUSUMBA: It should be fine, Sir, next week should be fine. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So, honourable members, I suggest that you go on, because for me I was marking areas where everybody has to put the stress, so that you study it and Wednesday we may not have any other business and this is very urgent so that we start with it, we give it a lot of time so that Members can contribute and we can get responses. As I see, it is not only the Minister of Finance that is likely to answer, because I have seen that the report is dealing with various sectors. It may be necessary also ministers in charge of those sectors to be around and tell us their views on this matter.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure for your clarification. The new minister, who has been sworn in, wrote you a note that he would be able to respond at a specific time he requested you to do so, and I believe he was aware his ministers were here. If he had wanted them to respond, he should have actually delegated the powers. But since he requested, and you have already communicated to the House, I would suggest that we wait until he is ready to respond so that we can debate this report.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the note as I read to you, was saying he had just received the report, he just perused through part of it from Thursday onwards.  So, if the minister suggests next week, I think he is in agreement with the note, which I received here. So in agreement, we do not want to crowd Thursday, and Tuesday I think we are expecting some statements and other matters, that is why I want to put it on a clear day on Wednesday so that we give it time and it will give you sufficient time I think, honourable members, to read the report. But the minister, since he is new, we must give him concession for that; if he thinks Wednesday is not, then he will indicate to me and then I will be able to adjust what I have said today. But I thank the committee.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, this report is a very big and serious report, covering the whole economy. My request is that on the date for which this report is to be discussed, we request the whole Cabinet to be here. That is one. Two, I also request that the Order Paper be adjusted such that it is the only item for the day because there are certain issues here which have recommendations which have been given, observations which have been made, which need a deeper insight. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Well, now you have made a point and I said Wednesday.  Wednesday traditionally is a Cabinet day; can this be an excuse? Not an excuse, a cause for the ministers not to be here. So you think I shift it to Thursday so that there is no “Cabinet meeting has delayed us”? Okay, I think let us then change from Wednesday to Thursday and as we said, we have a clear Order Paper, unless there is an emergency, so that this is the only item we have that day. I think it is agreed, honourable members, so let it be.

I think it is the convenient time to adjourn. I want to take this opportunity, honourable members, to thank you for the contribution and for staying because I saw many left, and for the Chairman making it in such a way that we are not so tired. I think we are not tired, but we have appreciated the presentation. So, with this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.26 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 February 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

