Tuesday, 25 February 2003

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, during recess, I attended a meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on the subject of female genital mutilation. It was held between the 2nd and the 6th of February 2003. The meeting was organised by the Inter-African Committee, which has for the last 18 years been campaigning against female genital mutilation.

It brought together activists from many African countries and from Europe. It was noted that the practice is still a severe danger to the health and welfare of women and children, and that the African immigrant communities did not only practice this abomination on the African continent but also brought it to all the countries where they migrated, including Uganda.

In addition, the meeting was attended by a number of African First Ladies who committed themselves to lobby the Heads of State on the African continent so that they could take a common stand and set in place policies that would lead to the eradication of female genital mutilation.

The Members of Parliament of the Inter-Parliamentary Union were requested to sensitise the population in their countries, as well as lobby for legislation that would eradicate the practice of female genital mutilation.

At the end of the meeting, the 6th of February 2003 was declared the International Day of Zero Tolerance Against Female Genital Mutilation. The race is now on to see which country will be able to report first that the practice has been eliminated. I thought I should mention that to members. (Applause).

The second matter I wish to communicate is the visit of the Rt hon. Speaker, Edward Ssekandi, to the Republic of Rwanda, last weekend. During the visit, our Parliamentary Football Team showed exceedingly good skills in dribbling and scoring, and they defeated the Rwanda Parliamentary team by three goals to two. (Applause).

The match was received enthusiastically and it was very well attended. I would like to add that our members were fit indeed. 

During the same visit, the Speaker was able to meet his counterpart of the Rwanda Parliament, members and chairpersons of various committees of the Rwanda House of Assembly, the Prime Minister of Rwanda and also President Kagame. 

So, I encourage our football giants in this House to continue with this spirit of sporting co-operation and bring many more victories to our House. Thank you very much.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, first and foremost, I would like to appreciate what the administration of Parliament is doing in giving us a programme of the week, especially for committees.  

I also request that you extend information of plenary business to us through the daily newspapers by printing the Order Paper in the Monitor and New Vision, as it is with the courts of law. The High Court normally has a column in the newspapers everyday indicating what cases are coming up. A number of people would like to know what transpires in this august House too. 

If you extended this information to the general public through the dailies, it would be beneficial towards democratic forces in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I hope there is money for such an exercise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the courts have a calendar that is fixed in advance and they do not normally get changes to it. If we were to publish the Order Paper in advance, there would probably be no room for us to slot in urgent matters like the ones we sometimes raise. Perhaps we could consider post-publication, after we have handled the matters. 

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember that during the 6th Parliament, the Editor of the Hansard used to give us drafts of our contributions so that we could edit them. These days, however, they just produce the record. 

In my contribution on UCBL I gave the figure of the money transferred from UCBL to Bank of Uganda as Shs 9.278 billion, but they wrote Shs 2.78 billion. This is a very big factual error for our future generation. I wish the system of us editing our contributions to this House would resume, Madam Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to give a statement to explain an issue that was raised here in Parliament by hon. Bakaluba about allocation of forestland to some Ugandans for the purpose of growing trees. 

The history of the involvement of the private sector in growing trees in this country started way back in 1988. A pilot project was set up by this government to study if it was possible to produce more, especially fuel wood, in urban areas. Urban areas were depleting many of the natural forests that were around the cities and towns.

The Government of Uganda requested the Norwegian Government to give us some money for peri urban-based farm forestry for people to grow trees. This was extended to the towns of Kampala, Jinja, Mbale, Arua, Tororo and Mbarara. The programme succeeded and it was expanded to cover the towns of Soroti and Kasese.

After ten years, nearly 5,000 hectares of wood had been established by the private sector, and nearly 3,000 by the Forest Department respectively. This was found to be a success and was promoted to spread all over the country.  

Madam Speaker, statement number three of the Forestry Policy, which was passed by Cabinet in the year 2000, says that we should encourage the private sector to participate in tree growing so as to rehabilitate some of the depleted forests and provide enough material for building and for our energy. As you are aware, most of our energy is got from wood fuel.

Presently, in the Committee, we have the forest bill, which is going to be discussed by this Parliament. The bill has some provisions which are going to guide the growing of trees by the private sector so as to make it an income-generating activity for Ugandans and also make it contribute to environment.  

We also have international community protocols that we are signatories to, like the Kyoto Protocol, under which we anticipate to access money from countries in the North which are the causes of pollution. These countries may be able to contribute money that we can use to grow trees. If the money is availed, it will be available to the private sector to grow trees.

So, the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, and the Forest Department in particular, is translating the policies that have already been approved into practice by allowing the private sector to go into tree growing at different scales.  

The land was allocated when the pilot project was carried out. Five hectares was found to be viable for small-scale growers of trees. We think that 50 hectares is the very minimum if somebody wants to go into large-scale commercial growing. 

Madam Speaker, the land that is allocated to people is only for tree growing; it is not for agricultural crops. You cannot grow crops on this land. 

How does one access this land for tree growing? Individuals, companies or non-governmental organisations can fully place their applications to the Commissioner of Forestry, and sometimes with the advice of the District Forestry Officer who may know exactly where that land is. 

The application is evaluated by a committee within the Forestry Department, by both local and external investors. The land is then allocated according to the financial ability of the individual who is applying.  

Normally a permit is issued initially for two years. Depending on how much land you have, after two years, you are expected to have planted on a certain percentage of that land. If you are unable to achieve this standard, then your permit will be terminated and you lose the ground rent that you may have paid.

Mr Speaker, the period can be extended up  - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I am not “Mr Speaker”.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: My apologies, Madam Speaker. The period can be extended from five years to 49 years. During that time, you will be followed up by the Department of Forestry to ensure that you are proceeding according to the agreed management plan.  

Normally a management plan will be put up, upon which you will agree on the species of trees you are going to grow and how the forest is going to be managed. We give two years as the initial period to ensure that land is not just held by people who are unable to grow trees. 

There are people who have participated in growing trees ranging from five hectares up to even 10,000 hectares, depending on the ability of the individual and the plan that one puts down to the Department of Forestry. 

Government agreed - and this is going to come in the law - to create the National Forest Authority, the body that is going to manage all forest reserves of this country. It will also allow the private sector to participate at a fee, but they will be managed by the National Forest Authority to ensure that they are proceeding according to plan.

Madam Speaker, tree growing is not an easy thing.  It is easy for people to condemn those who might have gone into growing trees thinking that they are just going there to grab land. As I have told you, it is not a question of grabbing land. If you do not perform within the first two years, that land goes back to the Forest Department. 

For eucalyptus, we have an average of about five years before one may be able to begin harvesting, but other types go up to 20, 30 years. If you are growing trees such as Mvule and Mahogany, you have to prepare for about 100 years. So it is not an easy issue. 

The money that you put into tree growing is sometimes referred to as “buried money”, because you have to work maybe 10 to 15 years before you earn anything out of the trees. Not very many people are prepared to invest in such a manner.

When honourable members are interpreting this policy, they should do it with caution. We have some foreign investors who are willing to bring their money here and keep it here for 30 to 40 years, growing these trees. They could be scared if they hear that we are again acting counter to the policy that Government has taken up. 

At one time, Uganda was nearly 54 percent covered by forest, today the percentage is going below 20 percent and we need to revamp ourselves. I must mention again that 96 percent of the energy that our people use is from wood fuel. Therefore, we must rehabilitate our forests and attend to all degraded forests in order to be able to provide wood for fuel and for construction. As we see, the construction industry is also continually going up.

Madam Speaker, during the 6th Parliament, I informed the Members of Parliament that they were also free to participate in tree growing and I have repeated it a number of times. 

On the eve of the new millennium, I issued a national statement, which I have appended to this statement that I have circulated to you, calling upon all Ugandans to participate in tree growing by approaching the Department of Forestry and getting land that they can use. 

For this land you are given only a permit. There is no lease. You just get a permit and you grow trees. And on the land you get, you can only grow trees. You cannot grow permanent crops and you cannot settle there.  

I have attached to this statement statistics of the number of people who are growing trees in areas that have been located to them in the different districts within the country. Honourable members can take interest in their own districts to find out if these people do exist. They can also find out how they are doing, in order for them to be able to take charge of this programme that Government has encouraged.  

I want to encourage honourable members to take up tree growing. At least if each member could be able to do 50 hectares within his district or constituency, this would contribute a great deal to reviving depleted forests in the country.

I thought I should make this statement because the hon. Bakaluba had brought up the issue, and it looked as if some Ugandans were sharing out the forests and grabbing land. The purpose for which they were getting this land was not explained by hon. Bakaluba. So, it was taken as if people were taking chunks of land to perhaps do crop agriculture. 

However, this land is reserved only for tree growing. It is open to all Ugandans, as long as you follow the proper procedure and the proper management plan that is set down between the grower and the Forestry Department. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. However, I have some observations. 

On page two, he says that these forest reserves are solely used for tree growing, and he concludes with the same remarks on page four. But we realise that in some areas, I will give an example of my own Pallisa District, most of these local forest reserves are used for growing rice. 

I do not know if the minister and the commissioner - who I see here - are aware of this development, because these areas are totally devoid of trees. It is of great concern, because even the animals do not have where to drink water. All these areas have been encroached upon, and I want to find out if this is being done by the DFO or with authority from the commissioner.

Equally, we realise that there is bureaucracy involved in getting permits to access the forestland, especially if the local person has to apply to the commissioner. I realise that most of the people do not have the relevant information. That is why I imagine that those who are in higher circles may easily get the information and hence the land. 

May I know from the minister if he has any strategies to inform the masses about the availability of this land? How are they supposed to access it? Apart from using the DFOs - whom I know are not well facilitated – who should the people approach? I know DFOs are already scared about the in-coming Forestry Authority. Many of them are aware that they are going to lose their jobs. So, how are we informing the masses about the availability of this land, because many of them do not know? I thank you.

MR GABOI KIBAALE (Budadiri East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for this informative statement. My problem is that I am a bit confused with some of this information that he has given us, especially that on page two. The last sentence in the second paragraph on page two says, “Presently only Mount Elgon forest project called FACE wants to claim carbon credits.” My confusion arises out of that statement. 

First of all, the project called FACE is not under his ministry. Two, FACE is basically a project, which is being handled by the Uganda Wildlife Authority, and I think that is not under his protocol otherwise I would have asked very many questions about that project. 

The project has the most inhuman methods of work while interacting with the people. The FACE project, which is currently run by the Uganda Wildlife Authority, has displaced very many people in Mbale and Sironko. It has grabbed people’s land and it is not paying its employees. I would not like to go into those details but at least I have mentioned that. If you say you are directly concerned with that, then I may begin shooting.  

My second concern is that you have a table of items here. You have districts, the number of people allocated land in the forestry reserves, and the total area. Madam Speaker and honourable members, as you will realise, there are some districts with empty spaces. Does it mean these districts have land available for tree planting but nobody has applied for it? 

For instance, I would be very interested in knowing where this land in Sironko is located so that tomorrow I may apply for it. I will go and plant trees because I am very interested in doing this kind of thing. Thank you very much.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to know from the minister, if hon. Bakaluba Mukasa had not raised this issue, how would the people’s representatives know that there is such land for tree planting? What mechanism does the ministry have for informing Ugandans that there is land for tree planting in certain areas in Uganda? 

Two, the Minister says the forest cover has reduced. Has he considered that he contributed to forest destruction when he gave away Butamira?
 
Three, did he consider the local population? It is the local population that destroys these forests. Has the ministry got any mechanism to involve them in tree planting so that they know that they are part of this project, so that they do not destroy it? Otherwise, how would Ugandans know that that land is there!

REV DR KEFA SEMPANGI (Ntenjeru South, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I have three points to raise. The first one is on page one – “forest land was first initiated as a pilot project in 1988”. I would like to inform the Minister that in the 70’s there was an attempt to cut down the Musizi trees in Mabira Forest and people had to interplant with banana trees. 

What happened was that the people scotched the Musizi trees with hot water and left the banana trees to grow, and it became a problem. That is why Mabira Forest was depleted; people were growing bananas under the pretext of Musizi trees. What measures does the Minister have to ensure that this will not be repeated?  

Secondly, why is this tree planting to be done in the forests? In Kiganda, in Mubende, there is a project of clearing land to grow trees in open space. Why should this be done in a place which is already a forest? 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification because land and forests are under different ministries. Why should they not be under one ministry? 

There was an issue here about Namanve. When the Minister of Lands was allocating land there, the Minister of Forestry was, at the same time, rejecting it. He was claiming that this area belonged to Forestry, but the Minister of Lands was also claiming it belonged to them. So, I am wondering why this confusion about forestry and lands does not get cleared up. In any case, these areas that are now being given in Mukono, does Forestry own this land or not? 

Madam Speaker, on the question of this land in Mukono, before Kayunga became a district it was one time in Mukono, so I have an interest in what is happening. Was this land that is being given in Mukono gazetted before or was it done overnight? Was it done stealthily? Is there some hidden agenda as to how many people should get land there or not? I think he should clear the air on how this land came to be distributed in Mukono. I thank you.

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for his explanation. 

Madam Speaker, much as hon. Bakaluba raised a lot of questions on the issue of forests in Mukono, these issues have not been answered to my satisfaction, and I believe to the satisfaction of many of the people in Mukono. 

Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa talked about forests covering 265 hectares, which were sold to non-residents of Mukono.  We, the people of Mukono, are aware that this land was sold to less than 10 people, but here the Minister has come up with a number of 159 beneficiaries who bought 1,560 hectares. 

From my little calculation, it means that a person got an average of nine hectares. But we are aware that people have 45 to 50 hectares.  So, when the Minister comes here to say that 159 people benefited from 1,560 hectares, I wonder!  Maybe the Minister needs to go to the ground to see what is taking place in Mukono before he comes to tell Parliament what he gets on paper.  

Madam Speaker, I wonder how the Minister came up with the idea of cutting down a forest to plant a forest. I have really failed to see the financial implications of this. You hire people to cut down a forest and you talk of putting up a forest! 

The Minister has also told us that eucalyptus trees grow fast, therefore, they are thinking of inter-cropping. It is unfortunate that our ministry has no records about eucalyptus trees. But inter-cropping was tried in Mukono a long time ago and it was found that other crops could not grow together with eucalyptus trees. Eucalyptus trees consume a lot of water underground, therefore the other crops cannot do well. 

But since the Minister is doing other research, maybe we the people of Mukono need more clarification, because we have been telling people not to inter-crop eucalyptus trees with other crops.  

Madam Speaker, I also wish to know how durable the products from eucalyptus trees are compared to those made from trees, which take long to mature. 

I am still not very comfortable with the Minister’s response. To us in Mukono, he has not answered a single question that hon. Bakaluba Mukasa raised on the forest in Mukono North. Therefore, I request that the Minister comes up with a better explanation.

MR AACHILLA JOHN (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a frequent user of the eastern route, and I normally pass through Mabira Forest on my way to Karamoja. Of recent, I am a bit scared of what is happening in Mabira Forest. I know very well that Government came up with a programme to expand the eastern routes by opening the road, but I also see many trees being felled on both sides of the road. 

I want the Minister of Environment to help me understand whether there is some compensation by the Minister of Works for the many trees, which have been felled, so that Mabira Forest is expanded and we maintain the size. 

When you look at Mabira Forest from the outside, a lot of it has been encroached on by those settlers who have come to occupy it. My worry is that much as I enjoyed reading about Mabira Forest when I was in primary school, I am now living as a Member of Parliament who is seeing the end of Mabira Forest. Can the minister of Environment clarify whether the future of Mabira Forest is guaranteed?

Secondly, the minister talks about scaring investments, on page four. I am a person who comes from an arid area, which is environmentally destroyed. We look at environment as a serious matter which must be taken care of. It is not enough to have wishful talk and paper work. 

I call upon the Minister of Environment to put in more effort in seeing to it that there is rehabilitation of land and afforestation, especially in Karamoja. Maybe we should organise the farmers into strip farming or agro-forest farming. There you cannot go and tell people, “we want to plant trees”. 

This means that Government must come up with a clear policy on how we can carry out the programme, and funds must be in place. You cannot go there as a Member of Parliament, as an LC III or LCV chairman and just tell people to plant. If we do not come out very seriously to take some of these programmes in a more serious way, and organise some farmers to demonstrate what we want done, we may just be having wishful talk.

Madam Speaker, on page four, the minister states that the 6th Parliament was told to take the opportunity of participating in tree planting.  This is what I still call “wishful planting”. May I know from the minister how many members of the 6th Parliament took up this message very seriously and have acquired land and planted trees. If they have not done so, why haven’t they? 

We were told that time that members of the 7th Parliament could emulate what they have done. I don’t think a lot was done by the members of the 6th Parliament. 

There has been a lot of talking, and yet a Parliament like this one could take up the initiative to avail members with loans or grants to take these projects to their constituencies and plant trees on behalf of government. We would be proud at the end of the day to say, “we took this up as an institution and this is what we have to account for”. But if you just say, “go and do it”, Members of Parliament are always occupied at burials, paying school fees and dealing with all sorts of problems in the constituencies, so I think we may not be able to meet our target.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, for the case of Karamoja, Government should not worry about discouragement of investors. Just show us those investors who want to plant the trees and we shall take them where they will get protection to do what they want. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA (Mukono County North, Mukono): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the honourable minister for this presentation. I am very proud that I, Rev Bakaluba Mukasa form Mukono North, caused the honourable minister to come up with a very lengthy presentation this afternoon and a sensitisation arrangement for the Members of Parliament. 

How I wish this was done earlier, so that the people of Mukono and of Uganda as whole would have known how they could access this land before a minority group went in to grab all this land, leaving our people in Mukono with nothing at all.  

When I raised this matter in Parliament, I was so disturbed at a later stage when Her Excellency the Vice President accused me of being tribalistic. She said she fears that when she comes to stand in Mukono, I may get threatened. Let her come, I am prepared! (Applause). Who is she? 

She even added that I had acquired 25 hectares. The Commissioner of Forestry is here; let the Vice President show me where the 25 hectares allocated to me are, because I have not received that. I was promised only five hectares, but I have never seen anyone coming to show them to me. 

I have applied for almost one year and half, but the Vice President who just dreamt of people allocating themselves rang and they also allocated her within only a month. Is that justice? Is this the government we fought for, really? Is this the government for the people? Is this the government that our people love? I think we need another lesson. This is too much! (Applause).

Madam Speaker, on page 3, the honourable minister is raising a very salient point - how does one access forestland for tree growing? If my people had known the process to go through to access land, don’t you think they would have applied? Do you think that in Uganda we only have Kapalaga Isaac, J.F. Esegu, Dr Peter Ngateingize, Mary Ruth Owori, Dr J. Sempira Otalla, Philip Gwage, Dragulu Val, Specioza Kazibwe, Odong J., hon. Dan Kidega, hon. Elongati Odeke David, Edward Onenerech, covering about 267 hectares? 

I am even disturbed when I see the figures you have given behind here - 159 people sharing the whole of our land in Mukono! This is a shame! We are soon applying Article 118 to the honourable minister. This pains our people. We thought that we were going to pass through a normal procedure of applying through our districts. That is what most of our people did. But before we had been allocated, the Commissioner and a group from the Ministry of Lands were making allocations from the centre. 

What can the forestry department in Mukono District do when the orders are coming from above? I have raised this matter in our Committee of Natural Resources, and the minister is aware of that. I continue to apply the same. 

Our people in Mukono feel so concerned about this. After getting a new district chairman in Mukono, we are going to sit as a council to review this matter. 

When I went to the commissioner, I told him that I had no problem with the Vice President and her colleagues getting this chunk of land but I said that this is too much. They could at least have got 20 hectares and left our people something to share. Are we going to remain with nothing, when people are coming in from near and far to finish everything? (Laughter and Applause). 

Madam Speaker, enough is enough! I am telling the honourable minister that let them review this arrangement. Everyone would like to share something of Mukono. Let them reduce the prior allocations in terms of hectares, to allow more people to get some too. Our people in Mukono should get some, and the other people in Uganda should also come to Mukono and enjoy Mukono. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I look at what the minister has presented here, like my other colleagues, I think it smacks of influence peddling. It was not straight, it was not transparent and the way it was done leaves a lot to be desired. 

There were some dubious tendencies because, first of all, if Parliament - which represents the nation - could be so ignorant about what took place and it is just being told about it today, then the whole thing needs to be reviewed. Perhaps later we could even pass a motion to take this back to the Committee of Natural Resources. 

Parliament has not been availed the study concerning the project. If I could refer you to some of the statistics availed by the minister, and also what my colleagues have submitted to you, then you will get my point. For instance, look at Kiboga. In Kiboga one person was allocated 12,186 hectares. That is just one person! What was the modus operandi applied here? These are some of the questions we are raising.

I am one of the Members of Parliament for Kampala District. Referring to Kampala District, they say the number of people allocated to the forest reserve was 119, and this is to a total area of 230 hectares. Who are these people and where is the forest being allocated to them? It seems there was some doctoring of this data. This data is arrived at unscientifically. It is just arbitrary, to please Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, I wish the honourable minister would include the local councils. All this acrimony we are hearing comes about because even the LCs were bypassed. Parliament is just being informed after hon. Bakaluba raised alarm bells, but even the local councils may have been bypassed. They may not have been briefed about the happenings in their areas, and that is why this acrimony is here.

Lastly, the honourable minister is talking about forests which are being cleared. What about the swamps? Big men are settling in the swamps, putting up residential houses there, putting up schools and even building factories! You are talking about forests when swamps are disappearing. What have you prepared for this country, really? It seems we are acting out of a crisis, yet we also need to address the people who are concerned.

Madam Speaker, even the people who are benefiting from these projects are not the ones who are supposed to benefit. Very soon they are going to abandon the project, and he is talking about permits. “It is not a licence, it is not a lease,” he said. 

If I am to grow a tree that takes 100 years to harvest, are you going to be around to say that you never gave me a lease? You are not going to be around, honourable minister. 

You will give me 1,000 to 2,000 acres of land and I will grow my Mvule tree. It takes about 100 years to mature; you will die, but my children will stay behind. I will put in my will - because I will not die intestate - this is my land, and who will be there to testify against that? Therefore, I want to know the methodology you are going to put in place, the plugs you are going to put in place to overcome all these problems (Interruption)

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much for giving way. On the speculation on Kiboga, perhaps this is the case that is in court about Madudu, where an investor came and dislocated about 3,000 people – they are on the streets. Could the minister clarify, at a later time, whether that may be the case? What is happening to the Madudu case? Thank you very much.  

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform the hon. Member for Luwero that actually Madudu is not in Kiboga. It is in Mubende District.  

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, as I wind up I would like the ministry, and the minister, to avail us with all the schedules regarding the names and the modus operandi used to allocate land to people. And these are people who are not even foresters but who are just thinking about money and not the welfare of the eco-system of Uganda. Thank you very much.

MRS OKOT SANTA (Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to get a few clarifications from the minister concerning what he has just presented. 

When you look at the last page, he has given us the list of districts concerned. I can see that a number of acres of the forest reserves have been indicated for some districts but there are others with blanks. For example, Pader has no acres indicated. Does he mean to say that there are no forest reserves in Pader District? If so, why? 

I am saying this because I know there are some forest reserves in Pader District. Even if people are saying they are for Kony, we can still also plant trees there. I want to find out why he has not indicated the hectares of forest reserves in Pader District. Thank you.

MR JOHN ODIT (Erute South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few months ago, the same minister made a statement on the Floor of Parliament encouraging Members of Parliament to go and inform the local community about the coming of El Nino. “If you are not very careful, we are going to make some mistakes,” he said. And yet the predictions turned out to be untrue for most parts of the country. That information was based on scientific research.  

Page four of this statement talks about scaring investment, and there the minister still relies on scientific information. He says, “Scientific information available indicates that unless we intensify tree planting, the present wood will be exhausted in less than ten years.”

On the same page, as in the paragraph above that, the minister says that tree planting requires some patience. He adds that one has to stay for a minimum of five years and a maximum of 100 years. This straight away scares interested persons, and yet the people who most demand trees for fuel are the poor. These are the people who have this land and they have to be patient, for 100 years, in order to benefit from the trees that they plant? 

I want the minister to tell us exactly how we can encourage poor farmers who are interested in planting mahogany. How do we see to it that the mahogany is planted and thereafter the gentleman or lady can reap the benefits?

Two, on the first page, the minister said that the Government of Uganda requested Norway to fund a pilot tree-planting project for mainly pole and fuel plantations in peri-urban areas of the towns of Kampala, Jinja, Mbale, Arua, Tororo and Mbarara Districts. Are these towns or districts? The statement is vague.  

Why did the project stop at pilot stage and what kind of fund was received by the Government of Uganda from Norway? Was it a grant or a loan? When the recovery period finally matures, will the taxpayers in the country be able to pay back this money? Why was this pilot project not pushed forward to expansion, consolidation or to a sustainable stage, before it was wound up?

Finally, on the same page, the minister says, “From the interest generated in the private sector, it became clear that Government did not need to continue growing trees in these areas.” I do not know whether this is really an honest statement. Which private sector would be interested in planting a tree that matures in 100 years to come? The gentleman or lady would be interested in getting the money invested today, to reap benefits tomorrow. 

I do not know what kind of communities would be interested in investing in such trees, unless they are getting the wrong type of species for this country. I wanted this clarified so that we are able to accept this ministerial statement. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative Of Persons With Disabilities): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start by appreciating the efforts the minister, hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, is taking to protect our environment.  

I think hon. Kezimbira Miyingo, the man, is committed to protecting the environment, and he has done a lot in this field. Unfortunately, I think he does not have the support of his colleagues in Government. Not long ago, the press carried a news item that two of his colleagues in Government were actually constructing houses in wetlands. This, I thought, was most unfortunate. For a government that is prepared to protect the environment to have ministers going against government policy was most unfortunate.  

Madam Speaker, the issues being brought here are matters of lack of transparency. If you look at this list of people that have been given opportunities to grow trees, it would be interesting to know the identities of these people. It would also be interesting to know how they knew about this scheme. It would be interesting to know how they were identified and given these pieces of land. I think the most important thing the minister should look into is making the system transparent. The case study from Mukono shows very clearly that there are problems of transparency.  

My other point is that I expected the minister in his statement to state what Government policy is in regard to charcoal burning. Madam Speaker, charcoal burning is responsible for the destruction of trees in the countryside. A long time ago people told us here that the only way to overcome this problem was to increase the production of electric power. That was the time when they were trying to advocate for the ill-fated project of AES. 

When you look at it very carefully, the people who use charcoal are not the people in the villages who are burning the charcoal. They are the people in towns, who have access to power. You can see that the charcoal is placed strategically along the main roads for people to pick as they come to Kampala. Therefore, it is not a question of lack of electric power, it is a different matter altogether.  

So, surely there is need for Government to come up with a clear policy on charcoal burning, as this is definitely responsible for the destruction of our environment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NDAWULA KAWEESI (Kiboga West, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the minister for this attempt at giving us a report, though very unfortunate.  

My big issue is the forest reserve in Kiboga. The forest reserve in Kiboga, called Luwunga, is 48 square miles and it has been allocated to one person! Really, this is totally unacceptable. For whatever reason, it is unacceptable. It cannot be justified, even if he is an investor. We may as well sell the whole country anyway if it comes to that. So, honourable members, the minister should revise this. 

We have had problems with this Luwunga Forest Reserve, which we have maintained very expensively. Our people have had their houses burnt, and all the time there are cases running in court about it. When you tell us that there is an individual who gets all the 48 square miles, this was only available in the 1900 Agreements; it cannot be now. (Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, thank you for allowing me to give information to my colleague in the profession. It is very important at this stage for the minister, who is allocating land to the Forestry Department, to realise that the people of Uganda have been waiting for industrialization. 

When you industrialize the towns, you move the population from the villages to the towns. That would normally take 30 to 50 years. People will automatically move. They were doing it in Jinja, but now we have gone back. So, if the minister starts selling the villages and the villagers have nowhere to go in the towns, we are going to end up in a very chaotic situation. 

I do not know what plan the minister is following. Is the Minister of Planning the one advising him this way? This is very difficult, but it is very important to tell my brother that the situation is going to be very bad when the villages have been mortgaged to foreigners and yet the towns are not available for them to run to. I thank you.

MR NDAWULA: Thank you very much for that information. Really, honourable members, the Constitution empowers the minister as a trustee. Government holds these forests in trust for the people, so we really need to get involved. Much as your policy may be accepted, you do not have money and you need the private sector to support you. But it is not only foreigners who are in the private sector. You should allocate us one or two acres; we can plant the trees.    

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I believe the minister has seen that this was a big mistake. The whole exercise shows lack of transparency. It should be reviewed. It is full of fraud. This exercise must be cancelled. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ENVIRONMENT (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank honourable members for their contributions and views. I will move a bit fast.  

The member from Pallisa complained that the forests within the area were being used for rice growing and there were no trees. This is exactly what we are trying to preach. The forestland is there but it is bare and therefore people are using it for crop growing. Can we get people who are interested in growing trees so that what used to be forest can be re-established as forest?  

I want to call upon the honourable member from Pallisa to work together with her District Forest Officer and the Commissioner, so that this land is taken up by people willing to grow trees.  

Many members here have expressed themselves; one member has said, “who can wait for so many years to grow trees?” That is exactly the problem that we are facing. That is what I told the entire country, through a statement that I read out on the eve of the new millennium, but very few people have come up. No Member of Parliament has come up. They have just started coming up. Some people have put in their applications, including, hon. Bakaluba.  

It is not easy to bury your money in trees and wait for 10 or 15 years and yet you have to maintain the trees, instead of maybe building a school. You know, a school gives money within one year - and hon. Bakaluba knows that - but when you put your money into trees, you have to wait for 20 years before you harvest a single tree. Few people are interested, and this is not fraud. Any Member of Parliament interested in growing trees will be able to grow trees.  

People are saying that the local people are not getting involved, but I will give you an example.  In Bukaleeba, in Iganga, we have two investors and we have about 11,000 hectares that are being utilized. We have two companies occupying about 4000 and 5000 hectares respectively. We have set aside 500 hectares for the local people; whether you want one hectare, half a hectare or two hectares, as long as you will participate in tree growing. The only problem there is (Mr Wambi rose_)- why don’t you allow me to clarify first and then you ask for clarification later because I am also clarifying?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wambi, I think let him respond.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: The problem is, are you willing to come up and take a piece of land and devote it only to tree growing and spend five years waiting for the eucalyptus trees to grow?  If you are willing, then come up. Hon. Wambi –(Interruption).

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the course of discussing this important report, consensus has shown beyond reasonable doubt that there is need for the scheme of the minister to be restructured. Is it in order for him to continue elaborating without answering that clarion call of the members here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, several members had different issues to which they require answers.  I think it is only fair that they should be given an opportunity to get their questions answered. I am sure even your question will be answered.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to answer your question, hon. Lukyamuzi.  Hon. Wambi, on the issue of the FACE Project in Mt. Elgon, yes, this may not be directly under me, it is directly under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. But my Ministry is involved, because it is one of the projects that was structured in such a manner that it would gain funds from this international fund that is going to pay for carbondioxide that is fixed by forests. That is how we become interested. 

When this project comes into being, money could be accessed by growing trees in this area, in terms of fixing carbondioxide.  So, even if the project is under the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, it also ties in with us. In fact, we are even involved with Uganda Investment Authority because factories are also going to contribute towards this particular international fund when it comes up.

Why don’t some districts have people? Some districts have no people because nobody has applied from there. Nobody has been allocated land. Madam Speaker, I have this document, which I issued on the 31st December 1999 as I was giving the millennium address, and at the end of it I said – and this went out to the press and to everybody - my ministry is soliciting assistance to produce more seedlings, which will be ready for August and December depending on rains in the regions in question. Private nurseries will also be selling seedlings. The ministry has land, which is to be leased out to serious private investors to plant trees. The NRM administration is in total support of all individuals, groups, NGOs, institutions and investors participating in tree planting. 

I gave this document to all Members of Parliament. I gave it to the press. I read it out on radio and television. So, really, people are informed. If some people have not yet got interested, get interested now.

Hon. Byaruhanga, we did not give away Butamira because we were deforesting. We came here and argued that case, which you all understood.  It was a question of preferred investment, and we have taken the farmers somewhere else to grow trees. 

Hon. Sempangi said that people were allowed to grow bananas in Mabira that time and they damaged the Musizi trees. This is not what we are doing. We are saying, you go to an area, which is allocated to you - and some of the areas are like the areas you have in Pallisa, which are totally bare - we give you two hectares there, and you grow trees of some type in that area. And the District Forest Officer, together with our staff, will be monitoring you in that area to see that you are growing trees.  

If two years pass and you have not participated in growing trees, that land is reversed back to the Department of Forestry and you lose the money that you had put in- (Interruption).

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a point of order, and a very serious one. When Members of Parliament say that you gave away Butamira, they are not wrong, in light of the fact that Uganda is a signatory to Agenda 21, which I hold here. Section 11 openly states, “All signatories of this Charter shall protect and promote all existing forests, including forest reserves and woodlands”.  

In light of that, is it in order for the honourable minister to deny an accusation that Government of Uganda, by leasing Butamira Forest Reserve, contradicted a charter it has internationally ratified? Is that not a shame, on top of the point of order? (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Honourable members, I have not read Agenda 21. I do not know when it was executed, so I am not in position to say whether he is right or not. Please, minister, proceed.

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: Madam Speaker, from the minister’s presentation it appears he never answered my question about where land is located in Sironko District, where many of us were very interested in planting trees. Therefore, is the minister in order to mislead this House that Sironko District has any land which is free for leasing?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has he responded on Sironko? Hon. Wambi, I think he has not yet responded on Sironko. Why don’t you listen and if he fails to do something about Sironko then you can take him to task.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was going to answer this question at the end. I am informing you that the Commissioner is the one who has got an inventory of all forestland. You can lodge your inquiry about the availability of forestland within your constituency or within the district with the Commissioner, so that you can be able to apply for that land. 

Let me finish hon. Sempangi’s question. Namanve belonged to the Ministry of Natural Resources at that time, and the Ministry of Natural Resources was the ministry that was concerned with forests.  So, there was no contradiction in between. It belonged to one ministry, and it was not the Ministry of Lands, it was the Ministry of Natural Resources.  

Hon. Sempangi wonders whether some areas in Mukono have been gazetted. There are no new forest reserves that have been gazetted. It is indeed true that you cannot know the forest reserve within your own area. That is why I am going to ask my Commissioner; I think we need to produce a full inventory of all forest reserves within the different districts, so that each district gets to know the forest reserve within the district. So, one can know exactly where one can apply if he wants to participate in the growing of trees.  

Hon. Balemezi, indeed I have answered the questions that hon. Bakaluba put to us. You wanted to know how land is accessed and processed. Hon. Bakaluba knew the process but he found it a bit long. But I have answered the questions that hon. Bakaluba put to the House. 

The forests that had been occupied by the 159 people are forests which you may not know whether they belong to Government or not. You need to wait for the inventory so that you know. And you also need to find out from the District Forest Officer where these people are stationed, because you might be focusing on one forest reserve and yet there are many other forest reserves that you do not know yourself. So, you might have to wait for the inventory to know the other forest reserves.  

The question of inter-cropping, Madam Balemezi, I am not saying that you put crops or grow bananas in your eucalyptus. The experiment we are trying to carry out is to have eucalyptus dispersed within other trees and not within crops. It is trees to trees. 

How durable are your eucalyptus products? The eucalyptus products are very durable. In fact, eucalyptus can be a very good wood if allowed to grow to maturity, up to 20 years. It can be used to make very good materials compared to any other hard wood.

Hon. Aachilla talked about Mabira Forest Reserve and about the trees that were cut by the roadside. This was agreed upon with the Ministry of Transport who wanted the road to be cleared so that there could be clear vision by the motorists from either side of the road. However, we had to give up cutting the trees since the forestry department did not get money before the trees were cut down.  They were tendered out, so there is no loss that was incurred. 

Indeed we should be very serious about afforestation and reforestation of this country.  Honourable members, wood will get exhausted within less than ten years. It is not a joke! By the way wood is being depleted, we must take remedial measures immediately. My experts tell me that we would rather grow a lot of eucalyptus trees so that we can at least avail fuel and building materials, in terms of poles, while we wait for other trees which are going to take 20, 30,40 years to grow.  

This is a serious matter, before you say that this is not a good policy; this is a good policy, let us find a way of getting our people to participate. Because I know some districts where people are cooking with banana fibres, they cannot eat meat and beans any longer. This is a serious matter; please consider it seriously by getting involved. It is no joke. We cannot afford to import petroleum and also import firewood. We must plant trees and you must participate and our people must participate.  

When I come with a bill here, you will find that we have put in a forest fund. Thanks to the Ministry of Finance, they have agreed that we can now begin to have a forest fund to which Government is going to contribute and seek donations from outside. 

We are going to seek grants for it, so that we can have a fund by which we can focus and say, “We are going to Karamoja, we want to do so many hectares”, and we do them. Or if that fund is availed to the private sector, the private sector goes and undertakes a serious exercise. 

We must be serious. Nobody is going to come here and rehabilitate our forests; we must do it ourselves and Ugandans must participate.

In the law, we also want to give the minister power to declare certain days, maybe a month, a season where trees will be planted by everybody compulsorily, so that we have trees in this country kept to the normal level. This is a question of survival or not. Please do not take it lightly. Members of Parliament from the 6th Parliament did not take it seriously. I hope members in the 7th Parliament are going to take this seriously.  

I want you in your district to show 50 hectares of musizi or mahogany. We do not have to plant things for eating all the time. What about the Kakungulus who planted the muvule in Pallisa? They are not here but the muvule are there in Mbale, Pallisa and so forth. Let us also plant for the others who will come.  

Hon. Bakaluba, I am sorry that you did not access the 25 hectares, which you applied for.  But you will access them because I can assure you that while we are talking here, I am really waiting for serious people. I am waiting for people who will come and say, “give us 50 hectares”, and I will take them to the Commissioner and give them 50 hectares. And then we shall check on them after one year to see if they have put their per diem there. It is not easy; it is difficult.  Allow people who are willing to grow trees to grow them.

Hon. Sebuliba, people do not know that we have peri-urban forests around Kampala and in all towns. There is no town in which the Bazungu did not grow trees, especially where the railway used to pass. They used to have these forests for firing the steamers so that they can go on. 

When this Norwegian assistance came, it was a grant, and money was used to establish some of the plantations for Government, which have eventually been given away and people were stimulated to take up tree growing. The project did not stop there as people think; it expanded to other areas. But when Government saw that there was good response from people, it said, “Well, even the fund has to get exhausted, let people take it up.” And people have continued since that time to take up this exercise. Many people have got wood loads, which they are utilising now.

About local councils getting involved, yes of course, the District Forestry Officer is part of the district administration. And the district administration is aware of the people who are getting allocated land for tree growing. We welcome people who are willing to grow trees.  The acreage of deforested forest that we have is tremendous.  

People think that it is going to be exhausted today. No! Hon. Sebuliba should not think about Kezimbira being present. I am not an institution; someone else will be here. In 1988 people were there, and maybe those who were there are not there any longer but the project continued. A hundred years from now, it will continue. So, let us not worry about individuals, let us worry about the policy and see how the policy can be utilised well to revamp our forest. I tell you, we are threatened!

On the issue of swamps, hon. Mutumba unfortunately has gone away, but he does not even remember that when he was LCIII of Kawempe, we toured swamps together. I would tell him, “please, this swamp here should not be touched at all; you are the person on the ground”. But I would go back and find it had been touched.  Hon. Lukyamuzi knows how swamps are touched -(Laughter)- so we must fight together. (Interruption) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, being vice president of Global International and a known international environmentalist, when my name is mentioned on matters related to deforestation or environmental depletion, I become touched.  The minister said I know how swamps are touched, and that is a very dangerous statement -(Laughter)- especially when it comes without substantiation. If he cannot substantiate, is he in order to make those allegations, which could eventually damage me, and I lose my seat in Lubaga South? (Laughter). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think it is precisely because of your specialised knowledge on matters of the environment that he has alluded to your knowing about how these things happen.  So, it is okay.

DR KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO: Indeed, Madam Speaker, you have said it correctly. Somebody reputable in the environmental sector, like hon. Lukyamuzi, must be referred to.

The question raised by hon. Mwaka was answered by hon. Kaweesi. The area hon. Mwaka was referring to is an area where some investor is growing clonal coffee. It is not the one that we are talking about in the forests.

Hon. Odit, El nino really did take place. At least hon. Aggrey Awori really complimented my people for doing good work. If your area was a rain shadow - you know this happens- this is geography and I may not be able to do anything about that.

I talked about the issue of scaring investors, and this is serious, because some people are willing to take advantage of this fund that is coming. First of all, the fund has not matured yet. We are not sure when this is going to mature.  We have been negotiating for many years.  We had thought in last meeting, which we had in India, guidelines would have come out, but they did not. 

But some investors are willing to bring their personal money and put it into this country to grow trees, and they are finding quite a bit of a problem.  Of course as I said, some people desist or resent these people being in the country to grow trees, yet they cannot grow the trees themselves.  So, I want us really to be positive to these investors.  

The area of hon. Kaweesi is Kikonda. Kikonda is where we have an investor. The investor who is in Kikonda is the one who is taking up this amount of land. So far he has just started. I was there about three weeks ago, he has planted on about 100 hectares already, and he plans to do more.  But he had a problem - migrating pastorlists came and grazed their animals on all the trees and the man got annoyed with this. I had to go down to cool his temper. Unfortunately, when his manager took these people to court, he lost the case because they really did not know the importance of this investor and so on. The man lost the case and he got annoyed.  

We should really not discourage these investors. If somebody plants a forest like this one of 10,000 hectares for Uganda, the environmental benefits that we reap out of it are great. We can also access money if it comes that way, and our people get employed. I talked to the people of Kiboga and they understood the employment that can accrue out of this person. So, let us not be negative to these people. 

I want hon. Kaweesi to also come and take some 50 to 100 hectares in Luwunga and plant trees by the side, so that you support this man. This man is not taking the 48 square miles. 

You saw that I went through Luwunga to try and evict people who are growing crops, who are settling in the forest. I was there the whole day with the LC chairman. We want these people to vacate, or if they do not vacate, they should move their homes away from the forest, get plots of land to grow trees and live elsewhere. We do not want settlements in the forest. Attract your people to come and grow trees. There is no way we can get trees into this country unless we grow them. We must grow them. 

Hon. Mwandha, I never knew whom I was referring to when I went to the swamps down in Kampala.  You know, the ministers say they do not own those plots of land that were mentioned in the newspapers. I have talked to them. I moved against investors, by whatever name, who were in the swamp. 

The charcoal policy, yes, is important. At one time I even thought that we could get one shilling and a few cents from petroleum, to help us plant more trees that are used for making charcoal and firewood. But I have not yet finalised that line, which I am pursuing. But we can do some comprehensive work on charcoal.  

I also want to tell honourable members that, when the National Forest Authority is set up, if you allow it to come into being -because the bill is coming to you - then we are going to have managerial areas of all these forests throughout the country. 

We have mapped out nine managerial areas for the entire country, and the forests are going to be managed very closely now from within the districts. They will be managed by an efficient team, which will have transport and so on. We are going to stop this deforestation. If we can revamp that with planting by Ugandans, then I think we shall revive the forest sector.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to end by clarifying that the land we give out is not leased land –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I stood up a few minutes ago and I moved that consensus was developing among members that there was need for the minister’s scheme of allocation to be reviewed. You ruled that among the answers he is supposed to give, that worry must equally be attended to. I now hear him winding up. Is it in order for him to ignore the order you made that I be answered on a point of public concern of that magnitude?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe that is what his final statement is. Why don’t you let him say what he is supposed to say?

DR KEZIMBIRA MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I was saying that land that is given out to individuals, companies or associations is not leased land.  It is land given out under a permit. It is just a permit. You go and grow the trees and we give you time according to the type of trees you are going to grow. After sometime - I do not know how many years or depending on what - if you fail to continue with the project that you are doing, the land reverts to the department of forestry, or for that matter to the National Forest Authority, if that comes into being. 

So, the question of purchase, which I have heard from certain members of the House, does not arise. The question of leases does not arise; you just get a permit for that.

Madam Speaker, with hon. Lukyamuzi’s issue, we welcome ideas that have been given by this House, and we are going to be able to discuss this further. We are willing to look at whatever contribution you want us to put into the scheme.   

I want to appeal to honourable members that we should not discourage whoever has started to grow trees. We want more people to grow trees. If there is any addition that you want us to include in the programme, we are willing to absorb the suggestions that you are bringing, but allow this to continue on course, so that we do not scare away people who are investing money in a very, very difficult business.
  
Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. (Applause)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATIOIN, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE SALE OF UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK LIMITED

(Debate continued.)

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have not been in this country and I was missing the debate on Uganda Commercial Bank. But just to borrow the words of Shakespeare through Brutus, “I have not come to praise Caesar; I have come to bury Caesar.” So, I am going to look at the realities surrounding the report. 

I would like, first of all, to thank the people who deliberated in the ad hoc committee. I think the recommendations they put forward are very respectable, and I would like to thank them.

Madam Speaker, I have been hearing people talking about the resolutions of Parliament, which we passed. You cannot give any excuse for failing to implement a resolution of Parliament. Every resolution of Parliament must be respected. If you ignore it, especially when it impacts on finance, it is a treasonable offence. 

We are all convinced now that Uganda Commercial Bank was sold without the involvement of the Attorney General. The Attorney General was involved after the deal had been sparked off, and that is unconstitutional. 

The Constitution says that the Attorney General must be contacted for advise before expediting a programme. They first expedite the programme, and then they consult the Attorney General. The Attorney General began talking well, and then eventually he started bulldozing.

As a Member of Parliament, this is a very serious matter. You all know that recently when hon. Birimumaso was pardoned, it was the same Attorney General who came out to say, “No, he cannot deliberate as a Member of Parliament”. On being convinced circumstantially, he changes his opinion and says, “Now he can be a Member of Parliament.” He is the same man who was chairing the session when I moved a no quorum motion. He went to court later on to openly lie that there was a quorum. How can you trust that kind of character? 

I have come here to debate the issues, not to entertain any circumstances. That is why I borrowed a leaf from William Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar.  So, Madam Speaker, as a representative of the people, I would like to ask the following questions: Where are the proceeds from the sale?  Are the proceeds in UCBL? Are they in Bank of Uganda? Are they with hon. Ssendaula? This is a very serious matter, because we should go by this Constitution. 

This act was a perjury, and the Government must apologise to us with costs, because we represent people, the taxpayers. I have even heard people suggesting that hon. Ssendaula be censured. Yes, he should be censured! But he should not go alone. There are other people who are stakeholders in the programme of the arbitrary sale of the people’s bank.  

I want to take you back to the history of the people’s bank. It took people time to think about the need to develop a bank for the people, and then you just scrap it by a stroke of a pen, and you entertain foreigners to come and maximise profits.  By keeping official money in such a bank, the practice is wealth itself. That is why we assumed that the people should have retained the bank. Now they have started cutting to size the working staff in the bank. They are given two years to review the programmes of the rural banking scheme.  

Government should shoulder the responsibility of serving the people in the rural areas, whether there are profits or no profits. You owe them something, because you take their taxes from time to time. You have been taking their taxes in the past and then you want to shy away from responsibility. When Ken Lukyamuzi is taking action against you, you complain.

The President of Uganda is the main person charged with the responsibility of accountability for public finance. Hon. Ssendaula year after year reads the budget on his behalf. So, if things go wrong, you should first charge President Museveni, the man, before you go to Ssendaula. And this is a serious matter. 

It is so serious, and I want to read Article 107 (1)(b)(ii) of the Constitution verbatim, because Government ministers seem to be joking with us. We came to make sure that things are put right, and we are putting things right with reference to the main document, which is the Constitution. If anyone wants to remove the President of Uganda, he can remove him on the following grounds, and the relevant ground is: 

“that he or she has dishonestly done any act or omission which is prejudicial or inimical to the economy or security of Uganda.” 

Things are becoming serious, because by interfering with the operation of a bank which had started making profits, and then selling it outside a resolution of Parliament, you commit an offence similar to the charge advocated by the Constitution. So, the President of Uganda can be removed because of the mess he caused by ignoring the resolution of Parliament related to UCBL, the people’s bank. This is a serious charge. 

So, before you charge hon. Ssendaula, even his master is answerable. We could even plan that we put the man down on the basis of this. This is an open charge, and nobody can defend him. There was an offence committed, which is economically torturous, and we cannot condone it.

In conclusion, I demand that the President of Uganda officially apologises to this Parliament, so that we know what we can do next. We are the representatives of the people. When you apologise, you know what you are doing. When you apologise, you accept a mistake you have committed. So, we cannot leave this presentation of a report, hon. Kamuntu, without taking action. (Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, I do understand and know that Members of Parliament are representatives of the people. But I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that so is the President. He is also equally a representative of the people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, please wind up.

MR LUKYAMUZI: What else did I expect from hon. Matembe? (Laughter). I could not have expected anything beyond that point.  

The people of Lubaga South would like an explanation from the Minister of Finance. A sum of Shs 23 billion was removed from Greenland Bank and sent to Westmont to enable them - through the co-operation of Salim Saleh - to buy UCBL. After shifting that money to UCBL, Greenland Bank was declared insolvent and summarily closed. 

The first question is; was the closure deliberately done? Or was it a coincidence that as one was closing, the other was getting open? So, the people put it to Government that they wanted to deliberately kill off Greenland Bank so that they would see another one strengthened. Until you give us that explanation, UCBL does not belong to Stanbic, it partially belongs to Greenland Bank. I hope you understand.  Thank you very much indeed.

MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to commend the committee for doing a good job and bringing recommendations that highlighted what happened to UCBL. 

It seems to me that the most fraudulent thing that ever happened in this country was the second sale of UCBL. This sale defies all logic and all legality. Nobody knows how to fit what should have been done at that time into the existing policies and the existing logic. 

What dismays me and prompts me to make this very general observation is the statement by the hon. Minister of Finance. He comes to this House and tells us that the resolutions made by this House are not binding. And yet indeed, we debated UCBL, came up with the resolution and Government - the Executive - said they were going to follow it up. I am dismayed because I do not understand why, in the first place, we had to waste taxpayers’ money debating issues of UCBL.  

I am also worried that I precisely do not seem to understand what the role of this Parliament is when it comes to giving guidance to the Executive. Does the Executive perceive Parliament merely as a scapegoat where they come in to bring things so that we legitimise? Or is the relationship a convenient one, where somebody just walks in here as long as it is convenient to them and then the resolution is binding when we want to make Ugandans more indebted. 

When we want to borrow more and more in the name of Ugandans, then you seek a resolution. Then when we want to save the taxpayers when they have lost their investment, then the resolutions are not binding. I just do not seem to understand. Somebody is using Parliament as a scapegoat, and I thought at this material time Parliament is running the risk of becoming vestigial. We are becoming redundant. Somebody seems to think they can dispense with us.  We no longer matter as a Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the observation I want to make, which I said is very general, is that somebody once said that when one does something the first time, that is a mistake, you can overlook it. When something happens the second time, maybe that is a coincidence or an accident. But surely, as these things become repetitive, they are becoming a practice; it is a culture, it is a new policy we did not pass here.  But it is a policy of Ministry of Finance to ignore the views of Ugandans. 

I thought the question to ask ourselves this afternoon is, are we going to watch these types of things happening in our country unabated? I thank you.

MS OLIVER WONEKHA (Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been following the debate on the report that has been presented by the committee. I do appreciate the committee’s work and their recommendations. But I will confine myself to three or four areas, because of the suspicion of the people of Mbale on the sale of this bank, which they referred to as their own bank.  

Madam Speaker, I have had to almost spend sleepless nights trying to find out more information about the sale of this people’s bank.  First of all, who is buying the bank? Is it Ugandans? The information that I have gathered is that this bank has been bought by Stanbic, South Africa. This is the information I have got. Anybody with any other information will have the chance to say what he or she has found out. 

I will substantiate that information with the following: I am not so sure whether the committee asked for all the documents that do pertain to the sale of this bank. I do not know whether they did ask for a document like this one from the South African Reserve Bank, from the office of the registrar of banks.  

Madam Speaker, before I read what is in that document, I am just wondering, did the committee ask for these documents and they were not provided? Because it is like we are now doing the committee work here. We should have had this information perused and sieved, and then in the recommendations we get the right direction.  

Whereas I do appreciate the committee’s work, my problem is here in this document. The document is addressed to the Executive Director, Supervision, Bank of Uganda; reference SBSA9313D/TM, BSA8373D, SBIC7589D, dated 28 January 2000. I am finding it really too much to belabour, when we have a committee for this kind of work.

It reads: “To Mr Katimbo-Mugwanya. Acquisition of an interest of 80 percent in Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd by Stanbic Bank Investment Corporation Ltd. 

We wish to refer to the following: 

• Your letter dated 7 September 2001, reference EDS.B.2.

• Mr M. Matovu’s letter dated 23 of October 2001, Ref. BS/B3/01. 

In view of this office’s commitment to achieving the principles of consolidated supervision as set by the Basel Committee on banking supervision, we wish to inform you that this office recently granted approval to Standard Bank Investment Corporation Ltd (Stanbic), a bank controlling company registered in the Republic of South Africa and supervised by this office, to acquire an interest of 80 percent in Uganda Commercial Bank Limited (UCBLLL). A copy of our letter of approval, together with conditions of consent in respect of the aforementioned acquisition, is attached hereto for your information.”

Madam Speaker, I am sorry to have to belabour on this, but I think it is important that the committee should really clearly indicate whether they were denied access to such information -(Interjections)- no, this is in as far as people of Mbale are concerned. For me, this is a document to say something about who bought the bank, and I am still continuing. I seek protection, Madam Speaker. It is my turn, honourable members. (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, last time when the Speaker was in the Chair, he guided the House and said that members of the committee can come in any time and clarify any issues which do not appear to be clear. Now hon. Wonekha is referring to a document, the title of which is not even mentioned, although she mentioned a series of references. I do not know the gist of quoting the document, because if she did indicate, we would actually tell her that we had the document. But the purpose of quoting the document is not even given. So, can she help the committee members here present to tell us exactly what she is trying to get at?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, particularly the committee, do not gag the member. She is finishing her contribution and she will tell us what she wants to do with those papers. Let her make her contribution.

MRS WONEKHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that the committee concedes that they have the document. But I hope they will use the same document to give us the right direction in this debate. 

My other concern is, when did Karuhanga become director? If the committee had these documents, then I really do not know why we should still continue to debate these issues. I do not know why they should continue coming up and why the committee should still indicate to us that the bank was not bought by a South African bank. 

Mr Karuhanga’s name has come up as a point of controversy. That is why I referred to it. If they have the document, great; then it is easier for reference. Director Karuhanga is suspected to be a shareholder. And the information available to the committee, as I learn now, is that his position is Non-Executive Director on the Board of Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd, which is a subsidiary of the Standard Bank Investment Co-operation Ltd, a bank in South Africa.  

Mr Karuhanga has been referred to. His has been a common name in this subject. He is – (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the lady is quoting Karuhanga, but there are thousands of Karuhangas. Without mentioning the identity of the Karuhanga she is referring to, she does not help this House to understand the nature of her argument. Can we know the Karuhanga she is referring to?

MS WONEKHA: That is easy, Madam Speaker. This is Hannington Karuhanga, the Managing Director of UGACOF – (Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I think the honourable member is referring to the contribution by Capt. Byaruhanga on Thursday the 20th of February. Hon. Byaruhanga in his contribution mentioned that Karuhanga is a director, and he wanted to know the status of Karuhanga. I think it is the Karuhanga that was raised by Capt. Byaruhanga that hon. Wonekha is referring to.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: The information in writing, signed by the Registrar of Companies, certified that Hannington Rubarensha Karuhanga, a Ugandan, of P.O. Box 7355, Kampala, MD UGACOF Ltd, born on 18th August 1958, is a director; the only Ugandan.

MRS MWESIGYE HOPE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to give information that Mr Hannington Karuhanga is a non-executive director. But at the same time, he holds no beneficial interest in the ordinary shares of the company.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It looks like this idea of a Ugandan being a director in a bank is an issue. But honestly, Mr Mulwana happens to be the chairman of Standard Chartered Bank, but he does not own it. Edward Nsubuga was also a director of Standard Chartered Bank. In the case of Edward Nsubuga, he was an executive director. It does not make any difference. I wish, we could discuss something a little more – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wonekha, please conclude your contribution.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, I am perturbed because I have been following the debate and I have read the report from the ad hoc committee; I have also read the response from the Minister of Finance, but I have failed to find the name Karuhanga in those documents which are before us for discussion.  

Where does this issue of Karuhanga arise and why should it be made a subject for discussion now? Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. Are we debating the contents of the two reports or we are debating other documents which I do not have? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate has been going on for some time and many issues have been raised; maybe one of them is Karuhanga. So let her complete telling us about this, and then we go to the other side.

MRS WONEKHA: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. I am sure that as far as information concerning Karuhanga is concerned, people have it. 

I was also concerned about the selective sale of the bank. I was only hoping that those banks that members of the committee would have loved to see or that would have been approached would be mentioned.  Otherwise, a number of banks were mentioned that were approached in the selective bidding – (Interjection)- well when I mentioned the names, you said you had the documents. Otherwise, I have the names here.

Madam Speaker, my other concern is withholding tax not having been paid by the Bank of Uganda. This includes withholding tax from WPA, one of the consultants that was used in the process. The information I have is that the consultants negotiated for a net of tax payments and Bank of Uganda, if approached, I think they would be able to – (Interruption)

MAJ RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the ad hoc committee, and when they appeared they did not have those documents. There is no way the committee could have recommended or cited documents that were not availed to them. When we asked for them, they did not have them. I seek clarification from the mover. On whose behalf is she speaking? Where is she getting these documents that were not availed to the committee? (Applause).

MS WONEKHA: Madam Speaker, unless the former speaker tells me that those documents are privy to them as a committee, I think I am entitled to them too.  

With that contribution, I hope that the debate will go in the right direction so that we conclude this issue and attend to other issues. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE (Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work done. I would also like, from the onset, to state that the Constitution must be read as a whole document. We should not pick specific provisions at the expense of others. As far as I am concerned, all the constitutional provisions are at par.  

Article 162(2) gives the Central Bank controlling authority to do its functions without anybody directing or controlling it. 

Madam Speaker, I would like your protection because when hon. Awori and his team are speaking, we keep quiet. I beg their indulgence that they listen to us –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I am not chairman of the Movement. Which team am I speaking for?  

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, the 6th Parliament passed a resolution concerning the sale of UCBL. In line with the constitutional powers given to the Bank of Uganda, the bank evoked section 28 of the Financial Institutions Statute. This one empowers the Bank of Uganda to inspect any bank where they suspect that the affairs are not being conducted in a manner that is good for the interests of depositors.  

Consequent upon that, and by invoking section 29, the Bank of Uganda appointed a competent person that was supposed to advise it accordingly, this was Mr Jayant Virani. This was in an attempt to rectify the situation within the bank. 

I would like to state as well that section 31 provides for seizure of a bank by the Central Bank, and it gives circumstances under which such seizure could be carried out. One of them is insolvency; the other is when a bank is conducting its business in a manner contrary to the Financial Institutions Statute, and when the continuation of these activities is detrimental to the interests of depositors.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that because of that, when the Central Bank –(Interjections) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, please!

MRS MWESIGYE: When the Central Bank possessed UCBL, it had exclusive powers of management and control as per section 32. Those powers include re-organisation or liquidation. 

I would like to state here that the moment the Central Bank entered UCBL, it had to proceed with UCBL according to the Financial Institutions Statute. As such, it tried and actually found out that the bank, in addition to having been mismanaged, was actually insolvent. Then it went ahead, and through Treasury Bills, turned the bank round and it made profits.  

I would like to emphasise again that for the Bank of Uganda to do business the way it did, the affected bank need not be insolvent. It could be insolvent or it could not. In turning it around, it was actually making it attractive in order to re-organise it. It was re-organising the 80 percent shareholding so that it could be acquired by a core investor while at the same time looking at how the Government could retain the 20 percent.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that it is not only in the case of UCBL that the Bank of Uganda did what it did. I would like to quote examples.  We have precedents. We have the Sembule Bank and Allied International Bank. These had become insolvent banks and to arrest the situation, the Bank of Uganda seized the two banks, as under section 31, which I have talked about. 

The Bank of Uganda at the same time offered a financial package to both banks in order to enable them eliminate their insolvency. That would make them attractive to core investors and as a result –(Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Ever since the sale of the peoples’ own bank, various officials have been making speeches in defence of the sale of the bank. Is it now in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to read one of the speeches verbatim, a speech that has already been made by a certain Bank of Uganda official? Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not attend Bank of Uganda speeches. So, I have no idea about what they say. Proceed.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. I would like to inform the honourable member that I have the capacity to do my own research and to get information. (Applause). These are my own notes, and I am entitled to that. 

These banks were consequently sold after being made solvent and attractive. The same happened with the Co-operative Bank and Trans Africa Bank. In fact, in the case of Trans Africa, that one was even solvent. It was solvent but as time went on, it had to be made attractive so that they could get someone to invest in it as a core investor if they had to keep the banking institution moving.

Having said that, there has been an argument on the Floor that the PERD Statute should have been the one –(Interruption)

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, since the hon. Hope Mwesigye started contributing, I got interested in the actions of the Minister in charge of Ethics. Is it in order for the Minister of Ethics to get interested in people defending fraud? (Laughter).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byaruhanga, it would appear that you are not even listening to the person on the Floor. You are concentrating on the minister in the other corner, which is very far from you. (Laughter).

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker for that wise ruling again. I would like members to appreciate that the Central Bank, as a regulator, must treat all failed financial institutions equally. Otherwise, it would tantamount to discrimination. 

Whether or not there are sentimentalities that UCBL was the people’s bank, UCBL was a financial institution and you cannot treat it differently from Sembule, the Cooperative Bank, Nile Bank, which the Chairman happens to be associated with. In short, the Bank of Uganda did what it was supposed to do within the ambit of the law.

There has been an argument on the Floor that the process should have taken up the PERD Statute, but that argument is not tenable. The PERD Statute would have applied where the Central Bank had not entered. In this case, the Central Bank had entered and seized. Therefore, in accordance with Section 55 -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am drawing the attention of the House to Rule 56 (2). I am seeking your guidance. The Rule reads as follows: 
“The Speaker may, in exceptional circumstances, permit a Member to read his or her speech”.
  
I am seeking your guidance. Have you given that permission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not get the impression that she was reading a speech. She is referring to notes, I think.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker for the wise ruling. Obviously, I cannot be reading all these many speeches at the same time.  

Section 55 of the Financial Institutions Statute specifically states – and this one I will read, hon. Awori, so that you are satisfied that I am quoting:  

“For the purposes of banking and building society’s business, this Statute shall take precedence over any legislation relating to financial institutions, and in the case of conflict, this Statute shall prevail”.

I will confirm that the Bank of Uganda did what it was supposed to do within the law. Even then, we have record that DRIC gave approval to the transaction and the relevant ministers effected the transaction, and the work done by the Bank of Uganda was done legally, professionally and in good faith (Applause).

I just would like to mention one thing about Karuhanga, and I will also lay on the Table the document I have to strengthen my case. I had stated earlier that he is a director but has no shares in the company. The hon. Minister for Luwero also mentioned Mr Edward Nsubuga, who was a director of Stanbic until 2000, as well as Mr Mulwana who is the Chairman of the Standard Chartered Bank. 

Having said that, let me say something about the status of the legal consultants. It has been argued on this Floor that they did not have local practising certificates in Uganda. I hasten to add that these people were not advocates within the meaning of the Advocates Act of Uganda. They came as consultants. That is why all the documents were drawn by the Legal Counsel of the Bank of Uganda. They only gave advice and consultant services.

Madam Speaker, I would like say that I totally disagree with the recommendation that resolutions of Parliament must be binding. I entirely agree with my honourable friend that these would be unconstitutional.  

We need to promote the Constitution, which we made, mainly the principle of separation of powers. Parliament has a role of overseeing what the Executive is doing but not to implement. The implementers are the Executive.  

On the issue of branches, the Micro Finance Institutions should be strengthened so that the rural population gets services.

On the antitrust law, we need to do more research so that we come up with an appropriate law not only for the financial sector but also for other sectors.

On the recommendation on displeasure, I think it is not supported by the findings of the report. It contradicts the body of the report. It is personalised and therefore uncalled for, and it should be abandoned.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Hope Mwesigye to refer extensively to documents without laying them on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there was something she wanted to lay on the Table. Hon. Mwesigye, there was something you wanted to lay on the Table.

MR WACHA: Including her notes? (Laughter)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the corporate profile of the bank and the letter from the South African Reserve Bank. Thank you.

MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have noted that some information is not for all Members of Parliament but for some few. So, it still holds that some Members of Parliament are more honourable than others.

Madam Speaker, I have perused through the committee’s report -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: I would like to seek clarification from hon. Kikungwe. When he says some members are more honourable than others, what does he exactly mean?

MR KIKUNGWE: I meant that the document hon. Wonekha presented was never presented to the committee, much as they wanted it. 

Madam Speaker, I will start with what the Attorney General the other day called, “the eminent lawyers report”. From that report, it is very clear that those gentlemen worded their document very clearly. They warned the Executive of what would happen, but the Executive never took heed. 

Madam Speaker, the eminent lawyers were supposed to see whether the whole exercise was done transparently. What is surprising, however, is that when you read 22.3 of the report, it says; “Our report has been reviewed in draft by the Governor and Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda. Their comment has been limited to a small number of factual corrections and they have explicitly stated that they do not wish to comment in any way on the independent conclusions, which we have reached.” 

These were the people supposed to be investigated but they go around to peruse the draft report, to help the consultant come up with an opinion? I think that was wrong, and it really justifies the degree of fraudulence that was involved in this exercise. 

When you look at 22.2 of the same report, this was quoted by hon. Katuntu very well. The honourable minister’s response to the report was very clear.  He said that Stanbic Bank’s parent company had capital of US $2.3 billion. On the other hand, as if he wanted to justify that Stanbic was really a very strong company, CDC, the parent company for DFCU, had capital of up to US $7 billion. On top of that, DFCU Bank, a Ugandan incorporated bank, has 50 percent shares of Housing Finance Company Limited, 18 percent of Centenary Rural Development Bank, 63 percent of Rwenzori Properties Limited, and many other things. 

There is no doubt, therefore, that if we are talking about credibility in as far as financial base is concerned, DFCU was even stronger. One wonders up to today what the justification for referring to a company, which had only $ 2.3 billion, as the best was.  

Madam Speaker, the Bank of Uganda’s obligations in conducting liquidation are spelt out in the Financial Institutions Statute. But the Constitution of Uganda’s protection of property rights operated to compel the Bank of Uganda to return the property - the shares of UCBL - to its rightful owners when positive property rights were established upon the return to solvency of UCBL. This is what the eminent lawyers said, according to the Attorney General. 

In their view, bank of Uganda was supposed to have returned the shares to the rightful owners. What is surprising is that after returning it to solvency, Bank of Uganda went ahead to sell the bank. 

It is very sad that as they were drawing up the agreement to sell the bank, many items were not excluded in the agreement. To-date what is happening is that many of them have somehow fraudulently been incorporated in the agreement. Section 59 of the report says, “In order to ensure that bidders would see UCBL as an attractive a target as possible, the Bank of Uganda offered to exclude a number of elements in the bid:

1. The bank’s head office and Nkrumah Road buildings could be excluded. These were seen as potentially unattractive to inquirers.  

2.Other real estate owned by the bank but not used in its banking operations will also be excluded.  An adjustment would be made for the acquisition of a software license should a purchaser not wish to use UCBL’s own existing software. UCBL had just spent over Shs 7 billion on this particular software. 

3. Loans to UCBL staff, whose employment was to be terminated would be excluded.” And who would be meeting all these costs?

What is surprising is that they only picked out what they felt was good, then left whatever was unattractive to the people of Uganda. This, in my view, is unacceptable and it will be checked at an appropriate time.  

Madam Speaker, 59.7 says that the Government of Uganda would meet the costs of redundancy payments for the 500 employees who were going to be discontinued. All this is very bad. 

It is very clear that those who were negotiating, leaving out the Attorney General in the exercise, also took advantage of determining an exchange rate, which was so bad for the taxpayers of this Republic. They determined an exchange rate, which was far different from the prevailing rate, and thus made the buyer pay less. In this aspect alone, the people of Uganda lost Shs 1.4 billion. 

As I conclude, I would like to show Ugandans what you have lost as we sell UCBL. There were several items on which we lost money. One was an accumulated loss of Shs 73.7 billion. This was never put into consideration, and the Stanbic Bank, the buyers, are going ahead to utilize the same on their tax obligations.

Two, the exchange rate made the buyer pay less by Shs 1.4 billion.  

Three, before the sale to Westmont, there was a capitalization of Shs 72 billion.

Four, the profit for the year ending 31st December 2001, amounting to Shs 23 billion, was transferred from UCBL to Stanbic Bank. No justification is given for this. 

Provisions for bad debts of up to Shs 24 billion were not catered for, but today the debts are being collected and the money goes to Stanbic Bank. I think this is very wrong. 

Poor choice of method of valuation; this alone made a loss of up to Shs 51.4 billion. If I am given time I would go into the mathematics of calculating this. The arbitration between the Government of Uganda and Westmont cost us up to Shs 11 billion. We lost Shs 11billion in arbitration costs. Money –(Interruption)

MR LWANGA MUTEKANGA: Madam Speaker, we are listening and have heard that about US $7 million was spent on computers, and about Shs 23 billion was transferred as profits. However, is it really in order for the honourable member to keep on feeding us on probable rumors? 

I have documents here, and one of them is the balance sheet as at 31st December 2001, showing very clearly that as at 31st December 2000, the revenue reserves were Shs 26,760,198,000. As at 31st December 2001 the reserves were Shs 42,045,185,000. 

When you do the mathematics, Shs 42 billion less Shs 26 billion is about Shs 16 billion. That shows increasing reserves for the year, which is a profit, and it is all in the balance sheet. Is he in order to lie? Madam Speaker, I would like to lay these documents on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the honourable member has a balance sheet showing other entries, he should also lay it on the Table.

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister surprises me, because I did not talk about reserves. I am talking about profits. I do not know whether he has the difference. (Interruption)

MR MUTULUZA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member holding the Floor has said that we lost around Shs 1.4 billion in the exchange rate. Is it in order for him to continue without telling us what exchange rate they used in the transaction, which is contradictory to what existed that time? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, I did say that if you have a contrary balance sheet for that period, please lay it on the Table so that we can compare both of them.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, I am still referring to it but afterwards I should be able to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up then. 

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it looks as if we are going into accounts, and we are here to prove this. I will start with the year 2000 and the  movement of bad debts and provision of bad debts. It is good hon. Tim Lwanga is an associate, but I want to give you the figure; do not worry. 

The provision for bad debts written off in the year 2000 alone was Shs 10,495,000,970. In addition to that, the previous year we had written off Shs 16,714,000,762. When we add that up, it comes to about Shs 26 billion. We made a recovery of about Shs 2 billion. When you knock off that, by the end of 2002, the provision for bad debts was Shs 24 billion, and the borrowers of the money had not provided the securities. When we were selling the bank we never took into consideration these bad debts and so we are currently losing collections. 

On the profits which hon. Kikungwe is talking about, profits were made between the period 31st January 2001 and 31st December 2001. The date of sale of the bank is 31st December 2001 and the valuation is for the year 2001. This means that at the time of the sale of the bank, we should have taken into consideration the Shs 23 billion, which was made as a profit. 

Honourable members, let us not be lied to on issues of accounts. If it comes to accounts, we are willing to help our colleagues out on the figures. I will lay on the Table the accounts for the year 2000, for the provision of movements, and we shall look at the accounts of the year 2001. Otherwise, hon. Kikungwe is right. Thank you.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, if I could be allowed to conclude, I would also like to quote the hon. Minister of Finance. On the 28th of September 2001, the hon. Minister of Finance said here on the Floor, dancing as he normally does, that there was no more capital impairment; there was no more mismanagement. 

He added that the Bank of Uganda had the chance to be in the bank, and apart from everything else, it has made it possible, through the investment it did, for UCBL to be profitable. He said the bank was no longer capital impaired but that at the same time the Bank of Uganda had assessed its capacity to manage the bank. But the committee had already asked him to go into a management contract and avoid another expense. Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, I really hope you are winding up.

MR KIKUNGWE: Yes. The honourable minister wanted to avoid another expense but when you total up all this, you will find that the people of Uganda lost money to the tune of Shs 340 billion. And all this by just selling one item, UCBL. This is simple arithmetic. I am wondering how the Executive could fail to do this. 

The mighty Mutebile says he will not allow Stanbic to close branches, and that he would rather subsidize Stanbic to keep them open. On the other hand, the Minister says that after Bank of Uganda returned UCBL to solvency, they could not hand it back to the owners to mismanage. It sounds like the two do not come from the same government. It sounds as if the two refer to different policies.  

Let me make my call to honourable members that the time is now to stand and be counted, to make things right. Those who claim to have been confused, and the confusers, must all be dealt with adequately and without any mercy. Thank you very much.

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula North, Kamuli): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to say that there is no doubt that Parliament had clear concerns –(Interjections)- People are asking who I am. For the benefit of members, you may want to say that I am the Secretary, Co-ordinating Committee for the Busoga People’s Forum.

The report is clear, and looking at the issues in it -(Interruption)

MR ISAAC MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to rise on a point of procedure. I have been very perturbed by some of the statements hon. Kikungwe made in this House. He undertook to lay documents on the Table, but he has not. I would like to get the opportunity to access these documents so that I can see how Shs 330 billion could be lost in the sale of UCBL. What then would be the total value of UCBL? 

Which accounts is he using to be able make this establishment? How does he establish that Shs 11 billion was lost in recovering the bank? I want to see these documents. Madam Speaker, he undertook to lay these documents on the Table. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kikungwe, please come forward now that you have completed your contribution. You are no longer referring to the notes. Please come forward and lay the documents on the Table.

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, this is the document I was getting the things from -(Laughter)- and I will stand by this document. I hereby lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I really must reject what you have laid on the Table, because these are your notes. They are hand-written notes. We do not lay our own notes, our thoughts and ideas, on this Table. No, that is not how we do it.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, in light of -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, you have just ruled that the document which was laid on the Table by hon. Kikungwe, has been rejected by the Speaker. Is it therefore in order now for the honourable minister to pick it and start referring to it in his debate, when you have already rejected it?   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know what he is saying, but certainly hand-written notes cannot be laid on the Table of this House for the Hansard; no way.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I therefore request that this House, in directing itself to the value of the presentation made by hon. Kikungwe, orders that his contribution be struck off the record? For a record of Parliament -(Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: Could the minister, as a gentleman, allow me to give him information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let him finish, and then you will come in.

MR MWANDHA: That is why he is honourable. He should accept the information. (Laughter).

MR MUSUMBA: I accept the information.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening very carefully, and the submission by hon. Kikungwe was to the effect that from the time UCBL was privatised, and since the privatisation failed, if you add up the costs, the total cost is what he has listed and submitted. This includes the amount of money that was lost in the Westmont settlement of Shs 11 billion, and the Shs 72 billion that was lost in capitalisation. 

The Shs 23 billion that was lost should actually have come to Uganda, because that was profit made by a company owned by Uganda. All these costs add up to a total of Shs 300 billion plus. This is the submission of hon. Kikungwe.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was listening very intently. The honourable member was talking about a particular year, and when I asked him whether he had a balance sheet for that he said, “Yes, I am referring to it and I will lay it on the Table.” That is what he said. Now he has brought hand-written notes! 

MR KIKUNGWE: Madam Speaker, the balance sheet was laid on the Table by hon. Mafabi. What hon. Mwandha has stated is exactly what it is. (Laughter). Essentially, there was no way I could talk about Westmont and the arbitration without starting form the beginning.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, this House does not indulge in discussing fiction, fantasy and lazy talk. This House deals with facts, figures, and things that can be corroborated -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable minister to refer to the submission of a member as fiction? The honourable member even laid on the Table the source of the figures that he computed from the report. He showed the loss that this country incurred as a result of the mismanagement of the privatisation of Uganda Commercial Bank. Is the minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwandha, I think you have been in this Parliament as long as I have. At no time in the history of this Parliament have we laid hand-written notes on the Table for the records of the House. 

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker. May I finish my submission? (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am raising on a point of procedure, and I need some clarification. I would like to thank hon. Musumba for yielding the Floor. 

I am uncomfortable about the way you are proceeding, Madam Speaker. One, you had given opportunity to hon. Kizige to contribute and somehow the honourable minister rose. I do not know whether he rose to debate hon. Kikungwe’s speech or to give information. Now the House is degenerating into debating hon. Kikungwe’s speech. 

I would rather suggest that the proper way to do it would have been, if the minister has facts and figures as he is saying, he should bring them in reassurance to what hon. Kikungwe has presented.  Ordinarily that is how we proceed here.  

For the honourable minister to rise up, interrupt hon. Kizige’s contribution and he makes his own contribution; under what rule can a member make the submissions made by an honourable Member of Parliament be struck off? We have not cited it? I need to be clarified on the way we are proceeding. Otherwise, I am very uncomfortable, Madam Speaker. I think we are infringing on the practice and Rules of Procedure. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has been trying to say something which he has not managed to say.  I do not know what he is trying to say. Each time he has stood up, he has been interrupted. I do not know what he wants to tell us. Can you tell us what it is and then we move back.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for protecting me. Many statements which are really fictitious, have been made by hon. Kikungwe. Hon. Kikungwe in the process did undertake that he would lay the credible source of his information on this Table. He instead laid hand-written notes. 

When we are talking about accounts, we are talking about a balance sheet prepared by a professional accountant who has been nominated for that purpose. We can indulge in as much fantasy and fiction in this House, but the rules are that you lay on the Table the source of your information to enable Members of Parliament respond to it. 

It is, therefore, not possible for this House to respond to notes that are a result of the figment of the honourable member’s imagination. It is to that effect, therefore, that I am moving that it be struck off the record of this House. I thank you.

MR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable minister to continue wasting the time of this House talking about a matter on which you have already made a ruling?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said that I have declined the notes, which were laid on the Table, and they have not been laid.  So, let us leave them alone and proceed with hon. Kizige.

MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I thank you because at last this House is a House of representatives of the people of this country. The way we proceed in this House is very important. Ours is a growing democracy, and because of that we have the Parliamentary Privileges Act. We must use that Act to the benefit of the growth of this country, otherwise, it becomes a problem.  

I want to respond to some of the issues raised in the report. On page 15 of the report of the committee, there is a table that shows the values as arrived at by KPMG. In the wisdom of the committee, getting an average for the various methods of valuation gave them a value for the bank. 

But I want to say that valuations for an institution are just like cereals.  You may have rice, it is a cereal and you can prepare a very good meal from rice. You may also have wheat, another cereal, and you can also prepare a good meal from wheat. You may have millet, another cereal, and you can prepare a good meal from millet. But in our traditional dishes, I do not know of any method where you can put all those three together and you get a meal out of them. You cannot! If you did that, people would start questioning your integrity, and so are the evaluation methods.  

When you use the discounted cash flows, the answer you get is not related in anyway to the asset-based approach. When you use the earnings- based approach, the answer you get is also different. 

If you look at the table further and you do a little bit of analysis, you will even see that the ranges are related. The lower limit for the first method and the upper method, the difference is about 20 billion.  The next one is just about 33 billion, and the lower one is even more than 40 billion. 

So, if even in that way we cannot have them related, how do you say we put them together and we get an average and say we have the value? There is no way that has ever been done in any accounting practice anywhere in the world. (Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, in discount methods we apply cash flow, which we estimate basing on estimates.  Likewise, earnings are based on estimates. Given all those facts, you take all the valuables into consideration and come up with an average. The committee is going to come up with this value.  

In financial management, – I do not know, I want to teach him a bit - (Laughter) - on evaluation, you have to use a minimum of two methods: an average, and then you come up with a valuation.  So, given that background, you should only question the method of estimating the future cash flows or the future earnings within individuals. Thank you.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to inform this House that when you come to valuation where we use different methods, like cash flow methods, you have used the earnings and you have used the net asset value, which is enough. There is no way you can take them and average them and then come up with what you think is a value, because it is never done professionally. Thank you.

MR KIZIGE: I thank you honourable minister for the information, and I want to say that the information from hon. Nandala was not very helpful to me.  I am not surprised, because he had just given information to this House to the effect that we made profits of Shs 23 billion arising from the 2000 period. In his words, a provision for bad debt is a profit! That is surprising! (Interruptions)

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is my colleague in order to impute that what I said was wrong, when in fact I have laid a provision of bad debts for 1999 and 2000 on the Table and the profits we are talking about are for the year 2001? I mentioned it categorically that the profits I am referring to are for the period 2001 and not 2000 as he is stating. Is he in order to impute that I do not know how to read figures? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not sure who is right because I am not an accountant.   Please proceed.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I further want to let this House know that in transferring the ownership of UCBL, the balance sheet for 2001 is put into consideration, and hon. Minister for Luwero Triangle laid part of that balance sheet on the Table.  The balance sheet used was that of 2001. 

In selling the bank, you have to focus on future earnings. If you look at the balance sheet of 2001, you will realise that the biggest asset in that balance sheet is investments in government securities.  An investment in government securities is the biggest component of assets, to the tune of Shs 225 billion, plus.  

What about customers’ deposits? This simply means that you are making profits because you are acquiring government securities. You cannot be sure as a bank or institution that government will continue to acquire securities. We do not see any direct trading profits other than the profits from government securities. So, what value did somebody have to attach on that bank to pay more than 19 million dollars? Honourable members, let us not mislead the country.  

Honourable members, in the balance sheet for 2001, the total fixed assets, property and equipment, was worth Shs 26,533,770,000. Out of that property and equipment, as of 31st December 2001, lease-holding land and buildings were to the equivalent of Shs 21,153,710,000. These accounts are published in newspapers every year. 

MR KATUNTU: I thank hon. Kizige for giving way.  Madam Speaker, I see hon. Kizige trying to read his figures from some source, but he has not told us which source he is reading those figures from. Can he tell us the source, so that we know and follow his debate? What is his source? If it is a balance sheet, can he lay it on the Table and we see whether it is signed and then we can proceed.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, hon. Katuntu was so eager to ask his question that he did not listen to my last statement. In my last statement I said these accounts are published every year in the local print media, and they are accessible. I also stated here, in very clear terms, that the statement that I am reading from is similar to the one that was laid on the Table by the Minister for Luwero Triangle.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, hon. Moses Kizige stated that UCBL has been making its profits from investing in government securities, by and large, very little from customer deposits. Why? Because that is the operating market. Even today, Stanbic is going to invest in that security. Government can make profits. What is wrong with that? It is a prevailing market. So, I think it was not in order for a member to mislead the House.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the difficulty of Eng. Onek in appreciating what I am saying, despite the fact that he holds an MBA from Makerere. But what I said –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, when we are debating here, we should not use language that degrades colleagues in the House. Every one of us has a different background. He is talking about his profession, and there is no reason at all for any honourable member to be so proud of his own profession, to the extent that you should almost abuse a colleague because he does not know what he knows. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is hon. Kizige, whom I respect very much, in order to pass such unsavoury statements about a colleague? Is he really in order?
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I should ask all the members present and those not present to use civil language with one another, because it has been happening throughout, not only today. If all us can have a ceasefire on that language, that will be fine.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I withdraw the remarks I made about hon. Onek, and I apologise. 

On the point I was trying to make, my statement was in connection to prediction of future earnings and valuation of a bank for somebody who is going to buy, and the sustainability of the profitability that the bank is enjoying at the particular time.  So, that is why I said that you are not sure that Government will continue buying the securities in the next five or ten years. That is the perspective in which I brought it.

Madam Speaker, given that the owner’s equity as at 31st December was just Shs 49 billion, you may talk of assets and the rest of that. By the way, if you look at the book value of an asset based on historical costs, it does not always give you the whole truth.  

Take an example of two people who bought a Pajero for Shs 20 million at the beginning of the year. Using the depreciation method, you reduce the value by 25 per cent. The book value could be 15 million for all Pajeros and yet depending on the condition after you have driven your Pajero, yours could be either Shs 8 million or Shs 19 million. So, the book value does not say anything; it is what the market has to offer that you have to consider.  

Madam Speaker, I want to address the issue of the 19 million dollars. First of all, was it there at all? 

MR KOLUO: Is it in order for hon. Moses Kizige to refer to documents which are unsigned, and besides that, not even lay them on the Table? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is I to tell when somebody should lay the papers on the Table. Allow him to make his contribution and then he can lay them on the Table. I cannot rule whether he is in order or not. I cannot see them from here. 

MR SAM KUTESA: Madam Speaker, just as you ruled that over sometime we have been using un-parliamentary language, I think we should all address ourselves on that and adhere to parliamentary language. I also think it is good parliamentary practice to allow someone to make their contribution and finish it, whether you like them or not. 

In keeping with parliamentary tradition, it would be wise if we allowed someone to make his or her contribution, whether you agree with it or not, and then you have your opportunity to make your rebuttal.  

Could I, Madam Speaker, appeal to you, just like you appealed to us to use parliamentary language, to also urge us to adhere to the parliamentary tradition of listening to each other. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I really would like to associate with what the honourable minister has said. On a number of occasions there have been interruptions to particular people, with the intention to disrupt them or something like that.  

I would like to appeal to you to understand that each of us understands things from a different perspective. We come from different backgrounds, and every member here speaks from their understanding of the situation. So, if you do not like it, just keep quiet and let him or her finish and then you also give your part and everybody will listen to you. I really would like to appeal to you on that one.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, following on the issue of parliamentary procedure, is it not procedurally right for a member who is making reference to a document to inform us about the source of the document, the date on which it is published and were we can find that document? So that when it is eventually laid on the Table, we can take time to check whether the document is authentic or not. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether the honourable member has a document. I just see him talking; I do not know whether it is from his head or from somewhere.   But when he finishes, if he has documents he should lay them on the Table.  

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, maybe I have not made myself clear. I am saying that once a member starts referring to a document, the member should say, “I have a document in my hands entitled, published by such and such an organization, dated such and such a date, which states, and I quote,” So that the member who is listening should take note and then eventually go to the Table to check whether that document is authentic, or maybe even go further and check elsewhere whether that document has not been bungled up from somewhere else.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, of course it is more convenient to do that, but we must also appreciate that in this Parliament there is always a continuous learning process. I do not know how many times that practice has actually been adhered to. But it is a learning process and members have taken note.  So please proceed.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I will move a little faster now. On the issue of whether money was received for the sale of UCBL, I want to do as hon. Wacha has proposed.  I have a document here from the Bank of Uganda dated the 1st of March 2002, to the Executive Director Operations, in connection to receipt of the proceeds from sale –(Interjetion)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, order, order! You are the ones who said you wanted to know were the documents come from. Now the member has started mentioning and you are heckling him.  This is very un-parliamentary! Proceed, honourable member.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, the document is entitled: “Receipt of UCBL Sales Proceeds”. It reads:

“This is to confirm that a total amount of US $19,550,000 in respect of sale of UCBL has been received as follows: 

Value date:	 20th February 2002
Bank:		 Citi Bank, Kampala
Amount:	US $3,910,000				
Value date: 21st February 2002 
Bank: Bank for International Settlements, Switzerland 
Amount: US $ 15,640,000 on the account of Bank of Uganda.” 

So, the issue of whether the money was received at all or not does not arise. There are attachments - (Interruptions)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you hon. Kizige for giving way.  With me I have got a TT message, dated the 28th of February 2002 talking of the same amount. I am sure you are reading from the same. Can you, from that TT message, tell us who the sender of that money is? Madam Speaker, I can lay the same on the Table now.

THE SPEAKER: Can you please first explain it before you lay it, because I do not know what you are talking about.  

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, hon. Kizige is referring to a memorandum, which I have here, signed by Mrs Emunu, who is the DEO. Attached to that memorandum are two TT messages, one is dated the 28th of February 2002, which I have here, and it is the one he was referring to confirming the amount being remitted as 15,640,000 US dollars.  It does not show who the sender is, which really is not the practice. Every TT message should show who the sender of that amount is. It is here, Madam Speaker, and I can lay it on the Table. 

The other one on Citi Bank, US $3.9 million, is very clear. It shows by whose order the money was sent. t is clear, and this is a proper TT message. But this one of US $ 15.640 at least is the one we were supplied.   

I was the lead counsel to the committee, and I lay both of them on the Table, including the document hon. Kizige is purporting to read. These are records of the committee, Madam Speaker. 

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, the document hon. Katuntu referred to, he said is dated 28th of February. My document is dated 23rd March, so the document could be different from what I have. But the translated message shows the bank from which the money was drawn, and that is the Bank for International Settlements based in Switzerland. That is what is important to me. That the money was received on the account of Bank of Uganda – (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, our concern should be whether this money has been invested. Is it making profits? Because we are still in a process of receivership, you do not expect this money to be transferred to Government at this time. 

We do not know how much will be paid to the workers who are being laid off. We do not know which other obligations will come forth.  But, of course, it is the responsibility of Bank of Uganda to account to this country, and in the final analysis the value must be given – (Interruption)

MR KUTESA: I thank the honourable member for giving way.  I also have a document here, dated the 13th of June 2002, and it talks about the transmission of money. It is from the Bank for International Settlements, Basel in Switzerland. It says: “Attention: External Operations Department.  Reference: Your Swift Message, MT299TRN,”- and the number of the reference is- the credit of US dollars 15,640,000 of your US dollar’s one day’s notice account in our books valued 21 February 2002.  

As already confirmed in our swift message MT330, dated 21st February 2002, we re-confirm that these funds are by order of Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited, Kampala under ref. UCBL Sale agreements section 231. We have no more details available regarding message taller.”  This is coming from Citi Bank.

I will lay it on the Table so that hon. Katuntu – (Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: No, no we have that document.

MR KUTESA: Yes, even the ones you laid on the Table I have them. So you can have the advantage of having mine. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe let me just allay the fears of members. The documents, which are laid here, are the property of the Parliament. So they are documents for all of us. Everybody will have access to them.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, there is a procedural matter we need to sort out. Hon. Kizige read from a document, giving the same contents but of a different date from the document read by hon. Katuntu, giving the same information. Hon. Kutesa has read another document dated a different date but containing the same information.  

All I want to know is, and I think every member of this House would like to know, how do we reconcile these different dates containing the same information? Where these transmissions on different dates of the same amount of money?  

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, if you heard me, the document I read was a re-confirmation, so it could not have been the same date as the original transmission. It was to re-confirm what had been transmitted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But also honourable members, I think you know that this has been a process and there are a series of events. I do not think you can have all the letters sent on the same day and saying the same thing. Let us listen to one another and then we shall see what to do.

MR KIZIGE: Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to address myself on the issue that was raised by hon. Onek. We need to understand the foreign exchange regulation policies in South Africa. If the Reserve Bank of South Africa had to authorise Stanbic Uganda, whose shares are fully owned by a bank in South Africa, why then would we doubt whether Stanbic Uganda or a bank in South Africa bought?  

This is an issue of a holding company and a subsidiary.  Stanbic Uganda is just a subsidiary of the holding company, which is based in South Africa. That is why the Reserve Bank of South Africa had to clear transition because of their contingent foreign exchange control policies.

So, honourable members, my appeal to you all is that we must understand the transition and the situation in which it was done, instead of misleading the country. 

On the issue of value, we got the best that could be got from any such deal ever. All these issues that members are bringing up, you cannot read the balance sheet with fixed assets, land and buildings worth 21 billion, and you say the main building was not included.  Withdrawing the main building would mean that you would have to withdraw related liabilities. 

This bank was sold as a going concern. A going concern means you take over everything and you take responsibility for all the liabilities. For the few assets that were excluded, like the Nkurumah Road building, matching liabilities were withdrawn. So the issue of whether we get value for money does not arise.

Lastly, I want to say that Uganda Commercial Bank at IPS building has since been fully taken over by Stanbic Bank, but I was concerned at the time of take over. But I want to tell this House that as somebody banking in that particular branch, I am extremely happy that the bank had to go to Stanbic, because the services are much better than they were. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable members who have contributed on this very touchy motion. I want to thank the committee for availing this House another opportunity to debate on the issues pertaining to Uganda Commercial Bank Limited.  

I also want to reiterate what I said earlier, that this case is a finished case. I would say we are crying over spilled milk. Notwithstanding that, we want to make assessments, and I want to congratulate the Government and Ministry of Finance for fulfilling its wish. It has been its long-standing wish to get rid of UCB.  

At one time when we were debating this issue, I asked the honourable minister who is seated right opposite me, whether he was really interested in protecting the interests of Ugandans; I bet I never got an answer, and I know certainly that I will never get that answer. So, when the members of the committee, under 262, feel that it should have been the PERD Statute not the FIS, I want to say that the minister was not ready and you could not even have pushed it down his throat to take back this responsibility. So, the only way out was the FIS, and I think to this tune we should as well let it go. There was nobody to take the interest of these Ugandans whom we are all here representing.

I have read the response of the minister, and technicalities aside, the concerns of the committee have not been adequately addressed in the report. I have not seen the issue of the Attorney General not being involved in this whole process in the response. Maybe on the Floor of the House when he may have been assigned one assignment or – (Interruption)

MR FRANCIS AYUME: The last time I was here on this particular issue, I was trying to explain to the House that it was not accurate to say the Attorney General was not involved in the whole process. Indeed, the Attorney General was not involved in the negotiations of the sale. That is what I said, and that is what I told the committee. The Attorney General was involved on the issue of a legal opinion, which is normally provided at the end of the agreement by the parties.  

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, hon. Zziwa, for giving way. When the Minister of Finance appeared before the committee, he was asked why he did not involve the Attorney General. His response was that, the issue was confidential and he thought the Attorney General did not know enough law, so they had to get a consultant outside. (Laughter and Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, even before the Minister of Finance raises a point of order, I think we have already agreed here that we shall not use language, which is uncivil to one another. Hon. Byaruhanga, the language you have used is uncivil to the Attorney General.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, there is information available to Parliament, and with your permission I would like to quote from it. The document I am quoting from is a record of hon. Gerald Ssendaula’s appearance before the Ad hoc Committee on 18 June 2002. 

The relevant information can be found in that document, on page 6. This is a verbatim recording of hon. Ssendaula’s appearance. It reads as follows:

“Mr Chairman, the Attorney General could have been consulted when it was necessary, but on the day-to-day operations, and even when you look at the correspondence finally, this is all handled by the Bank of Uganda. It is the Bank of Uganda that needed legal advice on how to deal with the bank, because it was the regulator. In this place a regulator has to get competent advice on how to deal with the institutions that regulate services.” 

So, a Member asked, maybe if I could quote hon. Katuntu right, he was trying to ask the regulator and his legal persons: “you as the shareholder, the Constitution says your legal expert/advisor is the Attorney General, did you in that instance consult your legal partners?” 

Hon. Ssendaula replied, “we consulted the Attorney General when it was necessary.” I want you to mark that, but he goes on to say, “where the Attorney General said he was not fairly competent, he always authorised us to even seek outside advice, and we got it.” (Laughter). 

Madam Speaker, this is already a record of Parliament. Parliament already has it. So, I do not have to lay it on the Table.

MR AYUME: I am seeking clarification, because I have just heard about this, although I appeared before the committee and that statement was not put to me. But if what was meant is that where the Attorney General lacks expertise in a specific field, he can engage any lawyer, either locally or outside, which really happens as a routine, then there is no problem. But I think the point you are talking about is whether the Attorney General was consulted, and that is what I am seeking  - (Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, we have a document which is already in the custody of the House. Is it not procedurally right that the Attorney General leaves us to make up our own minds on the quotation, which has been presented to us?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am not in possession of those documents. I am also hearing some of those things for the first time.  So, I need to also be satisfied about whether demeaning language has been used against the Attorney General by a colleague.  

MR SSENDAULA: Madam Speaker, considering that my name has been involved in the debate and I am at the centre of it, I think it is proper that either I provide more explanation over this issue or I leave it for the stage when I am responding.

Madam Speaker, definitely what I have stated is exactly normal. For example, you may be making an agreement, which relates say to a hospital, and within the Ministry of Justice or within the Attorney General’s Chambers there is nobody who is already knowledgeable in this field. 

For example, when I was the Minister of Natural Resources, we were involved in power negotiations and sales. Definitely, when the Attorney General’s Chambers did not have someone who is familiar with a particular exercise, they would give us authorisation to hire the services of someone who had that expertise. Really, does that mean demeaning the Attorney General?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have understood.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the information, and I think it up to the House to judge. We can all make judgements on this information. But the House is not satisfied that the time the Attorney General made the intervention was the appropriate time. I think he should have made an intervention a lot earlier, because we expect the Attorney General to give guidance on any matter, on any issue of national concern.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to provide to hon. Zziwa and to the rest of the colleagues is that the Attorney General had no means of knowing what was actually going on.  Therefore, to say that he should have intervened earlier just does not arise. 

The Attorney General is not Jesus Christ that he would have foreseen what the Minister of Finance and his Governor were doing in selling this bank. (Laughter). This is the information I want to give. 

MRS ZZIWA: My argument is based on the fact that, once bitten, twice shy. The Attorney General should have recognised that after the failure of the Westmont deal, he should have even been keener. The report has mentioned that there has always been a junior counsel. I am referring to page 11. The fact that they can even term him a junior counsel, I think this is a deplorable matter.

I want to also express a concern, which the minister did not address or touch on in his response. What next on this issue of the signing of the contract by the manager of supervision? It has been proved that, circumstantially, it should have not been the manager to sign. It should have been the Governor, Bank of Uganda. What is the fate now?  All these are making this whole deal questionable, and we are looking at a deal where millions and billions of money is moving from account to account.

The third concern, which I have -(Mr Musumba rose_) what will you say when you come to respond?

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, when I come to respond I will put before this House evidence that Mr Katimbo- Mugwanya had authority to sign.  

MRS ZZIWA: Well, it is more comical if the Governor was present and could not sign. 

The other concern I have, which has been an issue of concern since this whole UCB saga started, is the issue of personalities. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, to ask about this issue of Wendy Abt. Who is this Wendy? She did the evaluations, she did the consultancy, she sourced the bidders, – oh dear!  Who is this Wendy? On top of that, even when the deal was being concluded, she was given tax exemption. 

I want to bring to this House a concern expressed during a committee of finance meeting in the 6th Parliament with the late Governor, Bank of Uganda. The late Kikonyogo also said that he was not aware or very conversant with the terms and conditions of how this lady came to be involved in all this. And he was not even very comfortable with her performance in Tanzania. It is on record. 

I want to find out why the Ministry of Finance went ahead just to see themselves conclude their deal. They even decided to convince His Excellency the President to remove the PS, Treasury and put him in Bank of Uganda, to conclude the deal. I want to express my disappointment over that. It is a fact. He is the Governor, Bank of Uganda and he was the PS.

MR MUSUMBA: Hon. Margret Zziwa has just informed this House that for the purposes of concluding the deal, His Excellency the President took the Secretary to Treasury then and made him Governor of Bank of Uganda. Before that, she made a series of statements about this particular transaction, the truth of which are questionable. 

Is the honourable Member for Kampala District in order to impute improper motives on His Excellency the President? Two, is she in order to impute improper motives on this House, which approved the appointment of Governor Mutebile?  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if this House approves jobs, then I think we cannot question our own act.

MRS ZZIWA: I will not proceed on that angle. But the concern should be noted. 

Madam Speaker, the report also recognises the objectives of Uganda Commercial Bank, and I will quote 2.3: “many Ugandans to become professional bankers and accelerated the Africanisation of the national economy”. To that I can also say, “monetise the Ugandan economy.” 

When this issue was brought up on the Floor, we said yes, the honourable Minister of Finance wishes to get rid of this burden of Uganda Commercial Bank. But where is he allotting this responsibility of monetising this economy, very well knowing that many people in Kagadi, in Kampala still keep their money in tins?  

The minister, on the Floor of the House, said that, “we are preparing Post Bank to take charge and responsibility”. This is really an issue of concern, and that is why the people of this country call Uganda Commercial Bank their own bank. May I be informed, since the committee did not capture it here, where the minister has relegated that responsibility? Also, how far has the improvement or development of Post Bank gone? 

I want also to find out about the issue of taxes. I mentioned earlier that tax exemptions were given. We have been told that Wendy and others were given a non-tax deal, whereby Bank of Uganda is going to take the responsibility of remitting tax. When is tax remitted to Uganda Revenue Authority? I would think at the end of every calendar year.  

MR MAFABI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. When it is tax that you have deducted, it should be remitted by the 10th of the following month, after deduction. However, VAT is remitted by 15th of the following month. If when they signed the contract is the day they were paying, within the next ten days of the next month they should be able to remit. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: The information I would like to give arises from the comment made by hon. Kizige earlier on, regarding the same issue about the taxes.  Madam Speaker, this very question was put to the officials from Bank of Uganda, including the Minister of Finance. 

When we told the Minister of Finance that these people had been exempted, he said, “I do not know who did that, but whoever did it, that was very irregular.” We put the same question to the Governor of Bank of Uganda and the Chief Legal Counsel, Bank of Uganda, Mr Bbosa. They said it was a mistake, and the recording is very clear. 

So, the argument being given, that the negotiation was net of taxes, is not correct. They admitted that they made a mistake and the record is very clear. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, and I appreciate the information basing on the two premises. May I know now from the honourable minister, since it is indicated that they are ready to pay the tax accrued, are they going to pay it with interest? I want to know, particularly right now that I have learnt from hon. Nandala Mafabi that for every other one month when the tax is due, it should have generated tax. 

The honourable minister now is looking for many more ways of reducing the burden on foreign debt. He was on the Floor of the House the other day trying to tell us how he is going to expand the revenue base of this country. Now we would like to find out about this.  

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to see that the Government acknowledges the mistakes it has made. I also want this issue to be de-politicized as much as possible. I am a Movement cadre, one-by-one solid. I think I can say that I follow hon. Kiyonga, not in hierarchy but in footsteps.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Zziwa, are you suggesting that you are in the queue? (Laughter)

MRS ZZIWA: If hon. Kiyonga is in the queue, I am in the queue, Madam Speaker. I want to reiterate the virtues of the Movement. We stand for transparency; we stand for accountability to our people. We want to bring good ethical values to this country. 

I do not condemn it when you put us in a caucus, but I think it is wrong when we go to a caucus and yet you do these things and you do not even consult us.  We do not even know, but when things go wrong, then we go and caucus. I think that is wrong! Criticizing ourselves openly when things go wrong should be what brings the goodness of the Movement out. And I do not think I should be labeled indisciplined.

I have been consistent on this issue. I warned you immediately the issue started that I think Government is wrong in taking this step. We should have taken better steps. That notwithstanding, I wish Stanbic Bank the best, because we cannot have recourse. We are already in the boat. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a series of documents have been laid on the Table. You should have an opportunity to peruse and scrutinize them. In the circumstances, I would like to adjourn the House at this stage. We resume tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. and we start from this side. So, the House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.29 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 February 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)








