Thursday 25th February, 1999.        

(The Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair).

The House was called to order.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO CENSURE HON. SAM KUTESA, MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 118 OF THE CONSTITUTION.

MR. DOMBO LUMALA (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  You realise that this morning the petitioners, through me as their chief petitioner, did write to you communicating that whereas we are ready to move with the Motion for resolution of censure against hon. Sam Kutesa, we felt it very prudent and according to the rule of natural justice that since every Member of this House is required to make an informed decision without fear, favour or prejudice, we felt it imperative that all the evidence that is going to be adduced before this House be made available to every Member of this House.  

Members realise that last time when this House moved a vote of censure against hon. Brig. Muhwezi, time came when the evidence was belatedly laid on the Table and this House had to be adjourned for a full week to enable Members study the evidence.  You also know the shortcoming - in Parliament - of the photocopying facilities.  We are doing all that we should to ensure that every Member should have available before him,  most especially hon. Sam Kutesa,  all the evidence and accusations against him.  This will enable him to defend himself according to the laws of natural justice.  

I do not wish to appear as if I am in a hurry,  like this House has always been accused of.  Hon. Members, you realise that statements have been to the effect that this House is witch-hunting Members, that we have underhand methods of work.  I wish to state before you that when the process of censuring started, it was the most transparent in manner, because the reasons and the process were made public before the Members provided their signatures.  

Even when we usually had meetings with the Speaker;  I quite often called a meeting of petitioners to give a briefing of what has been decided.  In that meeting, I would call and invite all Members of Parliament irrespective of whether they are petitioners or not.  That is the level of transparency we want to promote in this House.  I therefore wish, Mr. Speaker, to say that in order to enable all these hon. Members of the House here make an informed decision and as the Clerk's office is moving to make available the evidence to Members, I wish to request that the debate on this censure be deferred until Tuesday 2nd of March 1999,  for Members to make an informed debate.  Thank you very much.

MRS. EGUNYU:  I beg to proceed and move a motion according to rule 24 (4),  on petitions.  Rule 24 (4) says, "any Member may move a motion that the petition be rejected on the ground that is not properly and respectfully worded, or on any other ground..."   Mr. Speaker, I have valid grounds for moving for this Motion to be rejected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the first place, it should be realised that no petition has been presented to the House.  You see, when the item was raised, I called the Member who had been listed on the order paper to move a motion.  It is only when he has moved a motion that we would have a petition before us.  Instead of the Member moving a motion,  he sought an adjournment before he could present the motion.  So, what we have before us is an appeal by the petitioner that this Motion not be presented today, but we adjourn because of the reason he has given.  So, there is nothing to correct.

MRS. EGUNYU:  Can I be allowed to seek a clarification from the person who was supposed to move the motion?  I think this House is entitled to some clarification, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. NYAI:   Mr. Speaker, whereas our rules are very clear on how we should respect the Chair on which you sit,  and whereas the purported Mover of the Motion of censure has sought for a deferment,  and whereas the said Member has asked for your indulgence that this Motion be discussed next Tuesday,  does it serve any more useful purpose seeking clarification from a Member who is not on the Floor, rather than waiting for your wise judgement, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  This question of information and clarification is not mandatory that whenever you seek clarification  or you want to seek information it has to be given.  Apparently the Member had completed and has resumed his seat.  So what clarification do you want?  Let me hear it and see if it is proper, then I can ask the Member if he can make a clarification.  Could you make it?

MRS. EGUNYU:  The clarification I am seeking is that the hon.petitioner did circulate a photocopy from the Clerk's office, of the petition.  I would like to know how he failed,  for over two to three months to ensure that these other attachments which are three documents, were not before this House.  

And the second clarification I am also seeking is why the Clerk did not endeavour to make sure that we got those three attachments,  because this country has been expectant, everyone is ready,  and all of a sudden the petitioner says he it is not ready!  Mr. Speaker, I am seeking that clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I thought I would be asked to decide whether the application for adjournment is merited or not;  that I will decide.  Instead the petitioner has said he has not been able to present.  He has given the reasons.  Whether the reasons are sound or not, that is for the Chair to decide.  

MR. KUTESA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Dombo for the very spirited and calculated reasons he gave for seeking this adjournment.  As I told you this morning, Mr. Speaker, I received a letter from hon. Dombo - a copy of a letter addressed to you from hon. Dombo - stating precisely what he has stated on the Floor of this House.  I did reply to you also this morning.  

I would therefore like to read my reply to you because it contains my thinking as to why this adjournment is being sought.  I said that,  "I have received a copy of a letter addressed to you dated today, by hon. Dombo, MP for Bunyole county on this matter of my censure.  Hon. Dombo who is the chief petitioner is requesting you to postpone the date to Tuesday, 2nd March 1999, ostensibly because the petitioners wish to dispute their document relating to their case.  Mr. Speaker, the petitioners submitted the petition to you with three annexes as is contained in the petition:  that is annex A, B and C.  And you duly transmitted the said petition and annex to the President two months ago.  The President also sent those four documents to me, one day after he received them.  I am therefore, at a loss as to why the petitioners have not been able to photocopy those documents for two months and distribute them to Members.  It is therefore clear to me that the intention of the petitioners is not to enable Members to follow the debate, but rather it is that, if they were to present the petition today, I would be able to study their case and be better prepared to respond on Tuesday,  which they do not like. This to me is contrary to the rules of natural justice which require that the defender must be given ample time to prepare his defence.  It is in my view a sad day for our Parliamentary democracy for petitioners to begin engaging in trial by ambush,  and it is a shame that this is done by none other than the highest legislative body in our land." 

I would therefore propose, Mr. Speaker,  that the petitioners be asked to state their case today and be allowed to distribute the documents latest tomorrow, so that the Members of Parliament can use the weekend to read the said documents and internalise the case presented by the petitioners.

Lastly,  I would like to say that if you feel that you must accede to the request by the petitioners, the petitioners should - as they have done - openly say here that despite all the time they have had to prepare the petition, collect and distribute their evidence, they are still unable to present their case,  even when it is on the order paper.  I would therefore, Mr. Speaker, if you are so inclined to grant their request to adjourn,  wish to serve notice that should you feel inclined to give the petitioners more time, I shall also ask for equal amount of time to prepare and distribute my defence after they have stated their case. I thank you.

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, we should not only appeal for justice, but we must see that justice is done.  On the 16th of February of last month, this order paper was prepared by the Clerk's office and item number four on the agenda was that the motion for resolution of censure against hon. Kutesa was to follow, and the business on the National Citizenship Bill was to come after that. The Speaker called me to his office and told me that hon. Sam Kutesa had rang him requesting for more time.  He asked me whether we should grant that time and we did grant it.  

On the 16th,  hon. Sam Kutesa was not out of country, he was in Uganda.  One thing which surprises me like it surprises everybody else is that when we submitted the petition, the President submitted a copy to hon. Sam Kutesa, the annex had been attached and for us we felt that once the Speaker's office had received, we thought it was the duty of the Speaker and the Clerk's office to ensure that this evidence is circulated.  It was not the duty of the petitioner!  We are coming in because we were surprised that this information, despite having been submitted in December last year, hon. Members have not had the opportunity to receive it.  Yes, they are going to be the jurors.  We want them to make an independent and an informed decision, that is why we asked for this time.  

But if hon. Sam Kutesa feels that because of the information that is going to be circulated, he will require time in future to seek for an adjournment,  Mr. Speaker,  we shall gladly concede so that justice is seen to be done. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, the proceedings which we expected to commence today are constitutional proceeding - envisaged by the Constitution itself.  The Parliament does not deal with the petition until the period prescribed in the Constitution has expired.  So the petition only comes here after 30 days from the date of service of the petition on the Minister concerned.  Maybe it is only at this juncture that the Clerk would be handling the details,  giving you documents to consider, anticipating that a motion will be moved to debate that censure motion.  

Until the censure motion is moved, we really have nothing before us.  There is no way I can say that a name has been called, when the Mover has not moved and so we dismiss it.  I cannot put that question to you to dismiss a petition that has not been presented.  And it is true that today the application which I have is an application by the petitioner and it is the only application that I am going to consider. It may well be that in future, the person or Minister concerned may have his own application.  When he makes it, I will consider it.  Today I have to consider whether to push on with the proceedings when the Mover has not presented the Motion before us.  

However, I heard the Mover saying that we are not in a hurry.  Yes, we may not be in a hurry but we have a tight programme during this meeting. In fact, according to the funds we have, we may be going for recess at the end of this month, but we have a tight programme. We have a number of Bills to consider, we have very important reports to consider. So, I would ask Members not to think that we do have time.  Do not say that we are not in a hurry.  We should have utilised today, but we cannot.  

However I cannot say, 'move the motion,'  when the man says, 'I can only present my case in this way.'  I think I have to give opportunity to the mover to present his case in the best way possible.  And at the same time I do not want an ambush,  as hon. Kutesa has said.  It does not do anybody any good to be ambushed.  I think it is just to demand that Members,  especially the Minister concerned, are alerted at the kind of documentary evidence that is going to be presented. This is so that the Minister can prepare himself to put his case. Maybe, when he has prepared himself, the need to make an application for adjournment will not arise.  

Under the circumstances,  I will allow the application for an adjournment, but with these conditions. That the documents that have caused the adjournment are distributed to Members - especially to the Minister concerned - by tomorrow so that on Tuesday there is no other excuse to make of not proceeding with the application. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.  Thank you.

(The House rose and adjourned until Tuesday 2nd March, 1999 at 2.00 p.m.). 
