Wednesday, 21 February 1996

The Council met at 2.30 P.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman Al-Haji Moses Kigongo in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE AND LEGAL AND SECURITY MATTERS ON THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995

THE CHAIRMAN:  Chairman, hon. Butagira please reply to the House.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman Sir, on the 8th of February, 1996, this House referred the Parliament Elections Interim Provisions Bill, 1995 to the Sectoral committee on Legal and Security Affairs for appropriate scrutiny, adjustment and entire consideration.  The committee began its work on 9th February and now I have the honour and pleasure to present to the House the report of the committee.  Mr Chairman, first of all, I want to mention something about the provisions of this bill which are exact reproduction of the provisions of electoral commission interim provisions statute; I think from clause 1 to about 15. Hon. Members, you will see clause 123 of this bill that the interim electoral commission statute 1995 is being repealed.  So, the provisions which were in that statute concerning the procedure have been transferred to this present bill and hence there was no need to remove them from the bill as some Members have suggested.  

Having said that Mr Chairman, the committee went through all the amendments moved by Members of this House and discussed them exhaustively.  Members of Parliament who were not in the committee were also allowed to attend and give their views.  At the end of general representation, the committee then sat by itself to take decisions on various issues which were raised.  In attendance was also the Minister for Constitutional Affairs who is in charge of the bill.  In most cases, there was consensus on various amendments presented and where there was none, the committee reached a decision by majority of those present.

In this respect Mr Chairman, I would like to point out that attached to this report are the proposed amendments to the bill which reflect the decisions which were taken by the committee. The Committee, therefore, wishes to highlight those areas where the decision was arrived at by majority vote since those issues emerged as controversial.  The decisions of the committee are reflected as I have said in the proposed amendments in the bill. The major issues, which arose, on which we had to take a vote by majority include representation and method of election of special interest groups, procedure of election as which comes first, Presidential or Parliamentary, free manner of campaigns; is it individual or joint candidates meetings?  

Four, qualifications of Members of Parliament and five, the issue of costs.  I will elaborate on this.  With regard to election of women, the committee on a majority vote agreed on universal adult suffrage for women. (Applause)  

Mr Chairman, there was strong dissenting views –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Butagira, excuse me for a minute please.  Hon. Members, I wish to recognise the presence of hon. Hawa Yakub, a Member of Parliament from Ghana.  She is seated just over there. (Applause)  Hon. Butagira, continue please.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman Sir, as I said on the method of election of women, the majority of the view of those Members of the Committee present was that it should be by adult suffrage.  There was however, a strong dissenting view which favoured electoral colleges.  Mr Chairman, this is democratic, we are just reporting our decisions.  The next issue concerned representation and election of youth representatives.  The committee was of the view and did recommend that the number of youths remain five to be elected through the youth councils.

Representation and election of disabled representatives.  Mr Chairman, this is a group which is physically handicapped and the committee felt that for two Members to cover the entire country might be difficult in view of the physical handicap and recommended that the representation for the disabled be raised to five to represent each of the regions. (Applause) And that at least one of them should be a woman.  

Representation and election of workers representatives. Mr Chairman, the committee recommended that three who represent the work, the number of three be maintained and that they should be elected in accordance with their constitution.

With regard to representation by army and election of army representatives, the committee recommended ten and these will be elected in accordance with the procedure which will be contained in regulations after consultations and those regulations will be presented to Parliament for approval.  Now there was an issue regarding the Parliamentary elections, Presidential elections.  Which comes first or are they to be simultaneously held?  Mr Chairman, there were very many views expressed on this and after exhaustive discussion, the committee recommended that Presidential elections should take first. (Applause)  Mr Chairman, this decision of the committee is contained in an amendment to clause 46 of the bill which amendments are attached to my report.

Manner of campaigns.  The committee on majority vote agreed on joint candidates meetings. 

HON. MEMBERS:  Hear, hear!

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I want to mention here that I am just reporting the decision; the reasoning is in light of what was discussed in this House and so forth.  

Qualifications of Members of Parliament.  Mr Chairman, this is another matter which engaged the committee and we had to get various views not only from the Members of Parliament but from the experts in the field of education.  So we consulted Makerere University and also UNEB.  These are professional bodies who in our opinion are qualified to tell us who are these holders of ‘A’ level or equivalent.  

Mr Chairman, the committee also had to bear in mind the constitutional provision and try to interpret it as it should be.  In accordance with this therefore, the committee by majority agreed that the qualifications of Members of Parliament shall include a certificate, diploma or degree recognised by professional body, Uganda National Examinations Board or the National Universities as equivalent to ‘A’ level certificate or higher qualifications as listed in second schedule to this bill.  Mr Chairman, the committee was aware that a decision might offend some people but we had to stick to the law. Now there was the issue of cost - if you remember in the bill clause 85 and 90, if you are challenging the election that you pay costs upfront but we thought that the issue of costs should be left to court to be dealt with in accordance with normal rules and procedure regarding payment of costs.  So we have left it to the court to decide.

Lastly, on these issues which I have raised, the issue of the number of constituencies.  This House is given the mandate to determine the number of constituencies and the committee addressed itself to this and came out with a decision that the constituencies should be as that which prevailed during CA elections.  In other words, we have adopted the CA constituencies as the constituencies for these Parliamentary elections which are coming.  The committee feared to open a pandora box in view of the limited time that is available to hold these elections and the practical and sensible view to adopt was to go by the constituencies as established during the CA elections.

Mr Chairman, before I conclude, I would like to draw the Members’ attention to the amendments which are an attachment to this report.  If you go through these amendments, they have taken care of some fears which were raised in this House and we went through with the Minister and agreed to improve on the bill in view or in light of the views which were expressed in the House. So these amendments therefore take care of those fears which were raised, they take care of the suggestions which were raised in the House and they are embodied in this draft amendment.  Mr Chairman, I would like to end by thanking all the Members of the House who appeared before the committee and gave their views and also to thank those members of the public who also gave us their views on this important bill.  Mr Chairman, we arrive to the fact that elections must take place as soon as possible and therefore we request this House to adopt the report as presented Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman Sir, I thank you for having given me this opportunity to say one or two things about the report made by the chairman of our committee to this honourable House.  Mr Chairman, the report is brief and it summarises the principles considered.  But Sir, I wanted to say something about the mode of election of women.  (Hear, hear!).  

As you heard Sir, there was a strong dissenting opinion in the committee which I attended and I think it will be to the benefit of us all if I gave this information to the hon. Members before we finally take a decision and the information I give is in line with the thinking of the government which has been entrusted with the responsibility to see through this country this period of leaving transitional to the new constitutional order.  Mr Chairman, as the report points out, it is the candid opinion and very well considered opinion of us that to legislate for universal adult suffrage for women would be going strictly contrary to the spirit of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  (Applause)  

Mr Chairman, Sir, I did try to point out some of the relevant provisions in the constitution when I wound up.  Those provisions are still very valid, they are still part of the constitution.  I started by going through the principles of State policy which must guide this House and all organs of government; not only in interpreting but also in legislating.  Mr Chairman, with your permission, I will briefly –(Interruption)

MR LUBEGA:  Point of order.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Is it in order when there is a substantive motion by the Chairman of the Legal and Security Committee to adopt a report for that motion not to be passed first?  Is it in order? Because there is a substantive motion that the report be adopted as it is.

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order.  Proceed please.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, Sir, I will quickly remind my hon. Colleagues in this House of the constitutional duty we have as a seasoned revolutionary legislature for this country.  In our national objectives and directive principles of State policy, the very first principle says, the following objectives and principles shall guide all organs and agencies of the State including this House Sir.  All citizens, organisations and other bodies and persons in applying or interpreting the constitution or any other law and in taking and implementing any policy decisions to the establishment and promotion of a just free and democratic society.  Mr Chairman, Sir, objective 15 has this to say: “The State shall recognise the significant role that women play in society.”  

Article 32 of our Constitution has this to say in 32(1): “Notwithstanding anything in this constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition or custom for the purposes of redressing the imbalances which exist against them.”  Mr Chairman, we are debating a matter affecting -(Interruption)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to be clarified from the Chair.  The chairman of the committee having presented his report and according to the circulation of the agenda for today, I would like to be clarified whether we are going to debate the decisions as presented by the chairman or not.  Or if those decisions have to be taken wholesale and any other controversial issues should have been settled within the committee.  If we are not going to debate decisions reached by the committee, I am getting a bit lost when the Minister now tries to state to the contrary what the committee has reached.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Minister is in order and you will be also give time to discuss it if you wish to.  Proceed please.

MR KAVUMA:  I thank you Sir.  Mr Chairman, I was saying that we are called upon by the population we represent here to address and address effectively and imbalance or a problem that has caused to a very big portion of our population because of imbalances resulting from our culture, custom and the law and the time is now to address it.  (Hear, hear).

Sir, I want to refresh our memories with the provisions of article 33 (1) and then we shall go to (5).  Women shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the person with men. This is added support to the action I want to appeal to this House to take in order to emancipate effectively and totally the women who constitute more than 50 percent of our population.  Mr Chairman, the State shall provide the facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement.

MR  RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of clarification.  My understanding of the steps this House took last time was that when so many amendments were presented here, this august House under your direction decided to refer all those for coordination and further debate and conclusion by consensus or majority in the committee to which everybody was invited to appear.  Mr Chairman, the chairman of that committee has presented his report indicating substantial imput of the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs.  I get lost Mr Chairman and therefore, I am seeking clarification.  Have we now thrown out this report and are we reopening the entire bill for discussion from clause 1 up to whatever?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, we have not come to that but you are free to contribute.  I will also give you a chance.  (Interruptions). Let the Minister finish and then -(Interruptions)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, as I said, the purpose of my intervention with your permission is to try and avoid this House making a law that is really against the spirit of the constitution.  So, 32(2) says, the State shall provide the facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement.  Lastly Sir, sub-clause 5 says: “Without prejudice to article 32 of this constitution, women shall have the right to affirmative action for the purposes of redressing the imbalances created by history, tradition or custom.”  Lastly Sir, on this constitutional position, this Parliament we are trying to put in place is created under article 78 of the constitution. Mr Chairman, in article 78, we give the categories of Members of Parliament who will sit in this House and the first is Members directly - (Interruptions).  

I thank you very much for the opportunity Sir and I will finish very quickly.  

I will draw the attention of hon. Members in all earnestly to the provisions of 78 which provide for the composition of Parliament and women elected as district representatives are one of those.  Then in 78(3), the Constitution specifically says, the representatives of single member constituencies - those are the ones in (a)- shall be elected on the basis on universal adult suffrage and by secret ballot.  Now Sir, in four - and this is important because you must see the necessary implications of the constitution.  Parliament shall by law prescribe the procedure for election of representatives referred to -(Interruptions)  

Sir, the point I am making here is that we are being guided by the constitution that for Members of single member constituencies, direct universal adult suffrage but for these others, we are called upon as the legislature of this nation taking into account all the circumstances obtaining in our society under the constitution to prescribe an electoral college suitable for electing any of these other Members and I am glad to say Sir, that for all the other groups in this special groups, the committee agreed on electoral colleges.  

So Sir, must we appear to be legislating by discrimination when we say we recognise you are an endangered group?  All the others we have accepted will go by Electoral College, but for you universal.  We shall be doing a disservice to our country.  So Sir, because of the shortage of time, I want to place it on record Sir, that we would be moving constitutionally if we did legislate for a better way of our women coming to Parliament.  I want also to say Sir, that there is no worry whatsoever that the college we have prescribed is going to be manipulated.  It is so broad, it cannot be corrupted. (Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. Minister, it is time please.

MR KAVUMA:  The College we are talking about is an effective college in law and in fact.  I thank you Sir.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, at the time the Minister was trying to reply to the report, I had wanted to give him information that one, we have already agreed on the affirmative action as laid down in the constitution and as far as the women are concerned. The only thing that Parliament is deliberating on is the method of effecting this.  (Applause)  

Since we gave the mandate to the committee, the method which has been suggested is adult suffrage. Secondly, as far as the other marginalised groups are concerned, they are not going through the LCs, they are not going to be elected in the same way.  We have not left the election of women to women councils alone just as we have done to the youth councils and disabled councils.  So there is a difference.  This is what I wanted to highlight to him.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question on the report from the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Stop heating up Members.  Those who are for the report, go this side, those who are against this side.  Hon. Members, order.  Give  chance to those who are going to count you to count properly.  So let all of us keep quiet and wait for the outcome.  Simple.  Now the results are as follows:
Those for are 56 and those against 82.  So the report has not been adopted and I therefore adjourn the Council to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. and then we start afresh.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 3.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 February 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)



 

  



















