Thursday, 25th February, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Council was called to order). 


BILLS
SECOND READING

The Constituent Assembly Bill, 1992

(Debate continued).

MR. KAHERU:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I want to thank you for allowing me to make my contribution on this important Bill.  In principle, I am in support of the Bill.  Some of us were involved in the struggle that brought about the current NRM Government, and we had reasons for joining the struggle.  One of the most important reasons is giving back to the people their powers. (Applause)  After witnessing so many instances of people’s power being deprived, we decided to struggle and give back to the people what belongs to them.  There were some arguments here about supremacy; whether supremacy is in the NRC or in the Constitution.  But the ultimate supremacy is with people. (Applause)  If someone does not bow to the wishes of the people, he can claim his supremacy.  No one can say a document like a Constitution is supreme on its own.  A Constitution is a covenant; the people should agree on how they should be governed, and if you are going to change the basic covenant of how people should be governed, you must go back to the people.  It is not good saying we should deny the people their rights. In case of the establishment of a Constituent Assembly which will make a Constitution, then go back to the people to ask for their verdict in case you have to make ordinary laws; ordinary laws should be made based on fundamental law.  So, it does not make sense to say that you will deny the people the influence to determine what will go in the basic law.  But go to the people and ask them to elect people; to elect a new Government or a new NRC based on the law, and made without the agreement.  So, it is very important that the Constitution that comes out of all these processes should have three or four elements as follows:
    i) Popularity; it is determined by the people.
    ii) Durability; it must be a type of Constitution whose quality and consideration is beyond rebuke and would be respected by the population not just the current population, but even by posterity.
    ii) Acceptability; one could argue whether the majority would like this method of Constitution making or the minority and so on.  
In my belief, once a significant number of Ugandans have cast doubt on a certain method of making a Constitution, that method should be abandoned.  And since the Constitutional Commission sounded the views of the people, they had arguments, they had memorandum and the majority as we can see in the figures, the overwhelming 	majority preferred the making of the Constitution going to the Constituent Assembly, I would like to persuade some of my colleagues who were pushing the other 	line to give it out.

Secondly, because the Constitution making will involve us, it is not fair; in fact, it would appear high-handed for us to really decide on this when actually there has been a suggesting to the contrary.  Now, Mr. Chairman, this Constitution will be a very important document.  It will be different from Constitutions that have been there before.  It has been involving the people at every stage, and this gives this forth coming Constitution a lot of strength.  Now, it is a pity that many Members of the NRC have ignored the Constitution making process because I spoke to one Commissioner who was telling me that you are complaining they had very, very little representation from NRC.  And I do not think it is very proper for us to join in at a later stage and claim monopoly.  Now, Mr. Chairman, from - as you may realise, many of us Historical Members of NRC, would have wanted to take part in this, just as the other Members of NRC.  But after very serious discussion, we clearly decided to recommend the Constitution making to a directly elected Constituent Assembly.  In fact on this, I must express my disappointment by the National Political Commissar who is a secretary of NEC never presented to this House the recommendations of NEC.  That should have been the first thing to be done because NEC is a Committee of this House.  It deliberated on this matter. (Applause)  But its recommendations were not presented; I do not know when they will be presented.

Now, Mr. Chairman, I would like to therefore conclude that the Constituent Assembly must comply overwhelmingly directly elected members.  But I would like to make a few exceptions, and these must be very few.  I would like to make the exception of women, as many of my Colleagues have said, our society is conservative.  And we know the attitude of our society particularly towards women and youth.  And we are trying to persuade them to sensitise them on the gender issue.  I therefore think, Mr. Chairman, that it is light and befitting for the women in Uganda to be given special representation in addition to their direct representation.  If we do not make special representation, the voice of the women will be weak.  And here, I must say the women themselves are their own worst enemies in inverted commas, because if you look at the votes coming from the countryside, you may find that more men vote for women than the women.  However, I would like to recommend one-woman delegate elected by a male dominated district council.  I would like to recommend that a conference could be organised at the district headquarters comprising all RC secretaries for Women Affairs, and then in other words, other women in the districts who have been elected in various parts, could meet and select the women representative.  This can be modified accordingly.  The second group is the army.  As many of my Colleagues have said, there is a special need for the army to be represented.  As you know our historical upheavals and it is these young men who usually give their own lives to clean up the mess that we create we politicians.  And I believe that they should be represented, but even there, it should not be the top brass that should decide, it should not just be the Army Council.  The nominations should really start from units.  Now, the other group I would like to comment on, Mr. Chairman, from what I had said before, really there is no need of NRC representatives.  We should all go and test ourselves with the people -(Applause)- those who want.  But remember there will still be a very important job because we are so much behind in our legislation; some of us should remain in the NRC to make the ordinary laws.  For the youth, I would like to support the recommendation of two representatives.  Now, on political parties, I support the allocation given in the Bill.  So is the case of trade unions, I would like to support the two delegates indicated.  Now, I would like to suggest to my Colleagues that we should not add on more interest groups.  We should stop there, but other groups can join in the election, even the religious leaders.  There is no reason why religious leaders cannot present themselves for support to go to the Constituent Assembly because this is Constitution making, it is not the ordinary politicking.

I would like to make another proposal and that is the Constitutional Commission, has got a bank of knowledge and experience on Constitution making.  And I want to propose that two or three of their number particularly the Chairman and Secretary should be special delegates but without a vote.  They should be available, ready to advise; to speak but without a vote.  Now, when it comes to Government officials, I would like to say that the people generally fear being dominated by Special Forces, whether they are political parties, or now the Government or some other organisation.  And I would like to discourage giving the President powers to nominate because this will be misunderstood as has already been the case.  But the President could nominate five (5) to be in attendance if for example, he nominates the Minister of Constitutional Affairs or the Attorney General because of their special knowledge, they could always speak, but without a vote.  Now, when it comes to the Chairmanship, I would like to say that a Chairman of an Assembly like this must be a servant of the Assembly.  |He cannot be a servant of the Assembly if he has been chosen by an authority outside the Assembly. (Applause)  And, therefore, it is not proper.  In any case, he would be very difficult to control or if the Assembly loose the confidence f that Chairman, it will become difficult and it will make the President vulnerable.  Because if the person he has chosen happens to be a bad chairman, this would tend - people will give the excuse that because he was chosen by the President.  I wanted to suggest that the President could always nominate names particularly from the Judges of the Supreme Court or High Court, and the Assembly chose from the names, in view of the fact that some people say that the new Assembly may not know the performance of some of the judges.  On the question of language, I think I would like to agree with my Colleagues who say that English should be the language so that there is no problem of misinterpretation.  Now, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to advise the Minister that publicity and availability of documents, is very important in Constitution making.  And I would like - not only should the documents be available to the Assembly delegates, but they should be available even if in simplified forms to the people in the countryside at least, some RCs should have some copies of this Constitution.  Otherwise, they will not know what job they are electing the delegates for.  there are two small points which I am ending with.  When the Constituent Assembly is formed, the Commissioner is going to be very, very powerful.  And it appears the Draft is giving him independence.  But as you know, We have also known of people who have been appointed to jobs and they have not measured up.  and if they cannot be more, if they cannot be directed, we would have a problem and yet transparency here is very important.  So, I would like to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that since a secretariat for Assembly like this is very important, the question of independence should not necessarily be there, but either the President or somebody else could on advice of a committee of NRC or some other people, be able to remove him in case of gross mismanagement, because he has a lot of powers.  Now, I would also like to ask the Minister to present to us when he is speaking either half way or at the end of the debate, what administrative structure he proposes to put in place, and financial arrangements which will avoid the treasury -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up, try to wind up please.

MR. KAHERU:  Yes.  My last point, Mr. Chairman, in the rules which we have been proposing, I would like to suggest that the presiding officer should before polling day and after reasonable intervals, explain to the voters the procedure of voting because there is no provision in those regulations, the provision which was made in case of RCs where before the meeting starts the procedure being read and explained to the meeting.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. KAIJA (Kibanda County, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to talk about this important Bill.  In fact, when I went home, I contacted a number of people in my constituency.  And the last one I contacted was RC.IV Council.  They gave me a lot of support and in fact, they considered that the Bill as planned, is very good because it responds to the peoples call, which is fine.  But, they had some reservations, the reservations are that, they were trying to ask me as NRC Member in that area, that does the Bill cater for you?  That was the question.  I said, no, it sends me back to you.  then they said, is there any need, are we supposed to recall you or it is a Bill recalling you?  So, we were in the dilemma, however, I urged them because I did not want to tell them a different story, I urged them that we are trying to bring democracy back to you and see what you can do for a good person who can represent you, other than the NRC Member if you feel like it.  Now, there was one point.  They said, is the figure 180, those who were to be elected limited or we could add on a lot more?  then they suggested that what if NRC Members could hang on and we go in the field, we do not have to compete with other people you give us a free field, and we shall exercise our democracy in electing new people to join you for this Constituent Assembly discussions.  I said, well, it is fine, I will take the message and this is the message. (Laughter)  They went on to point out that since all along NRM has been playing politics of conclusion, why not now?  Because it appears NRC Members are being excluded deliberately.  So, they also thought that if I went, because they had not recalled me, it would cause a lot of mixed things because they would even have a second thought that since he is an NRC Member, he still has one year and a half to go.  Why cannot we give a new one?  So that was their second thought.  They said you could easily loose technically just because you will happen still to hold that office of the NRC as a Member here.  So, from that point, they said, what if the interim period expires or comes to the end and then we dissolve Parliament, we go in for fresh elections, you come back as a mere mister for that matter and join us in the race.  Then we shall give you or we shall give another person to go back.  I said, well, that message shall also be conveyed.  And I think I am doing it. (Laughter)

Now, it is up to the Government now, which Government we belong as a political organ, which is said to be supreme and an hon. Member was saying the Supremacy lies here, but at the sametime people control the supremacy.  Fine, but they are suggesting if they could get a free field, they elect their member to join us, what is wrong with that?  180 plus 42 and the rest of it, is still a small number to negotiate on behalf of the country in this Constitution making process that we are undergoing.  
Therefore, they even went on to suggest that a figure coming nearer between 400 and 500, will be very ideal to discuss ably this Constitution.  So, here they went to suggest further that women should be given a priority because they are the mothers of tribes in Uganda.  You educate a woman, you are sensitising the population politically.  And I think that was proper, they went on and suggest that women should be represented at every district, that is one representative per district.  With the youth, they said the figure could remain like that, but if it were possible and the expansion could be acceptable to this House of coming nearly to 500 people, that is including the NRC Member, they would expand on the representation of the youth to around 8 people.

AN HON. MEMBER:  What about the deposit?

MR. KAHERU:  About the deposit, they said, they had two ideas, either to pay 50,000/= if it were possible, but the majority said, why should they only pay Shs. 50,000/=?  When Government will be moving, engaging vehicles, putting in fuel, 100,000/= should be proper.  Because we do not want a representative who will fail to reach Kampala because he has no money to ferry him up to Kampala.  they want people who are reasonably should also financially.  They said, they are all aware at times payments are delayed, two months, three months, now, if they are not financially strong, surely such a Member will be very disastrous to the Constituency.  Presidents’ choice, they said, since he is the father of the nation now, he forging ahead unity and for sure even the Britons when they were giving us independence, they had representatives for Her Majesty the Queens Government.  Because they say with such example, when we were getting independence, the Africans, they call them the British Subjects, were handed over to the Government of Uganda.  Which means, there were some people who were campaigning who were urging and influencing the discussion.  So here their wishes were not actually to promote NRM as such, they were only supporting the idea of a fundamental change.  Which change has bring about unity or which should be embody the whole Uganda.  Now, they accepted 15 people to be the Presidents nomination reduction.  After all, if it is acceptable, and the number rises to 500 people, surely 15 cannot dilute that kind of Assembly.

And Constituencies we all agreed that county, it should be geographical point.  Each county must be the constituency as it is, and 80,000 should be the number as a basic number.  for kingdoms, it was very interesting here.  In Bunyoro, we had the greater Kitara which was I think, I do not have to tell you the history.  But to my surprise, they said well, the Assembly will solve it, they reserved, but they said, if it affects Buganda, it should affect Bunyoro -(Applause and Laughter).  So, we were surprised.  Excuse me, I want to wind up now, I am winding up, Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I am saying that if it is a local problem and it is considered fitting for Buganda, then it should also be good for Banyoro.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

MRS. NTABGOBA. J. (Women Representative, Kisoro):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Allow me to bring a message from people of Bufumbira and Kisoro District as a whole.  We consulted our people and we explained the Bill to them.  At first, it was not received and accepted quickly because of their being a baby district which is still having their own problems to settle, actually they said, why are you rushing us?  But then after a lot of consultation, the people of Kisoro District supported the Bill with some suggestions.  Some of the problems that came as we started explaining were as follows:  they said now, look at her, we have sent you - you have been there less than a year, now you tell us to vote for you again?  That confused them actually.  Then they said, you were still working on our promises.  We have no bus yet, and the roads are not yet smooth, no water, no electricity.  We are trying to start our projects, now you want to destabilise us again, going through voting.  All these were genuine, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members but as a representative of the people and then someone working for the Government, I had to work hard.  I told them, look, we are working on majority decision.  It has been decided by the majority of the people that we need a Constituent Assembly to discuss a Constitution that will lead us to democracy.  That was further attacked.  They said, now, what is democracy?  Each of them had his own way of explaining democracy.  Some said, look, in the past, we thought that we were working on democracy but some people were derailing - what you think is democracy is not what I think is democracy.  But then we concluded by saying that the democracy we want to see is the one which will cater for both people.  You should not claim you are practising democracy when you are violating my democracy.  It should be seen that when you practice democracy as your right, it should not interfere with my rights.  So, that is one message they sent to you hon. Members, that as you plan this Constitution, you have to first educate everybody to understand the type of democracy we want for Uganda.  We have to guide them as people we lead to be ready to accept changes.  Changes which will embody everybody’s interest other than tearing them apart.  We went on until these people of Kisoro District said, look here, all along we had no King, we respected out ‘Umutware’.  ‘Umutware’ was the head who was heading the Saza at that time, we gave him our due respect and we were very happy.  After independence, we respected our President.  In between, we respected our District Administrator, who was the D.C and was stationed in Kabale.  We were very happy.  Now, we have our President who has even steered is to having a District.  What is the Constituent Assembly Bill, giving him only 15 votes?  Then, it was our duty to show them why.  Eventually, they said, well for them they had wanted, in fact that everybody in the House, should remain there and you propose and discuss this Bill?  Why should it come back again after all, he has been looking after this country, giving us peace?  Then we said, no, we do not want to make a Constitution which is not popular giving it the name of ‘Museveni Bill’; that was very well accepted and then they said, we do not have any objection, let him choose the 15 people after all he is the only leader who is heading us now.  They do not see anything wrong in the President choosing the 15 people proposed by the Constitutional.  Then they said also, what wrong has he done?  Why can he not choose a Chairman or even the Vice?  Do you mean to say that we respect him because we are still a baby District and the rest are satisfied with his work, they are throwing it away?  Some of them brought the story of the Arab and his camel and the tent.  They said, now are we tired of him - now, we are pushing him out.  We said no, we want the Bill that will be accepted by everybody without naming it, personalising it to anybody.  Mr. Chairman, the discussions started as a general meeting for everybody who wanted to attend, then I went around personally in sub-counties and getting these views.  All of them preferred to be left alone to concentrate on their developmental activities for a while they said now, you are bringing again these ballot voting, for people to be running around buying votes.  Why not leave the system which was there?  The system of lining, you count and the results  come there and there.  So that point, I said, I would bring back and whatever will come out as a general decision will be sent back to them.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Members, on the other side of the youth, my people said, this government has been done a lot of havoc to the youths of this country and therefore, they welcomed the idea of including the youths in participation of the debate of the Constitution and in Assembly, they proposed that each District should send a youth where possible.  On the side of women, it was the same.  In fact, they sent a message to the hon. Members who are men by saying this; they said we are all trying to forget the past.  Now, let us face the future with men encouraging as many women to participate in the building of the nation.  When they suggested the number at that time it was to be 38.  Now, I think, it is running to 40 with new Districts.  They said women should come to represent a district.  From each district, one woman should come.  At the sametime, men should encourage as many women to participate in counties also - county votings, because some men were going around saying that there will be only one woman representative and that some people understood that it was only that they were barred to stand.  So hon. Members this is a message to you from the people of Kisoro District to encourage as many women as possible to come to this House to debate the Assembly Bill.  On the Bill, I have this to say, 70,000 people should form a Constituency for voting.  This will bring Kisoro District bringing up 3 people including women, that if 4 and that was so because of the geographical convenience where you have to climb a steep hill, then a steep mountain and down by the end of the day, you have seen very few people.  So this was a request to the local government as they plan this issue to put that into consideration for the areas that are difficult to reach to increase the number of their representatives and on the Members going back for voting, to be voted in - we came up by supporting the idea.  Although I am less than a year in the House, I am ready to go back but hon. Members let me leave you with a small story that has made us laugh.  Recently -(Interjection)  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up Madam, do not go into stories.

MRS. NTABGOBA:  These Members waiting for you have flexed their muscles.  They are ready to challenge you.  So, go ready to face that.  Now that my five minutes are over, I reserve my story for the next time.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. NABUURI l.W. (Chwekwi County, Moroto):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for giving the opportunity to make my humble contribution on the Bill before the House.  To begin with, I want to state clearly that I am in support of the Bill now before the House.  Before I go into details to discuss the contents of the Bill, I would like to make one or two remarks.  The first one concerns the NEC Committee of this House.  In fact, there have been statements alluded to NEC which have put this House in a most embarrassing position.  Before we started debating this Bill, there was a statement to the effect that NEC had discussed the Bill and had given the blessing for a new Assembly to be elected by the people of Uganda to discuss the Constitution.  Now, NEC being a Committee of this House, should have come here first and informed us that this is what we have discussed and we have recommended to you people - this should have been done first before going to the press or before public statements are made. (Applause)  Second point, Mr. Chairman,

MR. RUTARO:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that since NEC was elected or the Member of NEC were elected by this House, they have only given us two bulletins and since that time, they have been quiet.

MR. NABUURI:  Second point, Mr. Chairman, which I would like to raise now concerns the Leader of Government Business.  We feel very strongly as Members of this House that the Business of this House is being minimised by the Leader of Government Business.  It is only when they see the going becoming tough that they show up in this House. (Applause)  I would like to state clearly that the heated debate that we had at the beginning of the debate on the Bill was saved because the Leader of Government Business happened to be around but now that they think that the worst is over, they have decided to absent themselves.  So, we would like when the House is meeting, the Leader of Government Business or his representative to be around so that he can answer questions from the hon. Members.  I say this because the Executive Arm of Government nearly misunderstood Members when hon. Sebaana Kizito moved a Motion suspending debate on the Bill, but the Members were very, very clear on what they were supposed to do because most of what is contained in this Bill relates to what is in the Report, the draft report of the Constitutional Commission.  

So, we had every right to demand for the report first before we discuss the contents of the Bill.  Anyway, now that we have the report, you can see the direction the debate is going.  

Coming to the Constituent Assembly Bill, like many of my Colleagues, I have also consulted heavily in my area.  I have also consulted other Ugandans in their country.  In fact, the majority of the people I have consulted are for the new Constituent Assembly to discuss the Draft Constitution.  The people of Uganda know that this Bill is the deciding factor as to where Uganda is going next.  When we last discussed in this House, in the closed Session, the Motion on the suspension of activities of the political parties, I did not know until I went outside the Chamber that there was a lot of interest from Ugandans on what was going on in the closed Session, although there were some leakages but every Ugandan has his or her ears on the ground.  Even with this Bill the majority of Ugandans have their ears on the ground listening to what is happening.  

I am sure the majority of Ugandans are listening with keen interest what is going on here, but my appeal is that we should not be misunderstood with whatever positions will come up here in this House because the press during the first day of the debate came out the following day with all sorts f headlines on their newspaper.  Others said an attempt to thrash out the Bill had been foiled.  Many others wrote what suited their interest.  So, the press is free to write what they want to write. 

I now specifically want to go to the Bill.  I would like, us to look at page 8.  I think, I do not know whether it is me who has not understood it properly or it is the English I do not know, because it says here, ‘the function of the Assembly shall be to scrutinise, debate and prepare a final draft of the Constitution Text prepared and submitted to the Ministry by the Uganda Constitutional commission under the provisions of sub-section VI of Section 6 of the Uganda Constitutional Commission Statute, 1988’.  So, I do not know whether the Assembly, if elected - (Constitutional Assembly) has again to prepare the Constitution for somebody else to enact it.  So, I would like to propose that this idea of saying ‘to scrutinise, debate and prepare’, I think prepare should go, so that the Assembly can scrutinise and debate the final draft of the Constitutional Text prepared and submitted to the Minister by the Uganda Constitutional Commission under the provisions of sub-section VI, so that finally the Constituent Assembly should be the one to promulgate the Constitution.  So, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to nine -(Interruption)

MR. ABU W.D.:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Member, Mr. Chairman, through you that if he reads on in section B - it says, ‘to enact and promulgate a new Constitution for the Republic of Uganda’ so it continues in B, Mr. Chairman, that is the information I want to give him.

MR. NABUURI:  Now, Mr. Chairman, on the position of the Chairman.  Personally, I have no quarrel, so are my people in the President appointing a Chairman on the advice of the Cabinet.  I have no quarrel.  I would have a problem if the Constituent Assembly is the one to elect its Chairman.  Given the type of person whom we are trying to look for to chair this important assembly because it does not only say it is the President - it is the President on the advice of the Cabinet and the kind of person we are looking for, he should not be somebody who has allegiance to a political party.  So, the cabinet composed of people of all parties, we know and there is no secret about this that in our present cabinet we have CP Members, we have DP Members, we have UPM, we have UPC, so these wise men sitting together would definitely have to pick someone who can be neutral and recommend his name to the President because if you want to pick on UPC, then DP will be there to oppose, CP will be there to oppose, UPM will be there to oppose, and also pro-NRMs will be there, so they will definitely make sure that there is somebody independent of all shades of political opinion in Uganda to chair this Constituent Assembly.  

So, I strongly support the idea of the President appointing the Chairman on the recommendation of the Cabinet but the question of the deputy because it ways that the Constituent Assembly is the one to elect the Deputy Chairman but that - we shall also run into problems with the Deputy, because how will these men who have just been brought together know that Nabuuri is a neutral person?  I think if a Deputy Chairman has got to be elected by the Constituent Assembly this Constituent Assembly should be given time to know who is who during the debate.  If not, I think even the question of the Deputy Chairman should go to the President.  The people I consulted turning now to page 19, I would like to talk briefly about the names of specified bodies that will be represented here.  First of all, there will be the eight representatives.  We knew that in this country there are people who are fond of grabbing.  When the opportunity arises, they will grab and I will be the last one to support a Constituent Assembly where women representing others come from one region.  I would, therefore, like to propose, that the representation of the women should be on regional basis.  We know how many regions are in Uganda and we would like to ensure that at least every region of Uganda has a woman in the Constituent Assembly.  If that is not possible, then I would go for each district to have a woman representative in the Constituent Assembly. (Laughter)  The same with NRC representation.  We sit here, we come from all the districts of Uganda and from all regions.  Even here there are Colleagues of ours in this House who can easily grab the chance.  They can easily come from one region.  But at a later stage, we will appeal to the Minister that the NRC Representation, should be on regional basis.

Finally, on political parties, I would like the issue of political parties left aside.  Already, we know that these political parties are campaigning.  Campaigning started a long time ago and these people are busy.  We are told the UPC group was in Gulu yesterday or the other day campaigning.  We are deceiving ourselves when we say here that the political parties are not going to participate.  They have already prepared themselves; they will know what they will call themselves if the whistle is finally blown.  

So, as I sit down, I would not like to commend the NRM Government especially the Secretariat for the good job done in creating political awareness amongst the people of Uganda.  But it is only a pity that this political awareness is not being spread throughout Uganda.  Other districts are poorer than others without resources.  One area where there is a lot of weakness in the seminar is Karamoja.  We would like the NRM Secretariat to try their best, even with the meagre resources, and go to places like Karamoja.  I would also like to warn the NRM Secretariat that during this interim period when we are almost reaching the end of interim period to avoid statements which are provocative.  Because, Mr. Chairman, as I sit down, I was not happy with a statement that was made by one of the officials of the NRM Secretariat - a Lecturer at the school of Political Education.  This man said, and it appeared in the papers, I would like, to quote what this man said at Makerere last Sunday.  This man is called Mr. Karusoke, a Senior Lecturer at the NRM Political School.  He said, and this was at the seminar attended by students and many other leading personalities. ‘NRM freedom fighters will continue to fight those who think they can come back to Uganda and monopolise State power.  Even if Jesus supports them, they will fight him -(Laughter).  This is very serious statement, Mr. Chairman.  Uganda is a religious country and statements like this can fuel a bad situation and up to now this man has not come out to even to refute what appeared in the press.  But if somebody can say he can fight Jesus the son of God, then this definitely undermines the principles of the Movement.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr. Chairman, this is a double Biblical statement which is blasphemous and it is to be condemned at a very serious form and if what he is hoping is what is prevailing at the Political School, then I think we are touring a line which is not 90 per cent Christian country.

MR. NABUURI:  Mr. Chairman, I thank hon. Atwai for the information.  Mr. Chairman, I now declare my support for the Bill.  Let us go for the Constituent Assembly and get people elected from every county as it is contained in the Constituent Assembly Bill.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MISS WEKIYA F. (Women Representative, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for giving me this chance to contribute to this Bill.  When the Minister for Constitutional Affairs at the introduction of this Bill said that we had not been democratically elected, I described that like Brutus described his friend Cassius as a warm friend cooling.  But when I went back home, I felt over it and I knew what he meant.  So, I turned it to be a cool friend warming.  The reason is very simple.  I was trying to analyse what democracy is and I tool it to be being accountable to your people and how can one be accountable to the people who elected her here?  Because all of us were elected, it is true.  There were some lines.  We said I am a daughter of so and so and some of us had a popular heritage.  There are so many reasons why we came here.  But none of us came here on pure principles.  We have no principles in which we can go and account our people and even if today the Recall Bill came here and we passed it, I could still go back and challenge my electorate and say now that principle did I tell you I was going to represent you in Parliament?  Do you expect me to go and pull electricity and bring it here?  I do not have money for that. Do you expect me to go and bring boreholes all over the place?  How much money do I get?  And they would keep up and the situation would continue.  

So, if the principle was if I said alright, I am going there to protect the principle of conservatism and then I came here and I saw conservatism going down the drain, then my people would be able to call me back and say Florence, look here, we sent you there to go and look after conservatism, but what is happening today?  Then there I would be accountable to those people and I would have something to say.  But for as long as none of us can be able to account to his people what we are supposed to do, what principles we represent here, we are wasting time here.  For that matter, I stand to support the Bill and request that, like anybody else in the world can articulate his principles before he can go for election.  Even students at Makerere are now shouting, campaigning, each one with a placard, a photograph shown with a principle underneath it.  So let those people who would like to go to the Constituent Assembly be able to tell the Constituents what their principles are so that they can let them to go well knowing that they are going to represent a certain principle.  But should they fail, then they will be accountable for their not having fulfilled what they told the people they were going to do.

MR. LATIGO OLAL:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Wekiya from Jinja that from the onset the people of Kyoga know what a Representative in Parliament is and what he does.  Upon those principles, they sent me here.  We have a principle, we have policies and I follow them.  So if she says we have no principles here, the people of Kyoga do not agree.  Thank you very much.

MISS WEKIYA:  I thank the hon. Member.  The hon. Member had the chance of telling his people what his principles are, but most of us were not allowed to articulate those principles during that time.  So maybe, he rigged the elections before he came here. (Laughter)

MR. LATIGO OLAL:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Florence to impute that since I started elections in 1970 and I lost election in 1980, I was also running for elections in 1985, do the people of Kyoga not know who I am so that I was able to rig election?      

THE CHAIRMAN:  She is quite in order.

MISS WEKIYA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Since I had not looked at his CV, I can be excused for that.  I was looking at what we mean by being ordinarily resident in a place.  This thing has caused a lot of controversy in some places.  You find someone living in a certain place and on the very morning of elections, he travels to another place to go be elected and because she is a friend of the DA or the Returning Officer, that person will be left to continue.  Then another person who has done in the same area being disqualified for not being ordinary resident in that place.  So I wish this thing ‘ordinary resident’ could be defined even more.  Because as it sounds today, nobody really knows what it means.  Does it mean being born in a certain place?  Does it mean being married in a certain place or working in a certain place or living there?  We do not know.  So it needs to be clarified.  

MR. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I have already informed this House that Government reconsidered this position and said that for the purposes of this election, residents will not be considered, because it is not like the ordinary Parliamentary elections where somebody requires living there.  We welcome all Ugandans to take part.  So it will save time not to debate it. (Applause)  The important point will be citizenship. Therefore, an amendment will come in due course.

MISS WEKIYA:  I thank the hon. Minister for that clarification and I hope this amendment will be told to everybody so that people into the Constituent Assembly then they know that they do not have any problems.  Mr. Chairman, as we go to these elections, I would like to request that the DAs and their mobilisers be kept out of being Returning Officers. (Applause)  They should be out of this thing completely because they have shown a big element of favouritism.  If it is to be fair, let nobody be favoured under whatever circumstances.  Mr. Chairman, a lot has been said about women and I have been looking at these people who have been talking about women.  To begin with, is there anyone who can define a woman or what a woman is or what a man is before we start talking of giving women special seats or whatever it may be? (Interjection)- A woman just becomes a woman in relationship to other individuals around here.  You become a woman in relationship to your husband that is when you are his wife, in relationship to your father, that is when you are his daughter or to your son that is why you are a mother.  Otherwise in the absence of those relationships, you are as much as a human being as any other human being on earth. (Laughter) Therefore, we very much appreciate the affirmative action of Government to facially construct us and keep on putting us wherever we are supposed to be.  It is very good that community had already constructed us in such a way that we were disadvantaged and now we are being pulled out of what society has made us.  That is in fact why we can now stand here and define ourselves.  Because we have come out of where people had made us to be where we are now.  But the very advocators in this House of women being given a constituency are the very people looking at us with cold eyes, because they think we are going to their constituencies. Their warm face is cooling now.  Why do they not let us compete with them without looking at us very coldly? (Laughter)  If we are given a constituency, so far so good.  Because as it were, our culture is such that not many women will still be elected.  So let us have a constituency and let those others who have not been exposed here maybe take it.  But for those of us who are here, hon. Members should not be afraid of any Colleague here who is eyeing them coldly.  Hon. Members should just grab one constituency and make sure you come back here for the Constituent Assembly.  This is going to assist us, it is going to make our number bigger so that when we have a real issue to go through.  I remember for instance, the other day hon. Miria Matembe had a very big issue here of rape within marriage which was rejected by this House and yet during this age of AIDS, a man can leave his wife for six months, he goes away, she does not know where he is and then he comes back in the house and demands and because she is his wife, she has got to comply.  So, the two of them will die.  But as Mrs. Matembe was trying to argue it, she was booed down and it did not even go through.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that one of the reasons that our women Colleagues in this House to be as confident as she is, is because of that special arrangement and ticket that enabled them to come to this House and we cannot say that because the few who have been able to be lifted to this level she is confident, we should restrict ourselves to those few than allow many more people to have that chance and have that level. (Applause)  

MISS WEKIYA:  I think the hon. Member has misunderstood me.  What I said, I welcome the affirmative action for more women, but I am encouraging those who are here to go out and compete with men so that the number is bigger than it is today.  That was my argument.  

MRS. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine to be indecently dressed in this House? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is a new style of Kaunda suit.

MR. ADAM HARUNA:  Mr. Chairman, a few minutes ago the hon. Member on the Floor said that men leave their wives and go out and come back infecting their wives with AIDS.  I would like to know from her where does this man go and what type of woman? (Laughter)

MISS WEKIYA:  Mr. Chairman, I was not talking about the type of man of this calibre who comes to the NRC for three months without going home.  But I was talking about a man who leaves his wife and stays with another woman next door maybe in Katanga Valley and then after six months he want to come back home.

Mr. Chairman, just before I conclude, I just want to sound a word of caution to my fellow Ladies in the House.  This is a message from the academic arm of the women’s movement.  It says, ‘as we go to debate the Constitution, we should be very careful about issues that concern people’s value virtues.  This concern has come up more especially about the topic of sexuality.  So, many people have been saying we condemn the act of circumcision in Sebei.  We should reflect that value and virtue because, there are so many other issues concerning sexuality that may be condemned in the process.  For instance, there are others that are not articulated.  In Buganda there is another, in Busoga there is another.  So you just start condemning one culture without another, you are bound to land in problem’ (Laughter)  Mr. Chairman, with that, I beg to support the Bill.  

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Allow me to speak from here because I have a few notes to refer to, Mr. Chairman, and it is easier to speak with a fixed microphones than holding one in the hand.  Mr. Chairman, I must thank you for giving me this opportunity to participate in this very important debate.  Let me ask you that I have got about three responsibilities to perform here.  One is to speak for my county Otuke, another one is to speak for the Uganda Law Society for which I happen to be a member of the executive committee.  All these three institutions are very important and the resolutions they passed are very rich resolutions indeed and I do think that it will assist Members here to reach a very relevant decision during our debate.  In my opening remarks, let me - because I have been away for nearly two years from this House without speaking, I re-affirm my belief in Parliament and its importance.  This is a very important institution and if it was not important, some of us may have had second thoughts whether to be here or not.  The first challenge was in 1989 when this House extended its life and we are beginning now to open our eyes to think whether it was a proper decision or not.  Four of us, Mr. Chairman, myself, Nekyon, Okullu Ambrose and Ziritwawula did advise Government that we should go back and consult the people.  We passed that Resolution.  I did not resign like Ziritwawula because I believe that this is a very important House and even if we had extended our life, the evil to go out was greater than remaining here.  

Therefore, as we debate this important topic of the Constituent Assembly, this belief of mine in Parliamentary democracy is further re-affirmed and therefore I go into contribution with a belief that the future of this country lies in our hands and as well I take this opportunity to thank the NRM that although it came to power other than through the Constitution or democratic means, it allows a House like this to exist in Uganda.  I think it is very important. (Applause)  Mr. Chairman, opportunity to make a new Constitution is a very important exercise in the life of a country.  Let us remember that the 1962 Constitution was a hurried compromise to enable Uganda achieve Independence.  It was political expediency that left many issues hanging and unresolved.  The 1967 Constitution was born out of cumulative political issues that had been brewing between 1962 and 1967.  Uganda became a Republic at that time when the Constitution was made.  Some very people were in exile, including the then deposed Kabaka of Buganda and many people like Abu Mayanja, Nkangi and others.  Others were in prison.  So the greatest weakness of the 1967 Constitution lay in the manner of its birth and its making.  I endeavour to bring theses points to open our eyes in the manner in which we should make the 1993 Constitution, if we pass it this year.  The proposed 1993 Constitution will be born out of a bloody guerilla war launched in 1981, which brought NRM/MRA to power in 1986.  Like 1966/67, others are in exile and in prison and the strength of the proposed 1993 Constitution, therefore, will lie in freedom and democracy.  Let me quote.  Somebody said, ‘you have not converted me because you have silenced me’.  This is a very important quotation.  The critical stage of NRM is now from a fundamental change to a fundamental realism.  We have seen in the last seven years what NRM can do, what NRM cannot do, what one may call is theoretical in the Ten Point Programme, what might be really the priority issues to the people of Uganda and what judgement the people of Uganda can pass on NRM/NRA in the last seven years or so.  

So, we are moving from what I may call a fundamental change to a fundamental realism with our eyes opened through freedom and democracy.  Let us recognise and build our foundation and contribution made by others.  If we run away from this, that will make the proposed Constitution weaker.  But if we are realistic and we build on the foundation that has been laid by others, then we shall have a consensus on the permanency of the proposed constitution.  Learning is a continuous process.  At various stages in our history the people of Uganda have fought for their rights.  Let us take the case of Christianity.  Kabaka Mwanga and Kabaka Mutesa one may say that they had a negative role to play at that particular time.  But as we canonise our Saints and the Pope shakes hands with Ssebataka Mutebi, we may recognise that what historically may have looked a bloody history, today has built Christianity to the height which at that time nobody could believe.  

So, do we have to look critically at the role of our predecessors like Obote in terms of Independence and bring a Republican status that I think is going to be re-affirmed in the proposed Constitution?  Even Amin, the extent to which he abused human rights reversibly made us cautious of our rights and we fought for it and even if he messed the economy, even if he expelled and violated the rights of non-citizens and expelled Asians, he, to some extent, created a vacuum which has been felt today by Ugandan industrialists.  Most of them were mere ‘dobis’ and servants of Asians.  But today, I thin one could look at this negative role more positively.  So, we go on with the role of Hitler in the Second World War which was very tragic, but it brought the State of Israel to be born and the British Empire was so weakened that Britain was forced to surrender India, Britain and was forced to give us Independence.  Not withstanding, as I have said, that NRM came to power other than though direct election, NRM has enriched our life with its Ten Point Programme.  The making of a Constitution will be its climax if made democratically.  

On peace, NRM has had a great contribution.  But let me caution here that the real peace is based on love and goodwill, not on the gun and monopoly of the instrument of terror.  We have reached a stage in which we have to move from merely looking at peace brought about by the defeat of all other instruments of terror to a stage where we must preach love and goodwill and that will be the basis of permanent peace and stability.  As far as Otuke is concerned, peace is alluded us for the last ten years because of insecurity inside Karamoja and because of cattle rustling.  Ten districts and indeed a third of Uganda are affected.  NRM policy on the matter is totally inadequate.  We have been promised a Military operation, but this has not taken place.  As the retrenchment of soldiers was to take place, people of Otuke begin to wonder whether we shall have adequate soldiers to carry on this matter. (Laughter)

MR. NABUURI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my Colleague, hon. Omara Atubo now holding the Floor, that it is not true to say that Otuke people have no peace, that peace has alluded them because of the cattle rustling from Karamoja only.  Mr. Omara Atubo has not been sincere to this House.  The real problem of Otuke which we all know was insurgency, the rebels in the North and North Eastern.  In fact, the rebel activities that started in the North even made us the Karimojong to experience a lot of insecurity. (Laughter)  Because, cattle rustling was rampant in Karamoja.  The NRM Government moved with a big force to destroy cattle rustling.  As they were preparing to deal with cattle rustling problem, the rebel activities started in North and North Eastern Uganda of which Otuke is one of the counties of that region.

MR. MAYENGO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, hon. Omara Atubo, that when he said that the longevity and success of the Constitution we are expecting will depend on love, peace and goodwill and that because of that, a Military Operation is no longer necessary.  

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  My hon. Friend, a neighbour from Karamoja really is not in disagreement with me.  The peace of Karamoja is very important to all of us and I want to tell this House that unless there is peace inside Karamoja and districts that surround Karamoja, we will never develop and my county is next to the border of Karamoja, that Kotido, Moroto, Soroti and Kitgum.  It is a very strategically place county and very difficult one.  So, I would call upon my brother we join hands together to see that there is peace inside Karamoja for the benefit of the people of Uganda.  On this remark of peace, let me tell you that we want to salute the efforts of President Museveni in bringing peace to Sudan, to Rwanda and to Somalia and we believe that with all these efforts and experience that he has, we will not fail to bring peace to Karamoja and the rest of Uganda.  

MR. BUTELE:  Point of order.  In the view of the fact that Karamoja Region is now very, very peaceful to the extent that over 1,000 Karimojongs have come out with their illegally guns and they are now upholding the roads but on the way to the extent, we do not have road blocks, we do not have a convoy.  Is the Member in order to continue misleading this House to the extent that there is no peace in Karamoja while there exists; is he in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR. OBURA:  Point of information.  May I inform the speaker holding the Floor saying that there is peace in Karamoja that, last week in my County of Labwor three people were tortured and killed?  The Karimojong went on looting for three days consecutively and as I speak now, there is no total peace in Karamoja.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I thank my neighbour from Labwor, hon. Obura for that information.  We are not likely to have peace in Karamoja in Uganda as long as we are people like Anthony Butele.

Mr. Chairman, as I told you, let me very briefly read the resolutions of the Uganda Law Society.  This is a very important Resolution for which Uganda Lawyers would very much wish you to take into consideration.  The Executive Council of the Uganda Law Society at its extra-ordinary meeting on 13th February 1993 considered the Constituent Assembly Bill 1992 and put forward the following comments and recommendations:

i)  Necessity for a Constituent Assembly, the Council takes the stand that the Constituent Assembly, which independent, non-partisan are not dominated or over-influenced by the executive arm of Government or any other one particular grouping is necessary to consider the report of the Constitutional Commission and the proposals of a new Constitution submitted to Government by the said Commission 	arising from the views collected from Uganda and all over the country.  They said Constituent Assembly must also enact and promulgate the new Constitution. The Council that proposes that the institutions of the presidency cabinet 	which institutions and constitute in the main part, the executive arm of Government, should detach as much as possible from the Constitution and actual functioning of the Constituent Assembly.

ii)	The Council advocates and supports the position that the Constituent Assembly must be democratically and directly 	elected by all Ugandans of voting age and the Council opposes any proposal that the current National Resistance Council should turn itself into the Constituent Assembly on the following grounds -(Interjection)- I do not know whether to give the ground. That the democratic representation of 	the people of Uganda by the current National Resistance Council is seriously in issue with the people of Uganda themselves -(Interjection)- I told you not to extend your term you did, now you see the point.

iii)  It promotes democratic behaviour and culture necessary for the new spirit of Constitutionalism in Uganda.  For all Ugandans to mandate a constituent Assembly which they have democratically and directly elected to formulate a new Constitution for them.

iv) Two the Uganda Law Society agrees to the Constitution of the Constituent Assembly by directly elected delegates as laid 	down in the Bill and the Uganda Law Society does not support Section 4 to (c) of the Bill which empowers the President to appoint delegates to the Constituent Assembly on the following grounds:

    i) It is essential that the executive arm of Government does not influence the composition of the Constituent Assembly, and
    ii) There is already a Provision for special representation of deserving groups and it supports women. The Uganda Law Society supports special representation for women by eight delegates in view of the fact that the Uganda Law Society has generally operated against women and therefore, affirmative action in the Constituent Assembly.

The National Resistance Army, the Uganda Law Society is not opposed to their representation in view of the special role of the army in ensuring that it must not future tamper with the people’s Constitution and therefore, it must be represented to seal this covenant and also because of the special unique role of the NRA in the current Constitutional development.  National Resistance Council, there is absolutely no valid reason whatsoever why the NRC should have any special representation in the Constituent Assembly.

National Organisation of Trade Unions, the Uganda Law Society sees no special reason both historical, otherwise, for special representation of Trade Unions.  The Uganda Law Society calls up on Trade Unions to offer themselves to the people and be elected as delegates to the Constituent Assembly or to lobby when the Constituent is there.  The Uganda Law Society proposes that the special representation offered to Trade Unions be instead offered to the disabled who cannot undertake the election exercise and so on.

Political Parties, like the army, political parties too should be represented so that they too through this participation seal the covenant of never tampering with the people’s Constitution once enacted.

The Youth, Uganda Law Society support the special representation of the youth as they too like the women need affirmative action to enable them to participate in shaping the destiny of their future.  

Appointment and qualifications of the Chairman, Deputy Chairman f the Constituent Assembly, for reasons of impartiality and independence already stated.  The Uganda Law Society propose that Section 9(2) which empowers the President to appoint the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly on the advice of the Cabinet should be replaced with a Provision and that is very important, that the Chairman shall be a distinguished judge appointed by the Constituent Assembly from the judges of the courts of judicature -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, in these recommendations being read by my dear friend hon. Atubo, I want to inform him that I fail to reconcile the arguments of these learned people, when they think the President is impartial when he appoints the Chief Justice before all of whom they appear and who make them the judges but the Law Society believes, when it comes to this particular thing, the presidency does not have the sense of impartiality.  I fail to reconcile the argument. (Hear, hear!)  

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether -(Interruption)

MR. KATUREEBE:  Point of procedure, Mr. Chairman, like my friend hon. Omara Atubo, I am a member of the Law Society but as a Member of this House, I would like to see guidance from the Chair.  I am in a position of the copy of the document he is reading and it is a press release of the Law Society, it is procedurally correct that we should now start debating a press release which was issued by a body that is not officially represented here because are they in a position to answer questions which Members would wish to put on this press release?  I would like to be guided, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, it is not in order but he read it just for the people to get information.

MISS KADAGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am a member of the Law Society but I would like to make it clear that these are the views of executive of the Law Society.  We have never sat to discuss the Constituent Assembly Bill.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, in view of the information tended by one of the members of the Law Society, can some other member of the Law Society testify whether the Law Society Executive - one, was democratically elected and two; whether it is democratically leading the Law Society so that they can come here and give us advice on the formation of a Democratic Society.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I am about to finish and I thank all the - I was not going to the debate of these but let me say that my hon. Friend hon. Kadaga knows very well that this is the Executive Council of Uganda Law Society, not the annual delegates conference. Mr. Chairman, we were democratically elected in April last year and we hold office for one year, another election will be held in April and I am very surprised that as a lawyer herself Kadaga knows administrative and constitutional law, we take decisions on behalf of our members and if she was to disassociate herself, she is free to do so.

Mr. Chairman, let me conclude by saying that on the very important appointment of the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner, for reasons of impartiality and independence, which provides that Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners shall be appointed by the President on the respective advice of the Cabinet and Minister of Constitutional Affairs, should be appointed by the Provision that such appointment shall be by the National Resistance Council exclusively.  Mr. Chairman, all the other proposals are not as important as for the other provisions and therefore, the other important provision, is the election petitions.  Mr. Chairman, I think this is very important, the elections petitions for which most of you, you are going to run to lawyers, the Law Society proposals that - and election petition statute be passed and that in summary a special court be appointed so that it expeditiously hears all election petitions. We do not want these experiences of 1980 were some election petitions are still in the court course.  

Mr. Chairman, let me say that the views for Otuke and Lira District are very, very similar indeed to most of the democratic views already expressed in this House and therefore, let me just, without reasons why they arrive at this and that in just, without reasons why they arrive at this and that in just about a minute or two say that the people of Lira and Otuke accept the establishment of the Constituent Assembly.  In fact, the people of Otuke even wanted this House to be dissolved but we thought that - and taken over by the Constituent Assembly.  All delegates should be elected directly by the people, ordinary residents was rejected and the only qualification should be that of the register of voter -(Interruption)  

DR. OTENG:  Point of information.  I wish that the member should speak for Otuke but not for Lira District because he has not consulted the CMs of the other counties.  Thank you.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, we had our county meetings which was finished and the DA together with the Chairman RC.V, called the meeting for all the counties for RC.V NRCs.  Some NRC for reasons known to themselves did not attend that meeting.  We had a two days very exciting meeting in Lira and I want to enrich democratic Members who want to know what people decided.  Mr. Chairman, we decided that the Chairman should be elected by the delegates -(Interruption)   

MR. LATIGO OLAL:  Point of order.  In view of the fact that, Mr. chairman, the people of Kyoga do not want to be controversial in this House.  Should the hon. Omara Atubo continuing to tell a lie here that CMs were called when two CMs went with the DA called other lower cadres and left all the other CMs?  It is not in order. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is entitled to his opinion.  Continue please.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, the people of Kyoga fully attended that meeting -(Interjection and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, wind up hon. Omara Atubo.  Take your seat, it is time.

DR. KIYONGA C. (Bukonjo County, Kasese):  Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for affording me this opportunity to make my observations on the Bill under consideration.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to observe that the way we are conducting the Debate is in the right place.  In the sense that unlike other Bills, we are giving as much time as possible to the discussion of this historical Debate.  This is, Mr. Chairman, as it should be.  Yesterday there are some words which were used by hon. Colleagues that I would like to borrow but also later on add my own.  The hon. Lady from Tororo, the hon. Member representing Women of Tororo asked the question, what is on the ground?  And the Rt. hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister talked of a plain ground, I think in Johannesburg which some people to grade, it is plain which I understand is flat but some people want to grade it.  I will be using this ground, the level one and maybe other types.  But I would also like to introduce three other words, the question of added value.

The question of counter balancing and the question of viability.  Let me from that point proceed to quote, and the hon. Colleagues that the late Bishop Kivenjere, in 1972 he came to Kings College Buddo and talked to us among other things he said, this is the Bishop himself saying that my father was a witch doctor and he died as much.  I believe he will go to heaven because he was a witch doctor in search of God, but he happened to die before he received the message of Christ.  So, here was posterity judging a man.  A man who searches for truth and using the factors available to him, the only conclusion he could come to was to practice some form of witchcraft.  It is true today if we are to judge him, we say, he should have said I believe in Jesus Christ or Mohammed but these factors were not available to him.

I would like that posterity will say of this House in future that the NRC Sitting in 1993 given the factors that were available to them took the correct position.  Even if the position we take does not necessarily lead to the correct path but if we are judge that we looked at all option available, we shall be judged as having done a good job.  We are on a project as an NRC and we are not really an ordinary National Assembly.  The calling us of NRC was deliberate, we had had assemblies here National Assembly, people were called Members of Parliament, were called CMs, we are called Members of the National Resistance Council because, Mr. chairman, we are part of a process, we are trying to move from one point to another point.  We are trying to move from one point to another point and in this process there are huddles, there are cross roads that have got to be crossed and each time we reach a cross road we must look properly, otherwise, we shall be hit by a crossing car.  We must see whether we go straight or whether we turn left or right.  I am saying this because I have really been helped by Members’ arguments in the House.  Members have articulated technical arguments.  For example, on the legal aspect.  It is true, I was part of the process that sat here and we amended Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986, therefore technically, we should not be discussing something new because we decided that way and we should proceed with that from a technical point of view.  Other people have talked about finance implications that is a good technical argument but I think the argument here - because we are a part of a process is not purely technical, we have to put in other considerations.  As we go on from 89, it is 90, it is 91 are we learning new things which would add value to our project, do we need to add them to improve the process?  So, every argument I have listened to my questions, yes, this is a good argument.  Is it adding value to the process and what is this process?  We are involving a project to bring democracy, stability and development for all Ugandans in the long run.  This is really the project we are on and we should use every opportunity to add value to the process in order to arrive ultimately at that point.

So, my hon. Colleague from Tororo asked the question that what is on the ground?  I want to go back to this question.  She did by implication define, I think parts of the ground, perhaps for lack of time but I want to extend her argument on what is on the ground.  At the beginning hon. Omara Atubo did actually add to this definition on the ground and I will take what she said, for example, about the Government, the Regime of Amin.  We had Amin here he took powers through military means, he violated people’s rights, people were killed that is one ground that could exist and did exist in this country.  Ideally what we are looking for, as I said democracy, stability and development for all.  We want a situation where the people of Uganda will freely elect their Government, their representatives, freely and individually directly, that will the ideal situation.  Sitting in my village, they say we are voting, I also go.  I do not send Katureebe that Katureebe is going to vote for me, I go and vote, unless I am sick or I choose not to vote.  When the Government is bad and we want to choose again I also go, nobody should deny me that right in the eventuality of our process of the programme.  So that is the other extreme of the ground.  There are many ground and the ideal where we are going, where NRM is supposed to take us, so where are we now?  And again I will borrow hon. Atubo’s argument. We are in a situation where NRM is using arms through the NRA took power but very quickly NRM realised that this is not viable enough.  Can we add value to this process?  So a broad-based Government was formed of people who were in the bush and people who were not in the bush.  The attempt was to add value to add as many political opinions in this country as possible.  This added value.  In 1989, this House was expanded from the original historicals and we have been here since 89, this added value.  This has resulted into some amount of reconciliation in this country.  This has given us opportunity to carry out some amount of reconstruction.  This has enabled this country to have a situation where people have some amount of power because the people do not yet have full power, that is true, but they have some amount of power.  They put us here, if we go to elect they can decide to change us.  They have the RC, although the RC cannot go very far, but at the local level they are able to exercise some power.  This was again adding value to the whole process.  The war which was in the North and North East at first the position of NRM to use Presidency word was to use Military means to solve that problem but on the way it was realised that this was not viable by itself.  Therefore, accept to discuss with these rebels to give amnesty.  If we were to use only technical arguments that no but we are here, we are legally constituted, if anybody is fighting fight him.  I am not sure that would be here, the process would be different.  We added value and therefore, we are still here and continuing.  

So, I hope really this helps some to illustrate what I mean by adding value to a political process, use technical arguments but also look on the ground and my sister was saying, what is on the ground and therefore, what is the realistic decision to take at each stage?  Provided it is moving you forward to reaching that goal of democracy, stability and development for all.  But to add to what the ground is, it is that there are some arms of Government that form a state, at the moment some are much strong than others.  We have arms like the Law Enforcement Agencies, the Police and the Courts.  We have the Civil Service and the Executives, we have the Army, and all these are very strong elements of the Government.  Today, if you are to ask me of all these arms I have mentioned which is the most viable, I would tell you that the Army is the most viable as of now.  Why?  Because the Army if to choose two, it can hold power for sometime whether you like or not but the Civil Service or the courts at the moment, they are not in position to challenge that position.  At that final day where we are going, we want a situation where these arms of Government compliment and counter balance one another.  So, that it will become impossible or very difficult for anyone of them to choose on his own wills that now I will take power.  So what is on the ground, and given what is on the ground, what shall we do?  What we should do is to continue adding value.  If we have five, let us make sure that tomorrow it is seven.

Now given this Bill, what will add value to the process?  I said we are at cross roads.  I was elected by 450 people out of 500.  At first, I was really very excited, I thought I got 90 per cent but then when the results of census came, I found that in my Constituency there are 168,000 people and if I assume 40 of them should have voted, it means really, the people who voted for me are just seven per cent, not even seven per cent, point seven and suppose it was me who is now among the 99.3 who could not come and decide that this is our Member of Parliament.  What feeling do I have?  Because everyone who came to vote for me they were about 128 people behind he was supposed to be representing.  Did he consult all these people?  Because if the situation was that, now we are going, you people will be the electoral colleague but ahead of time before you come, Kiyonga is standing with so and so.  So, when you are being elected, you say, for me if I reach there, I will elect Kiyonga not Kafumbe Mukasa.  Then the people say, ‘wamma you are the one going, but the date was not there’.  So, we must accept that although we have done a good job here, we have added value, we could add more value to this process.  

Let us, therefore, go back to the people and get everybody involved.  Let everybody vote and say, yes, even if things go wrong, I also voted.  I am also part of the process but even more than that, perhaps equally important.  You have heard the arguments of lawyers.  You have seen the press, they are people who also can carry sustainable arguments, if you play in their hands.  If a man reasons that Kiyonga, he said he was elected by 90 per cent, it is not true, he was elected by .7 per cent.  You heard hon. Omara says, oh, me I told you, let us not extend ourselves, let us go back to the people, you refused.  So if that kind of argument is sustained, we are going to have a problem.  Some people will feel left out and say, we are not part of the process and at the end of the day, we have lost value and at every change we have to be bold.  We have to consider the over-all a part from the individual.  The argument is that hon. Njuba Gertrude was putting that as a historical who really made a very significant contribution like her fellow Colleagues who are historicals, should have loved that history would read that not only did she go to the bush but she came out of the bush and also made Constitution but alas! the process of adding value might reject here.  But she is happy with that if really that value will lead us to stability and ultimately to development for all.  I think in the same spirit, we Members of this House let us accept.  We are not wrong technically, we should be here, other people should come and join us but really after 89, I am convinced that there is value lost if we proceed without going back, I think we should go and add value.

Two last points, Mr. Chairman.  One is on the issue of the electoral, what is being called electoral colleges and I want to use this with the argument of financing.  People have been saying, it will be too much money, you have two or three elections.  That is true but I think you should also ask the space of time because we have commitment.  We have said that by 94 we shall have the General Elections.  Therefore, whatever we do must be such that fits in the programme, if we think it will not fit, we should say so now, tell the people ahead of time, otherwise, we are going to lose credibility.  So, I would like the executive to proceed in such a way that some of the steps that would be required right ahead should be taken now.  So, me I do not agree with the principle that the county must be preserved.  What I would propose is that we should now draw electoral constituencies, right now because the process is involved.  You have to make a register, if you make now for the county and then we cut the constituencies, then you are going to draw another register and issue new cards.  This losses time you spend money.  So, we should draw the real constituencies now and when we are going for the Constituent Assembly, those are the ones that should be used.  This will cut money, it will cut time and the register will be the same except if there is need before the General Elections then this can be revised.

The second point that is in line with my argument of adding value.  I do not accept that the President should elect the Chairman.  This removes value rather than art because also on the way as we move to that ideal goal, we should be testing.  Let us have a situation because people - there are two views here that if we elect Nasasira independently in the Assembly that he will be responsible, that he will be impartial.  But really the pudding, if you want to know the pudding taste, you taste it.  Let us see an Assembly there because the NRC will be here, the executive will be there; let us see how that Assembly performs.  the only for the Constitution and I hope that the press will cover them, the TV, everyday, the Radio, verbatim not this question of summarising that Ssemogerere said he supports full stop.  No, no, this, you would rather not cover really.  They should cover people full verbatim on the Radio, on the TV, let the people hear what is going on, and then they are in a better position to decide.  We must give information if we want to give democracy.  So, these people must choose the chairman but I support strongly that the President should nominate the fifteen people and the Army should be represented but these ones are different but they should be there to add value to the whole process.  So, with these few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity and I want to thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for giving us a bit of time to finish our points.

Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, in my own opinion, I think the moment of truth has come and this moment of truth has come for this unique House.  Why do I think that it is a unique House, Mr. Chairman?  This House has people who were here in 1962 at our Independence.  It also has people who were not born at that time.  The former have seen what has transpired hem and the latter, Mr. Chairman, has grown in what has been transpired until they came here.  So, I think to me it is a very rich House but, Mr. chairman, before as we debate this Bill, I think it is important that we recognise and accept the wishes of the people.  If we do not and take ours, I think we will not get far.  In my view, the opinion of the people as well NRC and the Army Council should debate the Constituent Assembly, forms the Constituent Assembly or whether should be a directly elected Constituent Assembly.  

Therefore, we should respect the views of the majority.  I would, therefore, assume that that is what our partners or would have been partners in the Constituent Assembly according to Section 14(b) of Legal Notice No.1 as amended.  Those partners - and that is the Army Council must have taken that into consideration and decided that if it is the majority view of the country, okay, we shall withdraw but for us we propose that we also elect only two representatives to sit on the Constituent Assembly.  Now if our partners have already move because were two partners in this business, the ball now is in our court and I think that is now I say the moment of truth has come.  what do we do?  But before I say what we do, I would want to salute the NRA or the Army Council for taking that decision.  This was a dogmatic approach, the politics of Uganda by our national army and this is unprecedented in our history here that the army recognises the politics of the country and the views of the people.  This is not the army we have known for sometime.  So, what is our role?  Let us not appear as if we fear elections because we fear election, we be democrat that fear democracy itself.  If we fear elections because that is how some people might read us that they want to remain here because they fear elections.  I would also want to appeal to Members that let us not be egotistic.  In the past some of our leaders have taken themselves to be actors on a stage and the rest of the population to be the audience to watch them.  I think we know the results.  This has proved dangerous indeed for this country.  So, let us not think that we have all the verses to act and the rest are just watching.  The people of Uganda have got interest in this country, so let us listen to them.

Thirdly, let us take an issue where in some cases when we got to a national political debate of this nature that raises up heat, you hear individuals visiting foreign embassies for consultations.  Why do they go to foreign embassies?  Why do they not go to the people?  As I talk now and as you might have read most foreign embassies in Kabul foreign embassies have left in Afghanistan.  You might go to consult them now if there is fire here, you might not see them.  they return to their peaceful countries.  So, I think we have been here for sometime.  Some year back we sat here and liberated on the extension of the NRM period and through con consensus - except one, in fact hon. Atubo has reminded me that they were four but I know only one who resigned.  We agreed that we extend the period and I think this culture of consensus that has developed a sign for Uganda so far.  When we sat here, we were trying to change something to extend the interim period. We have sat here many times.  We have amended acts.  So, what is special about Section 14(b) of Legal Notice No.1; is it beyond amendment?  Is it going to be the first time that we have amended things?  We amend things suit with the national aspirations of the time and we must consider the national aspirations of now.  

I also do not agree with the people who think that NRC will be marginalised.  What I feel is that for those who think they want to stand for the Constituent Assembly will go and stand and those who win, they will come they will perform their roles in the Assembly and they will perform their roles in NRC.  All that happens that those who want to stand and those who will pass will accept more responsibilities in this country, that is all and for four months to six, you have got more responsibilities than you have now.  What is wrong with having all responsibilities?  Therefore, I would want to thank the Government and I thank the NRA for having realised the people’s wishes and boldly brought in this Bill.  But I have a few fears -my Sister from Tororo mentioned fears.  My first fear, Mr. Chairman, is the history of this country, the history of its elite.  I think I belong to that group, but some elite of this country have let this country down.  They talk about democracy and when it comes elections they practice reading.  They talk about political parties and when they are mobilising their people, they talk about tribe, they talk about religion and they talk about money.  They talk about unity and they go back with the population and they practice cliquism.  This has been the problem.  We all know the results what has happened from doing what we do not talk, for those who are Christians I think there is a book in one of the Christians saying that, they have left the thing that they should have done and they have done those which they should not have done and there is no truth in them.  I think born again Christians like hon. Tiberondwa if he was here he would have agreed with me.  That is what has happened.

So, why I worried while the NRA with the intention - if they use hon. Kiyonga’s words of adding value has brought the Constitution process.  When it started, I remember when we were called at the International Conference Centre to discuss it, some people boycotted it.  They did not want to talk about it.  Immediately they saw that it was picking ground they were the ones in front, ahead of that Constitution.  

As we talk about the Constitution now, I am beginning to see certain people who have got short memories of the past.  In my own opinion, people will sort memories.  I have got short reasons.  If you look behind and you can see as far as hon. Mayengo, definitely you will not see further than hon. Njuba.  So, the people will short the memories of the past, I have got short visions of the future and these are very dangerous people in this country.  These are the ones that worry me.  These are the ones that have taken Uganda - if you imagine as a car - to look like a car of a drunkard, it is in the ditch tomorrow, it is in the garage in the following day, is panel beaten, it is back on the road.  It has smashed into a bus, it is back in the garage.  I think there is a limit more smashed of that car, a car might be written off.  Why I am talking of these people with short memories?  While we are busy talking about the Constitution process, these people think that the Constitution is just a document about a form of government and a form of Parliament.  they are busy of the ground politicking and yet they do not realise that the Constitution is a document covering environment, women, land, men, everything.  They are busy now doing the wrong thing.  So my question, they are going back to their old methods, they are going to parties, they are back to religion, they are back to money and yet some of them are the same people who are talking about even ground.  Now if you want even ground, if we are discussing the Constitution, please keep the ground even and we discuss the Constitution.  If we start politics, let us all go politicking because we might be diverted.  So, what do we do to these people?  What does Uganda do to these people?  This is my worry.  They are the people who want even ground but at the same time they are starting an even ground early and at the end of the day our people will be diverted.  What do we do to them?  Do we arrest them?  I do not think it will help.  Do we detain them?  There will be matters for nothing.  That is why I am of the view they should continue to a level, I think as a Government realised that the majority of people want an elected Assembly, maybe, the people might want a referendum ahead of this Constituent Assembly so that we solve this problem once and once for all. (Hear, hear!)  I think they are provoking the people to appeal again like they appealed they want the Constituent Assembly.  How far do we go on like this?  So, Mr. Chairman, I leave that to the Mover of the Bill but I think people who are supporting this referendum I am aware of costs and time and what not, but it might solve this problem so that we can get on to a more genuine Constitution rather than end there on different issues.

I do not think it has helped Africa to hurry on indicating other things.  We have perpetually been indicators our former colonialists and rest and we have never found ourselves a programme.  In my view, democracy is a culture.  You do not just grow a culture overnight.  If you do not have that culture here - because democracy varies in many countries in form, but in substance it is the same.  If we do not grow in our own culture here and we are rushing to what and what we will not get there.  When girls are growing up, they are taught how to sit with due respect.  The moment you sit, you are told to sit properly, the moment you get up, if you open a bit they warn you, so when you grow up, you would need to be a DA or NRC Member by the time so that when you are a lady when you are going to sit, you sit properly.  It is normal and if anybody sees a lady sitting improperly the whole crowd will be shocked.  Now. hon. Ssemogerere was talking about Amin yesterday, he said, the Constitution was amended to suit Obote who was a Prime Minister at that time but they did not know that it was going to be used by Amin but of course, if the political culture, the democratic culture was right Amin would never have had a chance to qualify to be the President of Uganda and that is the problem we have now and that is a problem we should try and solve first.  So, in my view rushing at certain things that you imagine are good when people have taken year to create them, you might be rushing in a vehicle for another ditch. 

Now, quickly on the Bill as we have discussed it, we have got in Kazo County, there are very few different views but I want to mention one or two things and I concluded my remarks.  One; the people of Kazo feel that disadvantaged groups should be represented.  The Constitution is not a general election for Parliament.  It is a document where the people of Uganda should all come and discuss it.  It concerns the politicians, and the non-politicians.  It concerns everybody.  Why do we want to assume that it is only those who know how to win elections are to be the competent ones to discuss it.  It is going to affect them too, so I think they are entitled to come and therefore, those groups who might not necessarily be very good at ‘budaalas’ to campaign should be represented in that Constitution.  So in summary, it support the Schedule, I think Schedule 2 with slight amendments.  One, the feeling of Kazo in is that political parties will be heavily represented in that Constituent Assembly because we are all of different political parties and there is no need for them to come.  But should somebody want to deny that no party participated, then let the executives of those political parties send their representatives for the sake of harmony and to make sure that nobody complains in future.  Let the executives of those political parties choose their members and send them to the Constituent Assembly -(Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER:  How many?

MR. NASASIRA:  Two, each as proposed in the Schedule.  For the ladies I do not see why we certainly change, in NRC we want from a district.  When we are going to the Constituent Assembly that will be expanding to about the same size of NRC, we want ladies to be eight.  We want a lady from each district and we are for this for many reasons because as you make the constitution, you are also going to be discussing culture.  There are different cultural interests in this country and these must be catered for. We are also aware that ladies find difficult in election, as for the NRA we support the ten -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up please.

MR. NASASIRA:  I am winding up, Mr. Chairman.  As for the Presidential Nominees we support them.  But for the Chairman, we are in support much as hon. Kiyonga was trying to campaign for me for that post, we have a different view.  The President should select this Chairman and then the Cabinet will advise him but the Chairman should be voted by the NRC appointments committee which has been doing that work for Ministers, for everybody that the President has appointed -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up, please.

MR. NASASIRA:  As for the Vice-Chairman, Mr. Chairman, he should be elected by the Assembly but only after one month.  NRC Members remember that after electing NEC most of the Members complained that they had only elected Ministers and they have never forgiven themselves for that.  Imagine now that certainly people are going to reach in that Assembly and all of a sudden a Chairman is known?  We should be very consistent.

There is a saying that the difference between a politician and a statesman is that a politician is always working hard how to win the next election while the statesman plans for future generations.  I want to appeal to hon. Members that this Constitution is for future generations.  Let us behave like statesmen and women of which I think we are and plan for future generation and then we can go and plan how to win the next General Elections.  Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF WATER, ENERGY, MINERAL AND ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION (Mr. Mulondo):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity also to have something to say about this very important Bill which is before this august House.  I stand here to support the Bill -(Interjection)- yes, please, that is very good of you.  First of all, I also had to go to my people in Mityana and talk to them about this Bill because I thought it was a necessity as other Members have also indicated here.  the people of Mityana would like to extend their thanks and gratitude to the NRM Government and to His Excellency the President in particular for seeing it fit for the people of Uganda to participate in the making of their Constitution.  When a Constitution Commission was established to go and seek information from the people as to what sort of Constitution they would wish to have.  People from Mityana have also indicated their gratitude and thanks to the Government when it saw it fit that this Constitution should be examined by a different body from the present NRC.  People in Mityana, think that it is opportunity at this moment for them to elect directly representatives to come and debate this Constitution.  I also join them and the many other Members who have stressed that the people of Uganda should be given a chance to directly elect their representatives to examine and debate a new Constitution.  I want to say that we should be brave those of us who are here and admit to the calls of our people we represent.  If need be, let us all go back to them and plead to them to give us the mandate to come and debate the Constitution and those of us who will not come back by bad luck or by not having done a good job here, should accept that.  I hope that when we accept to go back, the people will have more confidence in us because we have allowed ourselves to be tested.  the people will have the chance to elect us if we deserve it and that will give us more credibility.  Many people have said, a few things about the good of going back to the people, and I would not like to waste a lot of time on this.  I now want to go straight to the Constituent Assembly Bill and I would like to start with section four of the Bill.  In my opinion and in the opinion of the people I represent, and are not only the people in Mityana, I represent quite  a big section of the people of Uganda.  We are of the opinion that the word appearing in Section 4(i), in the last line of that sub-Section, should be deleted.  the words, ‘of the Republic of’ should be deleted.  The reason for this is that many proposals were submitted to the Constitutional Commission and there were more than one form of Government which was proposed to the Commission and therefore, I would have wished and I want to ask kindly, the Minister responsible for the Constitution, to note this and very seriously.  I would wish to see that this Section reads as follows:  ‘there is hereby established a Constituent Assembly for the purpose of scrutinizing, debating, enacting and promulgate a new Constitution for Uganda’.  That Amendment will cater for all of us and there is no danger in it.  Whatever will come out after the debate of the Constitution, will come out.  But I think that Government should not appear to have already decided in advance what type of Government Uganda should have after the Constitution.  

Section 4(2) (a, b and c) refers to the composition of the Constituent Assembly as reflected in the Third Schedule.  I have consulted my people I represent and their views and mine are that the electoral areas should as far as possible, be based on population rather than the sizes of area.  While I appreciate that the counties should remain the base of a constituency and should not be disrupted, I still strongly recommend that where a county has more than 60,000 inhabitants between 60,000 and 80,000, this county should qualify to have more than one representative.  This issue has been carefully examined and I strongly appeal to the hon. Minister to reconsider his figure of between 80,000 and 160,000 because that makes representatives not uniform; not only that, it makes it a little bit difficult for some of these Members to be going very long distances in covering some of these big counties.  

I want to talk about the position of the Chairman of the constituent Assembly and I am very sorry because this is the only issue I want to differ with my hon. Friend Dr. Kiyonga.  He has been my friend for a ling time and we have been agreeing on many, many issues but on this one, he will just forgive me.  I have to differ from him. I think in the person of Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, Uganda has had a very good President.  (Applause)  There is a saying and I think this is a very good saying that people do not appreciate good things which may be with them until these good things are no longer with them.  I do not know whether hon. Member do understand this saying but it is very rare where people appreciate good things that are around them until they are no longer there.  We all know that the president initiated the idea of Uganda having a new Constitution to be contributed to by all the citizens of Uganda.  He has been very instrumental in the creation of this Constitution and he has all along supported the Commission in all respects.  He has worked tirelessly to see that the Constitution for Uganda is made and now that the document is here with us, we start to think and I am sorry to say that he is no longer important.  I think this is a very, very bad conclusion.  His Excellency the President has all along wanted peace and stability for Uganda and I think he has contributed, as a person, very much to this.  Some hon. Members here have proposed that let the President appoint three people or three judges and then ask the Constituent Assembly to vote for one of them from here and so on and so forth.  Can you give me one or two minutes?  I will be winding up.  In my opinion, I think this is not the best way of trusting someone.  If you can trust him to appoint three people, then why do you not trust him to appoint one person?  So, the people in Mityana and myself and many other people I represent still feel very strongly - I think the House know that I do represent some other people - they feel strongly that the President should be left to appoint a Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.  This is important because in view of the qualifications required of the Chairman, you need a few people to sit down and examine which person to appoint for this post, and yesterday, the hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister here was indirectly giving us some advice referring to Amin appointing or dismissing all the Permanent Secretaries and so on and so forth.  But the Bill here is specifically stressing that the President will appoint the Chairman on the advice of the Cabinet.  Therefore, an incident like what happened with Amin, is not likely to happen in this respect even if - God forbid, even if His Excellency the President in the person of Mr. Museveni is not around.  This is not going to happen because the Ministers including the Second Deputy Prime Minister are assigned this responsibility to advise whoever President will be there.  So in my opinion, I think this argument does not qualify.  I still beg the support of the House that the President should be left to appoint the Chairman.  He is the best organ as far as I can see looking around ourselves and thinking of the group of people who will sit here to just stand up and appoint people like my hon. Friend Dr. Tiberondwa because he is vocal and so on and so forth.  This very hon. Friend of mine who, the other day said, that probably NRM had no right to try and find a new Constitution for us. (Applause)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, one of the reasons why I said that people should have been given an option to find out whether they wanted a new Constitution or not has already been proved by the hon. Member on the Floor when he proposed that we should remove the word ‘Republic’ from the Bill, because in his mind, he is still thinking in the Constitution of 1962. (Laughter)

MR. MULONDO:  At this age, Mr. Chairman, I really know that once someone is dead, he cannot resurrect until Jesus Christ or when this world has come to the end.  Therefore, the only way you can resurrect is by offsprings and these offsprings at times when they come, they resemble the deceased person. (Laughter)  

The 1962 Constitution was abrogated by a President who had the same ideas like my Friend Dr. Tiberondwa and I cannot be deceived that this time Tiberondwa would have been in favour of bringing back that Constitution.  The only consolation I have is that probably that Constitution left some children one of whom might have been me and in me, people can see that probably a 1962 Constitution was not bad and a few things could be put and added to the 1993 Constitution.  This is why I propose this.  Going back to -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up please.

MR. MULONDO:  Thank you very much.  I am winding up in a minute.  The 15 members who were proposed by the President, the people of Mityana and myself have no objection.  We think that the President should be given the opportunity to appoint people who may not be able to line up for elections.  People who are of importance, experts and probably some religious leaders.  When hon. Members here proposed that these can line up and be voted for, I think this talk is a little bit irresponsible because we cannot expect these people to come in and be voted for to come and debate the Constitution, but they can be useful if they are appointed by the authority that is, and there are also other officials which this Bill is silent about, like the Attorney General, like the Minister for Constitutional Affairs and so on and so forth.  I think the President should be left with these people.  It is important for us, we need some of these experts to come and join those elected Members.  In actual fact, we have in this House, Members who were appointed by His Excellency the President and many of these have been doing tremendous work.  I do not think anybody here could regret having worked with them.  

So, we still think that hon. Members will have their second thoughts and let the President have these people appointed by him.  I would be failing in my duty if I do not talk about women.  I had originally thought the women would be too many but I have been convinced since I was sitting here that probably a woman per district would be an adequate number and for the youths, the number should be increased to ten.  I would like to see at least two youths from each region of Uganda come here to represent their fellow youths.  Some will probably be elected but you appreciate that normally, not many youths come into these elections.  And for the NRC Members, it was difficult to convince my people that they are necessary.  The only thing they thought about was - and this is important, about our historical people.  These Members who designed the NRM and have been here all along with us.  Some of these Members may not fair well to go back to their constituencies, some of them have been confined here all the time and had no opportunity to go and be there but they are very useful Members.  

So, my people in the Constituency thought that probably this figure would be adequate if the ten Members elected by this House should be Members from the historical and that this, if it is approved, should be elected before we go to the general elections.  They should be elected before we go to the general elections so that we do not have to -(Interruption)- I was about winding up, I think your information, you can keep it.  That if we decide to have these Members, they should be elected before we go to elections to avoid what might have happened earlier that people who have been rejected there would come here and the House elects them.  If they are elected before we go to the elections, then everybody will know that at least, the Council as it was elected these members and they would not go out in the countryside for elections.  Mr. Chairman, finally -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is time.

MR. MULONDO:  It is time?  Thank you very much.  At least, thank you very much for giving me time to contribute.

MR. MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Mpigi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I am also adding a voice to this very important debate.  Recently, I had a chance of discussing the Bill with about 600 participants who were taking part in a political education seminar in Entebbe.  Now, this is a very good number As far as the Municipality is concerned.  The first point discussed was whether a different body rather than the present NRC was necessary to discuss the Draft Constitution a new body or the present NRC and the answer, and hon. Members, was that a new body should be elected to discuss the Draft Constitution.  There were several arguments for and against a different body - that is the Constituent Assembly which were traded, but in the end, the supporters of the new body - that is the Constituent Assembly, directly elected, produced the biggest gun that could not be side-tracked or silenced and that was the principle of transparency. In other words, the principle of never give anybody a chance of pointing an accusing finger at you.  The idea is, let the new and obviously needed Constitution be discussed or debated and promulgated by directly elected representatives of the people in order to make it the people’s Constitution rather than coining all sorts of names on it e.g. NRM Constitution, Museveni Constitution or Odoki Constitution.  On the question of membership, in Entebbe, we suggest in the Draft be maintained basically.  There were however, some questions about the NRC representatives and the compromise was to cut down the number to five so that the other five suggested in the Bill de distributed among the women and trade unions.  For the sake of not leaving out valuable contributions from those Ugandans who are knowledgeable about national affairs and maybe shy, those who cannot speak at political rallies and yet do not fall in the specially elected groups, it was suggested, first that the President be allowed to nominate ten members, the remaining five suggested in the Bill to be distributed among the major religious groups and also to the other uniformed forces, that is police and prisons who also must know the constitution very well.  On the question of the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, from three alternatives that were discussed, that is;

i)	The President appoints the Chairman of the assembly from 	outside the Assembly.
ii)	The second alternative was the President appoints the Chairman from the elected members and;
iii)	 Thirdly that the elected members elect their Chairman.

The consensus at our seminar was that the President should appoint the Chairman of the constituent Assembly on the advice of the Cabinet from outside or within the Assembly itself.  On the issue of electoral areas, this was very important as far as Entebbe is concerned.  In Entebbe we feel that just as the individual counties, big or small, had a feeling and pride of a special identity or belonging, so do we also have it in the Municipality, the chances are that the candidates ordinarily residing in the purely urban perimeters may look like monsters in the annexed sub-counties or vice versa. The appeal, therefore, or the suggestion, is that let the Municipalities remain full fledged electoral areas without the annexation of a sub-county done for the sake of keeping population representation to one member for every 50,000 or whatever people.  We are talking about only 18 additional members from the Municipalities and the acceptability of the Constitution of any country cannot be measured in terms of money to be saved.  Finally, there is a suggestion from Entebbe that the specially elected representatives also contribute 100,000/=.  This will chip in some Shs. 5.7 million more towards the cost of producing the new peoples Constitution.  With that, I support the Motion, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session, we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.


ADJOURNMENT

(The Council rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until 2nd March, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)




  

