Tuesday, 24 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from your weekend of rest. I wish to notify our women colleagues that a workshop on Women Friendly Legislative Practices has been organised for you. The workshop will commence this Friday, February 27th and run to Sunday, February 29th at Jinja Nile Resort. Our Office of Parliamentary Professional Development will provide the logistics for the seminar. You are advised to look at your invitation cards in your pigeonholes. I would like to wish you a successful event.

Honourable members, our former colleague in the Sixth Parliament, hon. Wilson Otage who was representing Usuk County, died yesterday at Mulago Hospital. Tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. there will be a service at All Saints Cathedral before the body is taken to Katakwi for burial. Tonight the body will stay at his home in Entebbe. 

Honourable members, you vividly remember that when we reconvened after the Christmas recess, on the 10th of this month, my communication covered very sad news of the massacre at Abia in Lira District. The following week was also a week of lamentation because we were dealing with death that had occurred in Mabira forest along Kampala-Jinja Road as a result of a traffic accident.  

Once again today, I very much regret to inform you – and perhaps you have already been informed - of the black Saturday, the 21st of this month. It is a black Saturday because of the tragic massacre by Kony’s beastly army, which resulted in the death of over 200 people and maybe some more may be recovered later. It has caused us a lot of anguish and I know this is true for not only me but also all of you. And the entire country is weeping for our brothers and sisters who died. We may ask Kony, “Why are you doing this?” But we do not have to wait for an answer, whichever answer Kony may want to give us. We have to move very fast and together to ensure that this does not continue, and to ensure that this year we end this Kony’s programme, which is anti-people. 

We must move together: the Executive, Parliament and other organs of Government, to ensure that this ends because it has caused untold suffering to innocent people, and I am sure they are looking to us to find a solution. But since the Minister of Defence is going to make a statement and I know it is going to cover this incident, we shall debate it subsequently. But it is proper to observe a minute’s silence for both our Wilson Otage and our brothers and sisters who have died.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

2.48
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Government, I wish to state that this tragic incident is greatly regretted and we convey our condolences to the relatives of the bereaved and to the entire country! I have requested the Minister of Defence to make a statement, which should assist us to discuss this matter so that we may find lasting solutions to this persistent problem.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.49
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, it is with deep sadness that I report to this Parliament the events that took place in Achuka-Dek camp on 21 February 2004. On that date, at around 1735 hours, which is 5.35 p.m., an enemy group of LRA estimated to be between 100-150 raided a camp at Achuka-Dek village in Orit parish, Ogur sub-county, Erute North County.

The bandits who attacked were under the command of one Odhiambo who was the same fellow responsible for the massacre of 40 innocent civilians in Abia camp on 4 February 2004. The Achuka-Dek camp is about 18 kilometres from the Fifth Division tactical headquarters.

The number of civilians killed includes mostly women and children who could not run and were killed when their huts were burnt. The total number killed will soon be ascertained because a decision was made on the spot today that the bodies be exhumed to give them a decent burial. I have heard the debate in the media about the number killed. I obviously do not intend to engage in that debate because to us, whatever number it is, it is one Ugandan too many that has fallen victim to this horrid terrorism.

May I at this juncture join the Prime Minister in expressing the Government’s and particularly UPDF’s deepest condolences to the families of all those who were victims of this horrid and ghastly act. I am sorry that we were not able to stop that killing!
 
Command problems:
(a) This camp had been hastily established and it was a mistake by the UPDF command in the area –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, our Rules of Procedure provide that when a serious statement like this one is made, members do get copies. We are not seeing any copies. Could the Minister provide us with the copies?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have been advised that they are getting copies ready for you.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was saying that this camp had been hastily established and it was a mistake by the area UPDF command to allow it to exist without adequate protection. Since the attack of Abia camp, the process of re-equipping, restructuring, improvement of command and control of Amuka had not yet been completed. This partly explains the absence of the UPDF command at this isolated, Amuka-protected camp. UPDF command of the brigade responsible for protecting the people in this area, as has been covered in the media, has already been changed. 

(b) Bearing in mind their level of training, these Amuka and LDUs did not have support weapons. Equipping them with such weapons when they have not had adequate training would make them easy targets of the bandits. In future, however, UPDF will provide commissioned and non-commissioned, regular officers to command them.
  
Enemy tactics:

(a) The terrorists are able to avoid detection by the UPDF because they split into small groups of five to ten and concentrate when they are closing in on the soft target.

(b) The objective of the enemy is to divert UPDF from the mission of dealing once and for all with the headquarter of terrorism, namely, Kony’s camps in Southern Sudan, by continuing to kill defenceless people inside Uganda and hoping that thereby they will be keeping the UPDF busy. 

(c) Certainly, burning defenceless citizens in huts and running away does not take a long time for the terrorists, whose interest is to cause mass murder and escape. The UPDF is in hot pursuit of these perpetrators inside and outside Uganda, whom it must certainly punish.

The Ministry of Defence has acknowledged in the past that there are internal weaknesses in the UPDF, which are being addressed. I hope that when we are discussing the UPDF Bill, we shall talk about them.

The UPDF owes an immense debt to the people of Lango region, who responded to the call and came out in large numbers to support the military training and mobilisation of reserves in countering these terrorist groups. 

The immense work already done by Amuka to fill the gaps and provide peoples’ defence to enable the UPDF concentrate on killing the enemy signifies the big role played by the leadership of the people of Lango in fighting together with the Army to eliminate terror.  

The tremendous work done in Teso region by Arrow groups there is another such example of the importance of fighting with the people. Teso has become secure in relatively a short period of time.  

These attacks once again show that the terrorists are worried about the strategy of the Army and the people working together. This strategy will succeed in Lira and Kitgum as it has succeeded elsewhere in Uganda. And I should mention here that the idea of Arrow groups started in Kitgum and Acholi generally, several years ago.

Measures taken by Government:

Government has taken some measures such as:

• Doctors were brought in from Mulago Hospital, specialists in burns and post-trauma management of victims.

• Drugs were flown in immediately, as an emergency response.

•  Food was dispatched yesterday and the Prime Minister’s Office is handling the emergency response.  

• A settlement centre has been set up in Lira for the people affected.

• And His Excellency, President Museveni himself this morning visited the victims in hospital and extended support to them.  

Once again, I would like to state very clearly that we are sorry that we were not able to stop this killing, but we will do everything possible to bring an end to this suffering! Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

2.58
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the Prime Minister, the Minister and this august House to express my condolences to the bereaved families and victims of this military atrocities and the failure of the Government to look after its citizens. 

From the Sixth Parliament, this august House has been recommending a number of options on how to solve the Kony problem. But whatever reason, the Government has emphasized one option: that is the military; where they seem to be spectacularly inadequately prepared.  

Under normal circumstances the Minister, at the end of his statement, should have tendered his resignation. (Applause) Mr Minister, you have spectacularly failed to carry out your duties in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution under Article 118 (d), which spells out incompetence as a cause of censure. You definitely qualify. 

Mr Speaker, at this moment when we are mourning our fellow citizens who have been killed callously, we cannot indulge in an exercise of censure. As you rightly observed in your communication from the Chair, we have to pull ourselves together and see how we can pull out of this difficult situation. The driver has again spectacularly failed in his responsibility of driving these passengers to a safe destination. I am referring to both the Commander–in-Chief and the Minister responsible for national security. If I were to examine the military policy and option, which has been adopted by this Government, the failures are so obvious. I will give an instance. 

On the last two occasions we have unnecessarily lost our people due to the failure of the military personnel to respond to a situation, which was obvious that it was coming.

Let me also, Mr Speaker, talk about the intelligence on the ground. As somebody who is familiar with that industry, you do not depend on information from one source only. You must have diverse sources of information. We know we have got ISO and ESO for military purposes and we have got the CMI. I would like to ask the honourable minister, do you have an external arm of the CMI to gather international intelligence that would affect Uganda? 

It is not for me this afternoon to tell the hon. Minister of Defence that you recall when LRA invaded the north-east, especially the Teso districts, you never came back to us to tell us how many kids were abducted and taken to Sudan for training. You have never told this august House the intelligence obtained on the ground on the other side of the border. It is common knowledge that on the other side of the border, the Sudan side, SPLA is progressively withdrawing from the territories close to the Uganda border. It is common knowledge that SPLA officials came to this country two weeks ago more or less to sound bells of alarm. But we are now moving away from certain territories in Southern Sudan, and that the Equatorial Defence Forces (EDF) a militia formed by the Sudan Government, was progressively taking over that area. 

It is common knowledge that EDF, commanded by one of us who lives on the other side of the border, but ethnically one of us, has been sympathetic to the LRA. It is common knowledge, Mr Minister, if your CMI was indeed working instead of terrorising civilians in Uganda, and politicians, especially to gather intelligence on the other side. The kind of arms, which may have been found in the possession of the LRA, are very identical and have the same marks as those of the EDF. Can you not draw a conclusion?

We have learnt from the media, this is not yet verified but the honourable minister can confirm, that the people who invaded these IDP camps and caused that damage were wearing uniforms similar to what we have just given to Amuka and Arrow militia groups. Are these two groups getting their uniforms from the same source or do we have saboteurs from within Amuka and Arrow that immediately we give them uniforms, they hand them over to LRA?

Mr Speaker, we know it, it has been said although denied that indeed two days prior to the attacks, Amuka boys for the first time were being paid some little money. They had left their families for a long time without support, and some of them had actually left their positions and gone home to give some little money to their people. It was confirmed by the Bishop of Lango that a number of UPDF soldiers prior to the attack had been seen drunk and still drinking. These are areas of concern for anybody who is in charge of disturbed areas and in charge of intelligence. These are issues you have to take note of.  

I would like to challenge the hon. Minister of Defence, how many of our UPDF units starting from company up to battalion level or small detaches have got communications, a walkie-talkie or even a Land Rover? Mr Speaker, when you look at the area where these people are operating, in military terms they can be considered danger zones. Really for anybody to move more than 25 troops from point A to point B, a distance of less than 50 miles and yet there is a UPDF detach and you do not take note of it day or night, it shows somebody is not working. Communication is extremely important whether it is telecommunications, electronics or transport. Is it there? How many of our companies, battalions have got this equipment? 

Not long ago it was confirmed that our army has been operating without knowing how many people are actually on the ground. A number of our senior officers are now facing court martial because they have been operating minus 10,000 and more soldiers popularly known as ghost soldiers. How can you deploy troops for an operation when you do not even know the number? As a Commander-in-Chief you sit there and work out “I have got so many battalions, consisting of 700-1000 men”, when in the actual fact on the ground you may have less than 400 and the rest are ghost soldiers! Who can you fight in that kind of situation?   

Mr Speaker, I am labouring these points to show that we opted for a military option that we cannot manage and we have failed. There is evidence, we have admitted, why are we pursuing a path we cannot manage? You go to war when you do not even know how many soldiers you have? How do you fight?  

Right now the few soldiers we have are up north. In the area where I come from, generally Tororo area, when I look at Lubongi Barracks it is literally empty. This kind of planning, no matter what you call it, modernisation or whatever it is, shows terrible flaws in planning and operations of the Army. 

The Police force is part and parcel of our security and yet we have ignored their role in terms of maintaining security, and in terms of giving our people security. From time to time, all I hear is the head of state condemning a part of our security forces, the Police force. One time it was reported and it was never denied that he said: “If I went to the barracks for a vote, the Police would rather vote for a cow than me.” For a head of state to talk about an important arm of national security with such disparaging remarks or terms, says a lot about our security.

I am expressing serious concern about our capabilities to provide security for our people and property. I do not know why we do not scale down our ego and appeal to the United Nations for troops to intervene in this situation. (Applause). We should go out and say: “Mr Secretary General, we have a problem we cannot manage in our country. It is basically military and we need help.” Whenever we are broke financially, Mr Speaker, we run to IMF, we go to the World Bank, we go to other people without shame and we say we are broke. Who in the world can tell his wife or children, “I am broke, I had to go and borrow,” and yet when an enemy comes you are hiding in the corner, you cannot manage an enemy in your house! Let us scale down our ego and say really that our current forces cannot manage the security of this country. 

I know there is a motion coming about this disastrous situation. But, Mr Speaker, we have to accept the fact that we are unable to provide security for our citizens who pay taxes.  All along I have been hearing that we are going to provide help for IDP camps. How come we have never attempted to move some of those people in the danger zone, especially IDP camps, across the river? Bring them to this side of the river where they will be a little bit secure. Ten lorries per day can move at least 100,000 people per week to be secure. We are prepared to take people from other countries to give them shelter here but we cannot provide shelter to our own people on another side of the country. In Busia we can take on kids –(Interruption)

CAPT. MATOVU: Whereas I sympathise with the submission by my colleague, Aggrey Awori, the issue of security in the North at times gets lost as we discuss. You know it is a very serious issue. You heard how the Speaker was presenting this issue in his communication. I do not want us to lose this issue of Northern Uganda, by politicising some of it. But the issue of communication he mentioned is pertinent; the issue of uniforms is pertinent. But do you think he is going to get the right answers from Government in the circumstances? Of course, they will go on the defensive.

I want to ask, Mr Speaker, whether we could get guidance from you. This issue has overstayed. Could we have a closed session so that we talk with an open mind? Give it some time, even if it is a week, suspend all business and we talk with an open mind. Government tells us - because like in the Alluta, the publication from the Ministry of Defence - I want to ask for your guidance. Could we have a closed session, we discuss this issue a bit more openly and more seriously and more honestly, as Parliament and as Government?

THE SPEAKER: You are asking whether it is possible to have a closed session? We can look into that. But if it is a closed session, it should be viable because many times I see it is a useless exercise. You say something in camera but before you leave the gates of Parliament somebody in Nateete already knows it. I will look into this and see but once we decide on it, please let us resolve that it will be in camera and we shall leave it at that. 

I am worried because of the past. You can never prevent people from saying later what has been discussed in camera. But we shall look into that, honourable member.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance.  I would not like to add to my honourable colleague’s concerns, but you have answered him adequately. 

To wind up my remarks, I call upon the whole nation to accommodate some of our colleagues who are having difficulties. I know some of the kids in the disturbed areas have not been able to access education in the same quality and quantity as some of us. How come we do not accept every school 30 kids –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: As I see it, many members would like to make their contributions. We may agree on time and perhaps take seven or ten minutes each. But you have taken long. Would you like to wind up, please?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wind up my remarks to give my colleagues a chance to contribute to this difficult situation. Thank you, but I am concerned and I call upon the Minister of Defence to resign if he has any shame at all.

THE SPEAKER: We agree on seven minutes each because many of you would like to make contributions.

3.37
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me also, on behalf of the people of Kawempe North constituency, to extend our innermost condolences to our brothers and sisters in the Northern region, for what happened last Saturday.  

We have said a lot concerning the atrocities going on in the Northern region. I am about to be convinced that gratification at the end of the day is not going to be achieved by speeches and resolutions of this august House, but by the resignation of this Government. I am convinced that we have talked extensively, we have aired out our views, we have contributed, we have even had closed sessions with His Excellency, the President. But up to now, the atrocities are still going on! 

Does it really ring a bell that for the last 17 years the war has been going on, we have lost our brothers and sisters, and indeed it is almost two generations lost? It is my humble appeal to the Government to at least do a simple thing; resign peacefully so that we could see the effect of this resignation in as far as this war is concerned. Because we have put in all the necessary inputs to ensure that the war comes to an end but I think the remaining input is for the Government to resign.

I know that these brothers of ours have fought various wars and I must say that there is war fatigue. You may find in the war zone a soldier who has never rested for the last 16 years. From Congo, from where, up to now he is still on the frontline! I believe that even these soldiers deserve a rest. But how can they get that rest? It is only by the resignation of this government.  

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Defence has said that Kony is aiming at the soft targets. What does it mean when people have been killed? Going in for civilians is what the Minister calls soft targets, when people have been killed! I believe that we do not have even the hard targets because if there were hard targets, our brothers and sisters would not be perishing the way they are doing now – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I did not want to seek clarification from my colleague but I want us to see how best to handle this. Some of our statements might have negative, and others, positive effects. I agree with him, Government could resign but if the rebels read this Hansard and realised that the other day they killed people and some Parliamentarians asked Government to resign, they would kill more. (Applause). So, as much as I agree with you, I think this time we should use sober words to find a peaceful solution to this problem. (Applause). Do you not think so?  

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I know and I have been very sober in requesting the Government to resign. You will agree with me that since we joined this Parliament we have been discussing the Northern insurgency and day after day the atrocities are on the increase. I believe that if all other options have failed, we should now resort to the last option and that is my suggestion. I stand to be corrected. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we should utilise this time to suggest practical solutions to stop what is going on. We should be serious on practical solutions to stop this carnage.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. I thought my practical solution was the resignation of the Government. If that is not the case, there is another option. 

Last year we had a motion asking to declare the Northern region a disaster area and Cabinet blocked it. At least that one is soft enough for the Government to accept so that we could call in international assistance like the United Nations (UN) and other organisations.

Finally, I heard that His Excellency, the President has exempted our brothers and sisters in the Northern region from paying graduated tax this year. Mr Speaker, that was a good gesture but I believe it has been long overdue. It is my humble request that the people of the Northern region do not pay graduated tax until the situation is normal.

3.24
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues and the entire country indeed in mourning this very big loss! I want to congratulate the Minister of Defence for the tone of his statement. For the first time the Minister of Defence has shown humility and apologised for the failure of Government to protect the people of Northern Uganda, and we have been waiting too long for this. Nevertheless, I must appreciate that.

Mr Speaker, the pattern of war in Northern Uganda is well established and I do not think at this time we should be debating what must have been done, when it must have been done and how it must have been done. There have been Members of Parliament on this Floor weeping for Northern Uganda for the last 18 years! The pattern is well established! Even if you ask people who sleep in peace, south of the Nile, they will tell you how Kony attacks lay people. Why is it so difficult for the trained soldiers of this country, for the people in charge of defence to know that and defend the people of Northern Uganda?  

Mr Speaker, I want to look at the measures taken by Government. I am not sure whether they are long or short but this is all a menu of what there is of the Government’s response. On the last page of the Minister’s statement we are told there are doctors from Mulago. If you recall, there are not many doctors in Mulago itself. So, how many did you take from Mulago to Northern Uganda? How many doctors and of which specialty were they so that we are sure that we should immunise the rest of Uganda from a disaster because there will be no doctors in Mulago? How long are you intending to take those doctors away from Mulago?    

DR ALEX KAMUGISHA: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give the honourable member is that the doctors who were taken to Lira were going to reinforce the existing staff on the ground and they are specialists in emergency handling. We use them whenever we have a situation of this nature to go and beef up the existing doctors. For example, in Lira itself –(Dr Mallinga rose_)- let me first clarify this, please. You cannot seek clarification before I give you information. Let me give you this information then you can ask questions.  

In Lira itself – Lira is a specialised hospital, it is a regional one. We have got specialists in Lira: we have a surgeon, physicians, obstetricians, all specialists. Most of them are on the ground and they can handle the situation at any single time. But where you have like 50 additional accidents, that one is not a normal situation by any means. We take measures to beef up what is already there and that is what we are doing. So, we sent a team of surgeons, specialised in accident management together with additional supplies. I want to emphasize “additional” because they already have their own supplies. But we have got a stock of additional emergency supplies to beef up what is already there. So when the Minister says that doctors were brought in from Mulago  –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are taking up hon. Proscovia Musumba’s time. When another one comes in, her time is being reduced. The information is that they sent in some extra doctors and supplies. Can you –(Interruption)

DR KAMUGISHA: Precisely, Mr Speaker, to be specific they were five doctors plus the more than 15 who are already in Lira.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the information. I wish you had gone on to tell us how many ambulances are on standby because we do need them, the doctors are not going to carry the sick on their heads.  

I am so bothered about the poor quality service we are getting. I used to work for the Red Cross and so I am familiar with emergencies. To me, it is another disaster for Government to lack preparedness and to always work to cover up for this lack of capacity and ability.  

Mr Speaker, already Lira Referral Hospital does not have the facilities to deal with an emergency. It does not. They have mourned on the Floor of this House and I do not know whether the Minister has done anything to improve the situation. So, when you say beef up it sounds good, but beefing up what? What are you beefing up? There is simply nothing! When you talk about a regional hospital the listeners might think that there is a thing called a regional hospital. There is none. In Mbarara, a regional hospital I visited at the time of hon. Bigirwa’s death is not a regional hospital. What are the standards of regional hospitals because really, we are being told lies year in year out. Can you give us services?  

I will let the Minister take his own time, but allow me to talk about drugs. Which drugs are you talking about? War has been raging in Lira sub-region, in Acholi sub-region, by now there should have been stocks for readiness. You are telling us you are flying in - what are you flying in? You are not flying in anything because if you were doing so you would have given us a list of the things you are flying in. So, time has come for us to look at ourselves squarely in the face and understand that we are playing games with peoples’ lives and this is not acceptable.  

Food was dispatched yesterday. I would like to hear from the Members of Parliament from that region because I have been in this House when they are pleading for food. The Members of Parliament from Lango walked out in December protesting the lack of food. How much food could you have mobilised over the weekend? Where are your silos, where are your stocks for disaster preparedness? Where are they?

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I would like to confirm that even before this incident took place, there has been food in Lira. And immediately after this incident happened, as they are saying, food arrived in Lira yesterday. How much? You must go to Lira yourself. (Laughter).

I think that the Members should be serious. And for once they should go and find out for themselves instead of depending on newspapers here. You go to Lira and even pay your condolences on the spot; do not just make noise here. Mr Speaker, we have sent food -(Dr Okulo Epak rose_)

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister - is it General something - who was on the Floor read a statement in this House sometime back, which forced us to establish a select committee, admitting the inadequacy of relief and inadequacy of escort facilities. When we walked out of Parliament, the Rt hon. Prime Minister invited us to his office. We presented a very serious case of lack of humanitarian support, particularly food. Since that time three trucks went to Apac and covered four sub-counties out of eight, which needed support. I come from there. Must hon. Musumba go there? We are there daily; it is the honourable minister himself who has never been there. Is he in order to stand in his uniform and intimidate us when he knows very well that there is no capacity to provide sufficient humanitarian assistance? We are Members of Parliament who voted for these funds here. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, you are being asked, do you know what is on the ground? You tell them.

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, I speak with emotion because I feel that whatever happens in the North is mistranslated or turned into different feelings. People have died and we are talking about serious issues. We said we have sent food, and if you say, no, then let us know who is going to say we have not sent food. I am not going to say how much food we have sent because from yesterday up to now many different organizations have taken food –(Interjection)- yes, that is why I said you go yourself. And if Dr Okulo Epak says he has been there, definitely, he must have followed a different route. I must not be there myself to ensure that there is food. 

There is a District Management Disaster Committee in every disaster-prone district and we are in contact everyday. Even before I came in here I was in contact with them. That is why I was late, Mr Speaker. Talking of food being enough, even in your own house supply is not enough. Sometimes people even go hungry –(Interjection). So I beg my colleagues to join people of Lira that they should see for themselves what is happening.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I represent Lira Municipality and I visited Abia, which was burnt down some two weeks ago, with hon. Grace Akello. We cried and mourned with the people and we came back believing that something would happen after that visit. I want to inform you and the House that since the Abia incident happened the Government has not supplied a single grain of food in that region. 

So I want to appeal to you, Mr Speaker, to inform the Rt hon. Prime Minister and First Deputy Prime Minister that when talking about this issue he should be very serious because many people are hurt emotionally and spiritually. Thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to continue –(Interruption)

MR KASAMBA: Thank you very much for giving way. I think this august House put in place a select committee to go and assess the disaster situation in the North. I would like to inform the Rt hon. Prime Minister that the whole of last week we traversed Apac; we went to Lira; we visited Abia Camp where the 47 people were killed; we visited Kaberamaido; we visited Otuke County and some of the badly off camps where Government has never reached. I would like to inform you that we were there representing this House and we are preparing a report. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable member, since we have the committee headed by hon. Alaso, we will discuss that report. But now our debate is in respect of this matter and the way forward. We set up the committee because we realized there was a problem and the report cannot be brought just now when we are dealing with a different subject matter. We have noted the concern and we appeal to those concerned to do whatever they can to alleviate the problem, but let us go on with the debate.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Once again I want to thank the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister for informing the House and for also accepting to be informed. One thing I want to say is that, yes, it would be good if I could go and check out the food in Lira. Because I am aware the food may leave Kampala but it may not reach its destination. So, is he right in saying, yes, you need to check from Arua because along the way he cannot account for it. 

I am looking at the measures taken by the Government. I wish we were talking about immediate money to be disbursed for this cause in Lira and Northern Uganda. I would have been glad if we had been told that we are preparing a supplementary and that we need to sit extra time to approve this supplementary. But there is nothing about money; it is about paying lip service again to the victims of this area.

Finally, Mr Speaker, Government must go back to the drawing board because everything they have assured us on the Floor of this House has failed. We have cut the budget by 25 percent but what results have they given us? You have asked us to be patient that the dry season is coming; dry seasons have come and gone. You have asked the Government of Sudan to give you permission to go through Sudan to flush out Kony, zero results. You have said we should enact a law to declare Kony a terrorist, and we have done so. Where are the results? You talked of amnesty; we did it. 

What have we not done as Parliament to ensure that we end this war? So now the question goes back to your ability. We are now beginning to check your ability. Are you a winning team? Can you run this country anymore?  

I know that for the last six months plus, the Government and the entire Executive is preoccupied with amending the Constitution to remove term limits. That is all they are pre-occupied with, and while they are at it, the situation is getting out of hand. So, before you go to the people of Uganda to ask for this life presidency project, can you tell us that you can manage Uganda now? Mr Speaker, the lasting solution is for Government to do its business and do it well and stop spending time on other matters asking for more when even the little they have they have not shown results. I thank you, Sir.

3.53
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. First of all I want to thank Members of Parliament for their concern over what has happened in the Lango sub-region and their support through the Select Committee on Humanitarian and Disaster in Northern Uganda.  

I have looked at the Minister’s statement and I have realized that the whole issue he is raising - like on page 2 he is talking about internal weaknesses in the UPDF, which is being addressed but he does not tell us what these internal weaknesses are that have failed to end the war for 18 years, which are being addressed. I think for the people of Lango and the people of Northern Uganda it is not enough to tell us that the Ministry of Defence, as acknowledged in the past, that there are internal weaknesses in the UPDF, which are being addressed.

Mr Speaker, if you look - still on page 2 – issues 2(a) and (b), the Minister is talking about the question of command problems vis-à-vis Amuka. I want this House to know that we went to recruit Amuka on the basis that Amuka would be on the defensive and the UPDF would be on the offensive. But ever since we deployed Amuka, the UPDF has left the Amuka to fight and to defend the people in the camps. This is what is happening. The UPDF are not on the ground; they send the Amuka people to go and look for the LRA and at the same time defend the camps. I want to know from the Minister, because for me from the beginning even us as Lango Parliamentary Group, we took time to develop the framework to recruit the Amuka. Because from the beginning when we recruited LDUs, they were ferried to Congo and other areas and we said, “no”. But on an understanding that this time these people would protect the camps and the UPDF would be on the offensive, we agreed.  

Could you tell me today so that I go tomorrow and tell the people of Lango whether these conditionalities have changed? Are you now telling me that Amuka will continue to be both on the defensive and offensive? I want that clarification as I go to my people tomorrow because I will not continue to engage in a Government venture to help my people, and when we agree on an issue, Government discards its part. This is something, which is very serious, and the people of Lango want to hear from you whether that conditionality has changed.
  
We have heard all the rhetoric, which hon. Salaamu Musumba has talked about; the problem will end, these are terrorists and all this. The people of Northern Uganda are tired of the lack of food; they are tired of the question of removing graduated tax; they are tired of all these issues; we want peace. We want peace; we are tired of people every time telling us the war is going to end. We are tired of the President telling the people of Lango, “I will come and camp here,” and he never goes there. That is what he said when we met him in Lira Hotel. He said, “I am coming to camp here and end this war”.  I am going to remove the Army from Western Uganda and bring it in the Lango sub-region.” 

Instead the UPDF was removed from Lira and taken, I do not know where. Immediately they knew Amuka was being recruited, the UPDF was removed. I do not know where it is and where they are. So, can we know whether you are thinking of beefing up the deployment, because the deployment as we talk now - let us not be deceived - there is inadequate deployment of UPDF.  

Mr Speaker, removing one man will not help. By the way, the commander who was removed from Lira is the most loved commander in that area - yes, because he knows all the bases of the LRA in Lira. He knows where all the UPDF are deployed; he even knows how many Amuka boys are there. The problem is not that one man, the problem is broader than him. He was doing much more – so, please, let us not use scapegoats to avoid our own problems And even if he was the wrong man, you cannot remove somebody and you go and promote him to go to training; that is promotion, yes. But as far as we are concerned he was a man loved, because he was working with the local people. So we are also mourning; besides mourning the death of the people, we are mourning the loss of the only person who was trying to help.  

Could we really know the fundamental problems? What is it that is going to make this war end? And for us in Northern Uganda we want the deployment of the UPDF to be adequate; we want to beef up security in the area. Therefore, any debate and any resolution we take up today should address the fundamental question of security. 

Food relief and humanitarian assistance should come secondary to security. Any debate that is not going to address the root cause of the problem and divert it to the question of humanitarian assistance is not solving the fundamental problem. That is what we want. As we debate today, can you tell us, Mr Minister, whether Uganda as a nation can no longer control this war? If it cannot, let us please, pocket our pride and ask for international intervention because in two years the President’s term will have ended. 

For 18 years you have been saying the national intervention can solve the war. Mr Speaker, as people of Uganda it is our fundamental right to be protected, and there are now very many theories going on in people’s minds. Does the Government really want to solve this war or not? That is another issue I want the Minister to address because you might be having the capacity but there is no political will to solve the problem. Yes, because if for 18 years you cannot accept and call for help from other places, it means there is capacity. 

And if there is capacity then we have to ask, why is it that that capacity is not being exploited to solve the problems in Northern Uganda? Why? Could you tell us if you have the capacity? Why is it that the capacity cannot be exercised to end the war in Northern Uganda? The people in Northern Uganda are now contemplating: “Maybe because we do not give enough votes that is why the Government does not want to end this war to reduce the numbers of voters”. Yes, those are things, which go around in the minds of the people and I want you to know it. Could you clear this? Can you tell us whether this is not a project or whether this is just incapacity? Yes, we want to know because for 18 years we have now used all the logic we can use to think of why the war has not ended and we cannot comprehend it. All you tell us is that you have internal weaknesses. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

3.53
MR PIRIR ABURA (Matheniko County, Moroto): It is most kind of you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, to give me this opportunity to contribute to this motion. I join the rest of my colleagues who have expressed great sorrow pertaining to the people of Lira who have died in large numbers.  

It is not the issue of talking now; this is a matter of action. It is a challenge before us. At this time I would request all my colleagues, let us be united in spite of our ideologies and save life. Kony has been there for more than ten years. How do we overcome the challenge and eradicate Kony?  

I would like to borrow the example of the British and how they succeeded in the Second World War in 1939; they recruited soldiers from all the colonies. And recently that is how America succeeded to conquer Iraq. They formed alliances with others. If I were the whole of Uganda and this Parliament, I would decree that every district in Uganda - we have 56 districts - should bring out 100 volunteers to go for a 60 days’ war in the North. If we are 56, multiplied by 100, that is 5,000 volunteers to fight hand in hand with the UPDF, with Amuka and others on the ground.

I would like to say that as long as we find excuses, they will not help. Unless we go to the field now, Kony will continue killing and planning. But we are here trying to argue, we are trying to do this and that. The issue of food, whatever it is, it will come, and other NGOs will give us food. Let us have manpower first. There is inadequate manpower in Uganda, let us take volunteers. That is the issue. 

I do not want to blame the Minister. We have realized that the statement is very clear and that we are inadequate. What we need is manpower; we should stop referring to ghost soldiers when people are dying; they are bleeding in camps; they are roasted and we come here to make jokes. That is why I say, if I were the whole of Uganda, everything would be done overnight. It is very unfortunate that we are still following bureaucracy when people are dying.  

On the other hand, if the people are now suffering like that, what happened to the Special Force? We used to have the Special Force; reinstate it. It was taking care of the people -(Interruption)    

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to give information to the Member of Parliament to the effect that according to what some of us have been gathering - and I almost agree with what hon. Amongi said, the UPDF has the capacity to intercept yet they do intercept communications of these rebels. They know where the rebels will be at a given time - because this has happened for the last ten years. In fact if this Government is committed we would ask for a national conference of Ugandans outside this country. 

The information we have and from UPDF people is that the Government has been intercepting information about the movement of the rebels for the last ten years. But what happens is that if they know the rebels will be here in ten minutes, they reduce their strength there and then they move to another place. Or if they know the rebels will be there in 20 minutes, they will reach that place after the rebels have attacked and this information can be verified. I am ready to testify because we cannot continue to allow our people to die when some people are playing tricks. 

So my dear brother, even if you gather so many thousands of Ugandans, the UPDF is not committed. Because the Minister said in his statement that the rebels were about 150 but later on they divided into small groups. How did you know? How do they communicate, gather to 100, and then attack a camp and murder people? Which means you have the capacity to intercept their information and you do intercept this information. But why have you not committed yourself to fight these rebels? Why do you always allow 15 Amuka groups and ten UPDF to be overpowered and killed? Honourable minister, can you defend yourself?

MR DOMBO: I want to seek clarification from the honourable member. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable member has made a very serious statement on the Floor of this House, which impacts on the ability of Government to safeguard its people as provided for in the Constitution.  

The Member has proposed that it is high time the people of Uganda, from wherever, mobilised to go and fight Kony. The Minister’s statement does not seem to say he does not have the capacity and the ability to do that. Although he does not say that, for 18 years he has fought and he has not succeeded. I want to seek clarification, that if this proposal was to be bought and we are willing to be recruited in the voluntary force, under whom shall we operate? Is it under you, hon. Member of this House, or is it under Government? And if Government has not said so, then will it work? That is the clarification I wanted to seek.

MR ABURA: I thank the two members for their information, particularly the last one. Mr Speaker, the military is an institution, which is professional. Whoever joins the Army must undergo certain exercises for his safety; there are tactics to be learnt. Similarly we may have an officer you do not like but his knowledge or skill in the field will be very useful. Obviously we shall be under somebody who is already a military officer and we are going for a war, which I said runs for 60 days. 

If we can do that, Apac, Lira, which is a bit safe, we shall by all means request the people of Lango in the North to come this way to Apac and we advance. I do not want to talk much. Some of us are full of action in the body, every inch almost tantamount to action. I do not want to talk much; I would propose that we rise up in this Parliament as a unit and recruit people, the whole of Uganda, and save the people of the North; 100 youth per county, especially the male, and we go. Thank you.

4.06
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to preface my submission with a word of condolence to the people of Lira District and the entire Northern Uganda. In the last two days, myself, hon. Capt. Matovu together with other members, have been considering whether it would not be the best thing to do for this House to sit in a closed session to consider this issue, but after wide consultations we dropped that idea. I find myself in a difficult situation. I think there is a lot I must say but because of the atmosphere in which we are debating I have to select what to say. Nevertheless, I will try.

I thank the Minister of Defence for his statement. I have put the honourable minister’s statement on the scale of content and form analysis and I want to say that this is not the first speech the Minister is making on this matter. I would like to say that in form, what the Minister has said today is what we have heard before. He has regretted before and he has done it again today. He has told us about command problems before, he has done the same thing today. 

I have also carefully listened to my colleagues who have spoken and you will agree with me, honourable members, that what my colleagues have said is what we have heard on this Floor before. As hon. Betty Amongi has said, hon. Minister of Defence, with due respect to you, what the people of Lira, Acholi, want is peace, not regrets. Yes, they appreciate that you know there are command problems, but that is not what they want. The people of Northern Uganda are very prestigious people who feel de-humanised to be begging for food. They are eager to go back to their homes and the best thing that this government can do for them is to create peace such that they can go back. As my colleagues have said, honourable minister, all that you have asked we have done for you as the Ministry of Defence. Now, where is the problem? We do not see this coming out in the statement and Government, as usual!

I request that Parliament tries to change its approach in debating this matter. I have observed that whenever we deal with this issue we deal with it the way Kimeza at Obligato discusses. We come, we make high, loud statements and we go away, and tomorrow Kony is going to come back and kill people. For every person who dies in Kitgum or Pader, you and me are responsible because you are in Government. We have an oversight function according to the Constitution to supervise what the Ministry of Defence is doing. So, if the Ministry is not doing its job then it means we as Parliament are also not performing our oversight function.

I do not think it is possible today for me to come up with a concrete suggestion. The word “failed” may be misconstrued, but I want to state that our Government has for 18 years not been successful in ending this conflict and, therefore, as senior citizens of this country we must give care and assistance to our Government. We should not humiliate our Government because these are people who have for 18 years not succeeded in solving a problem. You must be very careful with the choice of words that you use because if you use certain words there is a tendency for people to get defensive and at the end of the day we lose out on the very critical issues that would be very relevant in ending this conflict.  

I, therefore, still suggest that we think very seriously about this matter. As senior citizens let us sit soberly, if we think that the presence of the strangers constrains the way we discuss here, why do we not consider having a closed discussion? There are certain proposals we would like to raise, but we think at the same time they are prejudicial to state security.  

With that, honourable members, I would like once again to urge that we think seriously about this matter and this time round we make a very clear difference between Ekimeza and Parliament. When Parliament discusses it must come up with concrete and implementable decisions. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Like my honourable colleagues I would like on behalf of the people of Kumi County to extend our sincere condolences and sympathies to the people of Lira, in particular the people of Lango, and the people of Northern Uganda in general. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for the report that he has presented before this House this afternoon.

To say what I said again sometime back, – (Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, there is such a thing as a dress code, which is acceptable in the military. Usually when you go into a hotel or a public place, or in Parliament, you remove your hat. Also, if you have a stick you have got to leave it outside. Is the hon. Deputy Prime Minister in order to wear a military hat in the House of Parliament? Is he in order, Sir?

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: I know my colleague did not know what I was doing. When I put on the hat I was actually on the verge of moving out of the House – (Laughter)– so with your permission, Mr Speaker, may I go out of the House? (Laughter) (Lt Gen. Moses Ali thereupon withdrew from the chamber.)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, prior to the interruption, I was saying that I am going to repeat exactly what I observed before while reacting to statements made by the Minister of Defence. The statement that has been presented to us this afternoon is the same song that the Minister of Defence is singing. We have heard this before, the Minister of Defence talking about the military pursuing the enemy; the Minister of Defence talking about reduced numbers of the enemy; the Minister of Defence talking about these people moving in small groups of two and three; and the Minister of Defence telling us that the war is about to end.  

The killing of people in internally displaced people’s camps is not a new phenomenon in this country. It has happened several times before, notably in Atiak, in Pabbo, in Pajule, very recently in Abia and just a few days ago in Achuka-Dek Camp that we are discussing today. In his submission the Minister of Defence notes that there were command weaknesses and the command weaknesses that are cited in this statement are weaknesses that were cited some time before.  

I would like particularly, Mr Speaker, to address the issue of the Amuka and the tasks that they are given to undertake. In the case of the recent massacre, the Ministry of Defence knew very well that the Amuka were not adequately trained; they even knew very well that some of these were young boys who had volunteered to come in had no previous experience in a force of any kind. It is these people that the UPDF chose to charge with the role of protecting 4,800 people in the camp! People come to these camps expecting protection from Government, expecting protection from the Army but to deploy 64 or whatever the number is of ill-trained, ill-equipped Amuka is negligence on the part of Government. The Government needs to take responsibility for this. 

We have since been informed that the rebels actually came well equipped, they came carrying 62-millimeter guns, RPGs and B10s; they came with these guns. How would you have expected a force of 100 to be countered, moreover with all these weapons, by a force of 64, which was carrying only AK47s? I think we need to perform a lot better than what we are doing today in order to avert the situation that is unfolding in the Northern part of the country.

The other issue that I would like to observe, Mr Speaker and honourable members, is that it appears the UPDF knows what is going on the ground. But whether it is reluctance or incompetence, is a matter that we really need to hear about from the Minister. In his statement he claims that they have information that the terrorists move in groups of five and ten and only converge to form a formidable force to attack innocent civilians. If we knew this, honourable minister, what is the UPDF doing to counter such tactics? You have a good weapon, you have knowledge about what is going on within the enemy camp, what are your forces doing on the ground?  

Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda requires external help to the UPDF and to this country. I would like to add my voice to those that have spoken before on this issue, to urge Government to swallow its pride. Let us swallow our pride as a nation and seek external support to try to solve this problem. For how many years will the people of Northern Uganda continue dying? We have clocked 18 years now and for sure, if we continue at this pace then we are likely going to see more years of suffering among the people of the Northern part of the country.

I would like to comment about the language that is being used very often by high-ranking people in this country to address the rebellion in the Northern part of the country. I would like to pray that we urge the powers that to be to tone down. Last time when 52 people were killed in Abia the President, after the newspapers reported the massacre, said that was not a massacre. In his wisdom he invited the heads of these media houses to State House and taught them a little bit of English and probably a bit of military science. In my view we are dealing with frustrated people, people who are at the height of madness and for you to play with them is risking the lives of people. It could have been that this time the LRA struck in order to justify the use of the word “massacre”. 

Mr Speaker, those are my few comments and I believe the Minister and the Government take these comments in good faith. If we have failed we have got to admit failure and ask for external support. I thank you.

4.22
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise to move that this House considers the following motion without notice, under rule 40 (1)(k) of our Rules of Procedure. The motion reads: 

Whereas the role of Government is to defend and protect the lives and property of its people; 

And whereas the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995 –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you said it is a motion without notice under what rule?  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, this is under rule 40 (1)(k) of our Rules of procedure. It reads as follows: “The following motions may be moved without notice- (a) any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency.”  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then let us hear the motion you want to propose.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion reads as follows: 

“Whereas the role of Government is to defend and to protect the lives and property of its people; 

And whereas the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995 makes provision under Articles 209 and 212 for the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and the Uganda Police to carry out the above functions; 

And whereas the Government of Uganda and the UPDF in particular have taken commendable steps to preserve and defend the people from attacks by LRA; 

And whereas Parliament has given financial, material and spiritual support to alleviate the plight of the people affected by the LRA’s atrocious acts; 

Taking into account the fact that Kony has waged war on the people of Uganda for the last 18 years, and that this war caused and continues to cause untold suffering to the people in the war ravaged areas and Uganda as a nation; 

And noting in particular that in the month of February 2004 alone over 200 people were shot, burnt and hacked to death and others critically injured: 

Firstly, in Abia Camp for internally displaced persons (IDP) on the 4 February of 2004; and

Secondly, on the 21 February 2004 in another IDP camp located in Cuk Adek, Orit Parish, in Ogur sub-county in Erute North; 

And noting that this pattern of atrocities and carnage has occurred in Atiak in 1995, Lokung in 1997, Acol-Pi Refugee Camp in 1998 and other places;  

Now, therefore, this Parliament resolves as follows:

1.That Parliament condemns in the strongest terms the barbaric, horrendous and inhuman atrocities committed and which continue to be committed by Kony and his rebel fighters.

2.That we appeal to the Government of Sudan to assist Uganda to cause the immediate arrest and disarming of Kony and his fighters. 

3.That security for the people in the war ravaged areas of Northern and Eastern Uganda should be stepped up urgently.

4.That they should be more recruitment of the Uganda Police Force, which has to-date, not performed its constitutional duty due to low staffing levels and insufficient equipment.

5.That local militia presence should not be considered as supplanting the roles of the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force; they should instead supplement the UPDF.

6.That a special grant should be given to areas ravaged by war with the aim of addressing pressing humanitarian concerns such as food, shelter and clothing.

7.That the Commander-in-Chief should urgently give audience to Members of Parliament to express to him the security needs of people in the war-torn areas.

8.That areas ravaged by war should be declared humanitarian disaster areas in order to:
a. Access assistance in terms of security and relief that would otherwise be inaccessible.
b. Create local and international awareness about the catastrophe and human suffering caused by Kony.
c. Mobilize the international community to come to Uganda’s assistance in finding ways of ending the war.
d. Enable the international community to access funds reserved only for areas categorized as disaster areas.
9.That the Government should appoint a day of national mourning to remember all people that have been killed at the hands of Kony and his rebels. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

MR AWORI: Seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, taking into account the circumstances under which the Minister of Defence made a statement this afternoon, and taking into account that it is only ten days ago that we had a massacre at Abia, as it has been stated in the motion; we thought that was the end of these incidents. Now that another incident occurred on Saturday the 21st and over 200 people were massacred, and that this is the first occasion since the occurrence of that incident that Parliament is here, I find it a matter of emergency, which would not wait for a notice to move a motion. 

This motion is connected with the statement of the Minister. I have certified that this is a motion of an emergency nature, which should be debated and it has been seconded. We should give the mover leave to justify this motion.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling. We have heard on the Floor of this House what has transpired in areas where Kony and his rebels have attacked people. Taking into account the fact that Kony has waged war on the people of Uganda for the last 18 years, and that this war has caused and continues to cause untold suffering to the people in the war ravaged areas and Uganda as a nation, it is imperative that this House takes a decision that will bring about a lasting solution to this problem.  

There is one poet who said that no man - and in this case no person - is an island. Therefore, do not send to know for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee. Mr Speaker, when we hear of the deaths and we see the pictures of burnt people, to some these issues may seem to be very far away but they are not. Indeed these are fellow Ugandans and, therefore, we are part of the suffering that has been going on, as people and as a nation.

I would like to turn to the statement of the Minister. I thank the Minister of Defence for his statement and for me there is one particular issue that he raised, which is very close to my heart. This is the fact that a number of civilians killed are mostly women and children who could not run and were killed when their huts were burnt. This is very sad because this has been going on for some time. A question that comes to my mind is: should we continue to have people in camps? 

The other issue I would like to highlight is that although we have had the problem of internally displaced persons for some time now, we still do not have a policy to govern how relief or how internally displaced people’s camps should be managed. This is a glaring omission, which should be addressed in haste.

When you look at page 3, there was comment that there is a new strategy of people working together with the Army. Mr Speaker, we commend this spirit. However, I hasten to add that if these people who are working with our army are being exposed to the kind of danger that they have been exposed to in the recent past, it may have a counter productive effect. People may begin to wonder as to whether the volunteers or their sons and daughters were mobilised indeed to work in harmony. We need to see the Army working very closely with the UPDF and the Police on this particular matter.

Finally, on page 2, point 2(b) says, “In future the UPDF will provide commissioned and non-commissioned officers to command them.” I find this a little bit out of context because what is the future? We are talking about now! The urgency of the situation demands that commissioned and non-commissioned officers should be provided with urgency.  

Before I sit down I would like to bring out the issue of Kony’s camps in Southern Sudan and the fact that the UPDF is in hot pursuit, as well as the internal weaknesses. We have in the past seen photographs of the UPDF in tattered uniforms I hope that the Minister has taken into account the plight of the soldiers who have given up their comfort and have fought for all these years. I appeal to the Minister to also put in more effort in pursuing Kony and in talking to Sudan because once the Sudan route is cut off then I am confident that we will be able to end the Kony terror.  

When I talked to the people who come from this region they asked me to say that they are not interested in food; they are not interested in any other relief; they are interested in one thing; and that is security. Therefore, military intervention, which is key to security, should be stepped up with urgency. I thank you.

4.38
MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. First of all I wish also to extend condolences to the bereaved families. These are tragic events that have be-devilled our past days in this nation.  

Churchill, once Prime Minister of Great Britain, during the Second World War, after the rations and resources were dry, went to Parliament and addressed the Members in the House and told them that he had nothing more to offer except his blood. Many of us have given our blood, many have died, many are about to die in this course and it is certainly befitting that we as Members of Parliament do make a contribution in whatever form as it may take, and hence this motion.  

This motion is not intended to isolate Members of Parliament as an organ of Government because I keep hearing, “Government has…” but when I was studying my simple civics in primary school, I was told that Government is composed of three organs:  Parliament, the Judiciary, the Executive and sometimes, the media – they call it the fourth estate. Therefore, we should share in all that is happening in our country.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the motion before us is intended to show solidarity, to raise the spirits of those who are aggrieved and bereaved and to see the best way forward. We should look ahead and give life a value; we should not sit down after hearing that 200 people have died. Even if - as the Minister of Defence said - it is one of us, we should always rise to that challenge.

We wish to caution, because some of us think really that Kony’s name will live on. It does not matter whether commander Odhiambo is killed tomorrow. It appears there is already a replacement somewhere. We have also got to look beyond some of the things that may captivate us to think that there is success. For instance, the issue of Sudan in the Kony factor is still a funny one. 

I know it may be painful but it is high time we rose up to the challenge of considering concessions, however painful they may be for the peace of our people. These are innocent people going to the well to fetch water and they are murdered! Some of them may not know who Kony is or even actually they may have never met the President, never met the Minister of Defence or whoever, but they are killed brutally without any consideration. I think it is a challenge for us leaders, and when I say leaders I mean all of us without exception. In proposing this motion there was no intention of pointing fingers at anybody; it was a question of saying how best can we also get in and see that something is done. 

On the issue of militia groups, if I speak here as Ruhindi, Member of Parliament for Nakawa, normally I tend to look ahead. One may not easily feel comfortable with regional militia because these may at one time in our history cause problems; but we are faced with a situation where we have no choice. However, my advice is: as we form these militia groups we should form them very carefully. Let us find ways and means of integrating them into the normal military and armed forces so that they become part of the system and not be seen as isolated, balkanised groups that may one time cause this country another problem. With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I urge Members of Parliament to support this motion. Thank you.

4.44
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I saw a study done by the Civil Society Organisation on Peace in Northern Uganda in September 2002 and they put the net cost of the war at US $113.3 million as per September 2002. 

We are also aware, as Parliament that as of now we do not have a national disaster management policy and an IDP policy in place, which could govern the civil society organizations that are operating in these disaster areas.  

Mr Speaker, I also had a chance, some two weeks ago, to visit Northern Uganda and got acquainted with the situation in the IDP camps. The situation is really appalling and I call upon members, if they get a chance, to visit and assess this situation so that we all participate to find a solution to this war. 

There are some people who, because of the situation they are in, do not think we exist as a Government. When they saw us as Members of Parliament they said, “Oh! You also know that we also exist!” Mr Speaker, the situation in IDP camps is such that a number of children from 3 to 15 years flock to town in the evening from as far as 10 kilometres away, in fear of abduction. 2000 to 3,000 children walk to town every evening to sleep on the verandas of hospitals and shops and in the morning they go back. 

Mr Speaker, sometimes when it rains, water washes away the children sleeping in the compound of the hospital and the fence stops them. These are children in Uganda!

I have also seen the statement of the Minister of Defence. He actually has nothing more to say; he is overwhelmed by the situation. I visited an IDP camp where water was very scarce and we were told by the humanitarian agencies that one person now gets 6.72 liters per day instead of the international standard of 17.2 liters per day. It is very acute that the only water that can be got is for cooking food; if at all they get food. They do not have water to bathe. Some of the children have taken very long since they last bathed; and I think if they bathed now they would get sick and they are all covered in scabies.  

Mr Speaker, the food situation. The food is only provided by the World Food Programme and a family no matter its size, only gets 33.6 kilograms of maize seed per month and 7 kilograms of beans. So, some families finish the food in five days and the rest of the days they have to do with yawning.

Mr Speaker, much as we boast of our HIV rate having reduced to 6.6 percent here in Uganda, in Northern Uganda it is now at 9.6 percent. Some of the girls commute to town every evening not because they have not been protected but because they fear abduction. On top of that they do not have where to sleep. They build houses of 6 by 6 feet and when you have a family of 15, you cannot sleep there. When the young girls of 13 to 15 sleep in the camps, men rape them. In the evening before they go to town, the girls have to first cook for their families. When they are going, all sorts of men meet them and rape them, and this is a daily occurrence; and it is in Uganda! 

We have been talking of amnesty and we passed the amnesty law but I think there has been no seriousness in implementing it. The people who reported under amnesty have not even got the simple package of Shs 350,000 to resettle them. Of the 1,780 people who reported only 222 have been resettled. The rest have not and are now asking the Minister of Internal Affairs to extend the amnesty for only three months. “If this amnesty expires, shall we be resettled or we shall remain here?” they ask. 

I am trying to give these statistics, Mr Speaker, to let all the Members of this Parliament know that in support or in opposition of this motion, these are the statistics, which are on the ground. 

When you go to the ground, much as the Government is now in arms, fighting the rebels, but 85 percent of the LRA are abducted children. So, whenever we boast of killing 500 or 400, we are killing abducted children. Wherever we get a chance of rescuing them we say we have rescued the children, but when we get the chance of killing them, we say we have killed rebels. This is the situation - 85 percent of the people in the LRA ranks are abducted children. 

Well, we have formed militia, LDUs in Acholi region, Amuka in Lango, Arrow Boys in Teso, but the question remains: is this going to be a country of militias? I remember the last time we met the President we asked him to tell us; “The money you want we give it to you as Parliament, to finish this war. Tell us, if you have now removed the ghosts. Let the Ministry say, ‘we need so many people in the forces, and we need to recruit so many’, then the Government will provide the funds instead of relying on militias.” Militias cannot guard the people of this country. No, no. You cannot have a country of militias and you boast of defending and professionalising. I do not know what you are professionalising now, the Army or the militias? I actually do not know whether we are doing both.  

On the welfare of the soldiers, the last time I was on the Floor I told the honourable minister that when I was going to Lira, I saw our soldiers half naked. The Minister told me that that army I saw was mine. But I was happy when after two weeks a photograph was published in the New Vision of his army. At least his army was worse dressed than mine, because mine was half-naked but his were stark naked; it was in the newspapers. Mr Speaker, I think we should be serious.  

I happen to have been in Kitgum and I talked to the troops on the ground. The welfare of the soldiers is poor. They buy them poor quality uniforms, I hope the Minister is noting - they do not have transport, and if the Army has to move, they ask the district to give them transport. They do not have transport to dispose of the dead; some of them rot in Kitgum Hospital, which has no mortuary and no x-ray. 

I met a soldier who had spent ten days in the hospital with a broken arm but the orthopaedic surgeon could not work on him because they had no x-ray machine. The soldier had to go begging in town so that he could go to St Joseph Hospital to get an x-ray before they could work on him. And this is our professional army overseen by the heavy Minister of Defence!

When we talked to the humanitarian agencies on the ground, they said, “There is a disaster, do you accept?” All the signs of disaster are there; these figures I have given you are signs of the disaster. I do not know whether you pocket or keep in the bedroom your political ego, but let us move together and see how we can solve this problem. Tell us how much money you want and we give it to you, and we see how to move to end this insurgency. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.55
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this motion. I stand to support the motion on the Floor in its entirety. I would also like to thank the Minister for the statement he made. 

I wish to start my contribution by expressing my personal condolences and I believe for those of my colleagues in the Acholi Parliamentary Group who will not probably be able to speak, for the tragic events that have taken place in Lira District. We share the tragedy with our colleagues, the Members of the Lango Parliamentary Group, we share the tragedy with our brothers and sisters in Lango, and we particularly share the losses of members of families who saw their loved ones die in the most horrific way.

The last time the issue of the North arose I stood up here and said that I would wish not to contribute any further. The reason was very simple, Mr Speaker. For the last three years that we have been in this Parliament, while our colleagues go home on weekends, while our colleagues go to launch development activities, while our colleagues go home to enjoy Christmas, we remain stranded and displaced. We Members of Parliament from these regions are so much victims of the conflict, which has rendered us virtually useless as leaders and yet we have to play our part. 

The death of our brothers and sisters in Lango was most unfortunate. But as pointed out earlier, it follows a series of deaths that have occurred, some exceedingly brutal. You have mentioned the Atiak incidences and Lukum, but you have not mentioned Mucwini where over 200 people were killed in my own constituency of Agago in Lira, Kato in Lapono sub-county. I lost, on two occasions, not less than 85 people pushed together into houses and fire set on the houses.  

In my own constituency people were killed, cut up and put in pots and cooked. The whole country saw this in the newspapers but with all these at least, I am beginning to feel glad; glad that at last the death of our people is beginning to generate some sense of humanity in many who thought that what we were conveying to them was mere politics. I am exceedingly glad that in this last incidence, no other than the United Nations Secretary General issued condemnation and we thank him because that condemnation has certainly raised the profile of the suffering of our people. 

While massacres like these excite us into action, we must not forget the real tragedy that is in that place. Everyday not less than 20 people are killed in Acholi and Lango by the LRA, but because they die individually, their deaths are not reported.  

The day we were in Lira as a select committee of this Parliament, when we went to visit the hospital an Amuka fighter died of an LRA-inflicted injury. Then we went to Adwar and we had to return with the body of another Amuka militia who was killed that day by the LRA. On one trip two people who volunteered their lives to protect our people died!  So, this is a terrible tragedy. It is also very incredible that many times it is not reported that everyday in each of the 31 camps in Gulu alone, two to ten children die of malnutrition because there is no food, because there is no medicine, because their conditions of life are very horrific. But the big events tend to mask this.  

Mr Speaker, one of the biggest challenge and I think it is worth repeating, is the fact that while Government says that they are doing everything, the fact of the matter is that the Army is very thin on the ground. In his good statement, I wish that the Minister of Defence had captured this point so that we do something about beefing up the Army.

I would like to end by suggesting a number of ways forward. The first way forward, Mr Speaker, is what I have just alluded to. I would like to state that the UPDF who are deployed in the North are truly gallant Ugandans. (Applause) The conditions under which they serve are extremely difficult and many of them share this pain as if they come from those places. What they are doing is what a very small unit can do. They are doing their best and in this regard, I would like to make an appeal to His Excellency the President. 

I know Lt Col Mulindwa personally. He is a very committed and hardworking, young officer. This thing has occurred; let us not kill the spirit of this young man by moving him out of Lango. (Applause) I appeal to the President to commute the transfer and let Lt Col Mulindwa go back to Lira.

Secondly, one of the biggest problems that have caused death particularly to women is the question of food supply. No mother will sit by and watch her child die. What is happening is that the mothers brave it and risk their lives to go out in their villages to collect food, and many have died that way. It is important that the Government provides protection to them while they are going to collect the food, or it should negotiate with the World Food Programme so that enough food is given to the people in camps such that they no longer have to go out to look for food. 

And in this regard, it is even important for Government to consider the possibility of asking the UN to provide food escorts themselves. This will free us, for example, from putting a budget of Shs 4.2 billion to buy a, b, c for food escorts, which money can be diverted to the war effort.

Fourthly, the issue of communication that was alluded to by hon. Aggrey Awori is extremely important. I believe that Government could achieve so much in pre-emptive information if those areas of the North currently under conflict were covered by mobile telephones. Nobody would fail to report the LRA when they see them if they have mobile telephones. Therefore, I appeal –(Interruptions)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I would like to give the following information for the benefit of the House and for our brothers and sisters in the North who are caught up in this disaster. When the rebels attacked us in Teso we came together as individuals and as leaders of the region, we did not wait for UPDF to provide us with mobile phones. Out of our emoluments and other sources of incomes we networked and bought these things ourselves and gave them to our commanders. 

I, therefore, give this information that this is a challenge. If it were possible, I would like to request that wherever the network exists and whether you have your resources, let us commit it to the people of the Northern region. I thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you. I appreciate that and I can assure my brother that immediately we have networks, we will buy telephones for our people so that they provide information. The problem is not that we are not able to put together money. Parts of Kitgum, Gulu, Lira and Karamoja have a network, while in Pader District, which is in the middle - and this is where the LRA settle and move from to harass people in Lango and Teso - there is no network. If it was there and the coverage was continuous, a lot of atrocities would be pre-empted. (Interruptions)

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform you that when I alluded to communication, I was not referring essentially to what we call civilian communications such as mobile phones. There is really what we call two-way technical equipment, which cannot be intercepted by the enemy. The mobile telephone is very easy to intercept, but the other ones are very expensive as you are aware.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you. Mr Speaker, the last thing that I propose that we do is to continue the spirit that this seventh Parliament has shown in regard to conflict in the North. When we are burdened by death and you console us, you ease our burden. We urge all of you to stand with us together so that we see an end to this conflict. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your personal commitment to what Parliament must do to end this conflict. I thank many of my colleagues individually: Dora Byamukama, Martin Wandera, Capt. Byaruhanga, Miria Matembe and many others of you who have openly stood and said we should do all it takes to end this conflict. Thank you very much.

5.09
PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thought very hard about whether I should participate in this debate, but as an hon. Member of the House I decided that I should participate so that at least my colleagues, the country and the world at large, know how I feel about what happened. 

It was at night when I heard of the death of nearly 200 people in a very grisly manner, of people being barbecued alive. Animals are normally killed before they are barbecued, but these are innocent human being barbecued alive. So, I told my wife that I hoped the story was not true but as time went on, Mr Speaker, alas, the story was true! Therefore, this is an extremely difficult moment for everybody who has a conscience. 

That is why I would like to join my brother, hon. Wandera in appealing to leaders that at least this time we should rise to the occasion and become Ugandans. We should stand on one side, good against evil. There is no other way you can interpret or describe what happened to our people.

Consequently, I would like to take exception to some of the sentiments expressed by colleagues in this House. Hon. Musumba said that we are busy playing with people’s lives. Unfortunately, she is not in the House. After everybody has listened to her, she is not in the House to listen to what other colleagues have to say. Can I be protected against hon. Awori? He has his own agenda; I have mine.

THE SPEAKER: You are very much protected.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Unfortunately, hon. Amongi - I hope that statement was casual - to say that people are being allowed to die so that we reduce the number of votes is a very unfortunate statement. I think history will not judge it fairly because for anybody to imagine that normal human beings can resort to allowing innocent people, especially women and children, to die in order to win an election, God forbid!  

Hon. Aggrey Awori has at one occasion participated in this kind of thing. I want to assure him that I cannot in a million chances –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, we all know how this Government came about. We all know that whenever there is a struggle, there is loss of life. We all know that at the moment we are all mourning the loss of Ugandans at somebody’s hands. We all know nobody in this august House has praised Kony and condemned the Government. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to accuse me of participating in murder, chaos, mayhem, in his speech, and comparing me to the way he came to power?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the proceedings we have today have a purpose. The purpose is to find solutions to solve what has confronted us for many years. We need to move together; we should not say things that will isolate others. (Applause).  I am not alluding to what the Minister has said, I am only advising any person making his contribution to be very careful in what you say so that what you say does not distance a section of the 304 Members of Parliament here. You forget about politics and personal ambitions, what is happening now, and what may happen in a year or two. Talk about this issue, which is confronting us in the North. Please forget your differences, contribute to finding a solution; do not say things to annoy each other.  I think by that way, we shall move forward.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling and leadership, because at this moment we really need that. I would like to add that when I decided to contribute to this debate, although I did some brief consultation, what I am saying is my own feelings, and in fact, it is not a Government position. 

I want to thank hon. Dora Byamukama for moving this motion, which is by and large a very good motion, and also for the debate she advanced in support for her motion; and also hon. Ruhindi. The manner in which they talked about this motion is what this country needs.  

I would like to join you, Sir, in appealing to Members of this House to do or say nothing that is going to give some comfort to Kony and his group. Everything we say and do must condemn them for their cruelty and lack of charity. So, to a great extent, I support this motion.

Mr Speaker, some Members get frustrated and this is what Kony and his people want to do - to make us frustrated and desperate, but we must be leaders and it is at the worst of times that leadership is identified. When we become desperate and despondent, Kony celebrates, because that is exactly what he wants to do.  

In conclusion, I would like to appeal to my colleagues to know that when you are dealing with a person and group like Kony’s, it is not as easy as fighting a conventional war. Israel has the best military and intelligence in the whole world but you can see what is happening everyday in Israel. When criminals are determined to cause trouble, it becomes very difficult. 

I have said it in this House before that the Americans spend millions and millions of dollars per day on protecting their President. President Reagan was nearly killed by a mentally deranged young boy who went past all the intelligence and the security and got to this man. I would rather you criticise government than condemn it because a conventional war can be fought. Murderers will come any time and cause problems Who can tell this House that there is a government in the world, which will guarantee the safety and security of every individual at any time? There is none. Therefore, we have a faulty situation out there and we can only regret the death of our people. We should resolve here and now to do everything possible to exterminate the menace called Kony and his group. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.21
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the hon. Minister of Defence for his statement this afternoon. I also thank the hon. Byamukama for the motion. 

This is a very difficult time, for some of us directly, and I think for the entire country. Kony in his little, wild way has managed to embarrass the entire country; we are embarrassed!  

When we walked out of Parliament only 15 people had been hacked to death in Abia. From Abia, compared to what happened last Saturday, we cannot even dare think of walking out now. I could not have imagined that the reaction I had from my friend, Moses Ali, in this House could have been possible. If it were not because of the situation in which some of us find ourselves; I have always told people that when somebody is bereaved, let him cry in any language – and let him cry, for that matter.  

Mr Speaker, the Government has no capacity for humanitarian support; we have to be humble enough to accept it. The Rt hon. Prime Minister has demonstrated the highest degree of humility and magnanimity. If he had the means I think he could have done a lot more. The Government has no military capacity. When we go to the field, the kind of reports we get about the suffering of the Army - the poor welfare, the state of an army, which has been in constant battle for the last 18 years, tells a lot. We have no capacity to manage Kony, and the Sudan is determined, whether we sign agreements and protocols, we have emissaries to support Kony; he is determined.  

Here is a situation where we are so intelligent, we even know the number of the LRA that cross into Uganda and those that go out. We know their number and how they split into fives and twos and whatever it is; we know even the equipment they are carrying. We intercept their information and we have all this ability and all this intelligence. The only thing we are lacking, and which raises a lot of question is; why do we not do what we should do? Or why do we not try to successfully do what we try to do? 

We have a problem; the motion we have before us now is one of those efforts. This Parliament has passed many laws in the effort to end the war; this is just another one. I would have never supported the militia and the Amuka group, but I did under a participatory arrangement. After protracted negotiations with hon. Betty Akech Okullo and hon. Nankabirwa of three or four months, we agreed. I think this House should not find it impossible to accept this motion. I thank you.

5.26
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all I would like to support the motion and also to add my voice to those who have expressed condolences to the people of the North in general, and Lango sub-region in particular. 

Lango actually is the only other district I have ever worked in outside Kampala. I worked in Lango at the time when it was divided into East Lango and West Lango - in the 1970s. At that time, Lango was suffering under Idi Amin because those were Amin’s days. So, it really hurts me to see this phase II of suffering! Members who do not come from that region might not know such places like Ogur, Abia, Erute – I do not come from that region but because I worked there, I know those places. I used to visit them. So, really, accept our condolences.

I would like to support this motion and to thank the Minister and the movers of the motion. Because if you look at the Minister’s statement on page 1 he says: “I am sorry that we were not able to stop that killing”. For that to come from a Minister of Defence says a lot and I congratulate him for that brave move. He has been humble and accepted that. 

Then on page 2 he says in paragraph 5 under internal weaknesses: “The Ministry of Defence has acknowledged in the past that there are internal weaknesses in UPDF which are being addressed.”  

I am sure a lot of us have received this Alluta. I was just scanning it and I saw one area where they were talking of weaknesses. I think it is on page 2. It is a letter to the editor and it says: “Can anyone explain the missing papers? Dear editor, allow me to express my disappointment at actions of some unscrupulous people at Army headquarters, who pull out qualification papers of officers and men of UPDF, both military and academic, from files. For example, at the recently concluded verification exercise to get rid of ghosts in the Army from our payroll, I received so many complaints from both officers and men regarding the disappearance of their academic and military qualification documents….”

The Army discipline, the Army welfare, ghost soldiers et cetera, are all part of the same vicious cycle. Unless you deal with them comprehensively, this modernising of the Army, if you bring in modern technology – I deal with technology a lot but technology works best when the support systems are working well too. Technology is there to improve efficiency. If you are efficient at stealing, it will just help you to steal. If you are efficient at whatever, it will help you to be efficient. So, you must first of all streamline the proper management and I am sure Mr Minister we shall support you in all that.  

Going back to the motion itself, I would like to draw your attention to page 3 No.6 that a special grant should be given to areas ravaged by war with the aim of addressing pressing humanitarian concerns such as food, shelter and clothing. I support all the nine points but I would like to stress that this point should be given immediate attention. A lot of money has been allocated to Northern Uganda but in fact if there is no peace, that money will come to naught. For example NUSAF – it is a big project. 

Some people have suggested that people should not pay graduated tax in that area. I support it because where would they get the money to pay the graduated tax? But remember, graduated tax is a local tax, which goes to help local governments. So, if they do not pay graduated tax, then that means local governments are denied resources. Therefore, we should create a special fund so that they are compensated for that money they are going to lose in graduated tax, to promote local activities.

Finally, to the nine points I would like to add the tenth. Government should also study the long-term effects of the war and find long-term solutions. In addition to the arms, the fighting and so on, we should also explore other avenues including - talking is not a sign of weakness by the way. I talk to my children and yet I am the boss. Some people think when you talk you show weakness. As a matter of fact, talking is a sign of strength. So, we should explore all avenues.  

Secondly, we should try to understand terrorism because terrorism is a weapon of the weak. A terrorist knows that he cannot confront you. Therefore, he hits you where you are weakest. He goes for soft targets. So, by hitting soft targets, the terrorist has accepted that he is incapable of handling you because you have more sophisticated weapons. Therefore, to expand our military arsenal may not be the right thing actually because the terrorist knows very well that he cannot confront you head-on militarily - he is weak. Terrorism by definition is a weapon of the weak. So, we have to really understand this.  

Mozambique is a typical example where terrorism - by the way RENAMO was more terrorist than even Kony. But if you go to Mozambique now, you will be shocked to find Dhlakama staying in a mansion paid for by the Government! He is in Parliament and when RENAMO came out of the bush after the negotiations they went for elections. You cannot believe that they won 40 percent of the votes and yet they had terrorised people more than Kony is doing here. These people know terrorism works. Much as we find it appalling, terrible and horrible, terrorism is a weapon that has been used from time and time. Therefore, we have to study it in more detail.

And the other thing that we could do, apart from the relief and all those efforts from the armed struggles and so on, we could involve the NGOs. There are some NGOs, which go there and really try to study and look at the psychological, sociological and all sorts of aspects of the lives of those people who are living under terrorism. The military itself can only handle military matters but there are so many other things. My wife works with an NGO and they have gone into war ravaged areas of Luwero, Katakwi, Kitgum and you should see the sort of the things they do. 

They take psychologists, sociologists, they take psychiatrists, surgeons and they do wonderful work. That kind of wholistic approach in my view will end the war because the war, some of it, is a matter of perception. The people think we do not care and I am so glad that we have shown that we really care. We care for our brothers and sisters in the North. We would like this war to end so that we can start the real development of Uganda. I thank you very much.

5.35
MRS MARGARET ATENG OTIM (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute. I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for his statement, which has enabled us to make this discussion. I would also like to thank hon. Dora Byamukama for her motion, which I support.  

It is true that we have been working with Government, with the Executive, with local leaders, with Parliament as partners. It is, therefore, important to note that when you are taking a move, you should consult all the relevant partners. This brings me to the issue of the removal of Lt Col Mulindwa. We have been working together. He has been a strong man on the ground. What was that to him? I believe this is window dressing. That is psychological treatment to show people that Government is doing some work. We know it and we do not like it.

Secondly, the issue of identification of the Lord’s Resistance Army rebels. It has been so easy in the past to see that the LRA are coming because their dressing was different. But now that they put on the same uniform, it has made it very difficult for the people to tell who they are. These are people who come and impose themselves in a camp and they tell the people that they are mobile UPDF then immediately they start their work on them. I believe this is a very big problem! If you continue having similar uniform, similar kind of faces, similar body build, it is going to be very difficult to end this war. Therefore, I call upon international intervention, different colours of people, different uniforms  

The issue of weaponry has been mentioned in this statement. It is true that the Amuka militia have tried their level best to defend the people to the extent that when a camp is attacked and they have identified that the LRA rebels are around, they ask people to move into their huts because they believe these can protect them from stray bullets. You can imagine a group of 18 people in Abia telling the people that things have become very difficult, run for your life! That is the kind of sacrifice we are talking about. 

It is, therefore, important to note that the Amuka militia who have been recruited some of them were former UPDF soldiers. They know how to use all these kinds of weapons. Some of them tell us that they want to use artillery. They ask, “How can you keep on saying that these people were ill-equipped and therefore, they could not match what the other side had”?  

This issue of saying that we are going to deploy more UPDF is just hearsay. I know the number of UPDF is not going to increase. It is, therefore, important that while you really try to send in the UPDF - which I do not believe - you should identify the people who have served in the forces before and equip them.  

It is true that camp was hastily established but the question is: why was it done that way? There was a time when so many people flocked to the town and we had an explosion. There was nowhere to put them, no food so when the Amuka were deployed, these people started going back nearer their homes where they could access food from their homes. They want to stay nearer their homes where they can access the food they left behind or the food they left in the fields. 

That brings me to the issue of inadequacy of the disaster management and preparedness ministry. The Constitution of Uganda, Article 249 states that a disaster-preparedness commission should be set up and Parliament will make prescriptions as to how they carry out their activities. Up to now that commission has not been set up. I do not know the intentions. We just have a five-man team, which we call the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. It has the Minister, the State Minister, the Commissioner and two principal officers and these are the people who are supposed to help us with disaster.  

It was stated recently that Kitgum and Pader are now safe so elections can be carried out. That is the statement of Government because the Electoral Commission works in consultation with the Government. In my view, such statements are very misleading. When you say Kitgum and Pader are safe, it means that you should refocus attention where the problem is. So where the problem has been going on for quite some time - these people who attacked Abia, attacked Ogur, attacked Para sub-county, attacked Apala again within one week. But all are silent. No one has said anything about that. So, if Pader and Kitgum are safe, which I do not believe, then you should put all your efforts in the unsafe place.

It is so touching to us who come from the district. Having these people malinger within that vicinity makes some things happen. How true is it that these people can operate within a triangle and they are not pursued? For me, the number of people killed, and this talk in Parliament today is not going to stop me from thinking that a similar thing is about to happen. I believe today we should be able to address this problem. We should really address it such that we do not have another occasion to sit like this, debating the same issue.  

Another thing is, let us operationalise Article 249 of the Constitution. Let the relevant committees of Parliament carry out their activities that correspond with emergencies. I am glad that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has tried but the Committee of Defence, where are you? Do you only want to leave this to the Minister? You should go and see what is happening and bring your report here. I am urging for a timeframe. You said you are going to deploy the UPDF alongside Amuka. Please, give us a timeframe. Thank you.

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE, SECURITY (Mrs Betty Akech): Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You think reducing time for each speaker will give us time for more people to contribute, or shall we wind up? The Minister of Defence will have to say something. Do you think reducing seven minutes to five will help?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us now give five minutes to each speaker.

MRS AKECH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to offer my personal condolences to the people of Lira and Lango and Teso, for the terrible massacres that have happened, especially in Lango. I offer it personally because the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence have already offered condolences on behalf of Government to the people of Lango. 

As a woman Member of Parliament for one of the districts that have been in insurgency for the last 18 years - we have wept, we have cried, the tears have almost dried up because we have seen it all. The same group the LRA has massacred, people as you remember in Atiak some of them are not mentionable. 

I am very happy today to note that Members of Parliament of Uganda have decided that for once we leave everything aside, work together with Government to see how we can get rid of this menace, the LRA. This is a group of people who are bent in whatever way to revenge. Today’s occurrence of Abia and the occurrence of Ogur in Achuka-Dek have actually overshadowed a lot of the successes of the UPDF.

Last week many of you probably read and also heard that a number of the LRA were put out of action. Those are the kind words we use and it is in response to that –(Interruption)

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I just want to give information to you and even the Minister of Defence and the whole House. It is true that the LRA are out to revenge and I should volunteer this information that they have also set their eyes on Kitgum because of the coming up of the Kitgum Volunteer Force Guard. They said Langi came up with Amuka, they are now marching to Kitgum so you will hear more honourable colleagues.

MR MWANDHA: I want to seek clarification from the honourable minister. When the UPDF kills rebels, how do they tell between rebels and abductees?

MRS AKECH: Thank you Sir, I want to thank my sister from Kitgum for giving that information that reinforces what I was saying. It is the thinking of the LRA to revenge at all costs when their members are killed. This is a terrorist tactic, as you know, to make sure that people never again mobilise against them. It happened in Acholi when the Arrow group – which was using real arrows - was there. Because of that mobilisation a number of people were killed. So, I want to say that this is really a tactic, which should not deter us from our determination to make sure that these people are kind of – at least stopped from doing what they do. 

I want to say that 85 to 90 percent of the people who are in the LRA are abductees but they have been brainwashed. They are vulnerable children who have been brainwashed and they are the people actually the LRA puts forward as they come to attack any camp or any place. But they are holding guns, they are shooting at people, therefore, in combat I do not know whether one would expect the UPDF to say, “these are children. Let us just leave them while they are shooting at us”. So, this is the tragedy that we are going through. It is the pain because many of those children have also been trained now to turn their guns onto civilians.  

Sir, I want to now appeal to my colleagues because I know that outside there, aboard there are still people who believe that the LRA are doing the right thing, that they are fighting for a cause. I want to appeal to all of you who go out of the country to be our ambassadors, ambassadors of people suffering in the North. Tell the dissidents out there that really the LRA is finishing our people off. Please, stop supporting them and stop mobilising resources for them. If we can do that we would have gone a long way in supporting Government in fighting the LRA. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

5.51
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the mover of the motion and the seconder. This is because the tone of the motion, the content of the motion, sound as if it is a government motion looking towards getting support. So, by the end of this debate we shall have come up with a stand for the Government to implement.  

The motion is seeking the quickest way of bringing peace to this country particularly to Northern Uganda, a region that has not known peace for long, a region, which has suffered even under previous governments, a region that needs some attention right now. The motion is also urging the Government to co-operate, and Parliament to cooperate with the Government so that we can reach a position of peace as quickly as possible.  

We in Lango decided for peace under this government way back in 1987. We said we did not want anything to fight government at that time, we are only begging now that we should be aided and supported to continue with this kind of position. I fought this government. I led a rebel group but from 1987 when the Langi said no to rebel activity, I came back and joined, and I will continue joining, the march for peace. Please, we urge everybody else to understand us and see us as that.

Mr Speaker, the things we need are several. We insisted when Amuka was being put in place that once Amuka was passed out the fighting spirit that would yield peace must be kept, must be maintained. How do we promote and advance the spirit for fighting? It is what is making it very difficult for us to know how Amuka will work, and work to achieve what it has been put in place for.  

There are many reports we are getting, which are so discouraging. One, the officers who are dealing with Amuka are ruthless, they do not mind about the human aspect of the people. This time caning unnecessarily, brutalising inhumanely, are not the kind of things any sensible person in this country should do to his fellow Ugandan. We are hearing a situation where Amuka are not being fed properly. They are not getting enough food, they are not getting enough treatment as young people who are –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for giving way. I would like to inform you that yesterday on television, if you had seen the 20 or so young Amuka boys matching, you would have cried. You could have counted their ribs easily. You could see these are people who never have more than one meal a day. These are not the kind of people you can put on the frontline. 

My honourable colleague, I am sure you know by now that Amuka, like Arrow group, have never been taught or instructed to use any other weapon except the AK-47. You know and you saw it on television the other night the kind of damage that the LRA caused to those two camps. One little hut had a hole in the wall the size of six inches in width. That kind of damage can only be done by a heavy weapon like mortar, or heavy artillery. When these young people saw that kind of weaponry, they fled.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, for the information. It goes on to stress my argument that if we are going to encourage Amuka to fight and achieve our purpose, they must be attended to, they must get their dues, they must be paid, they must be given enough food, they must be attended to as much as possible.

Mr Speaker, we need to enlist the co-operation of the stakeholders in this affair. The Government cooperates with us, we co-operate with the Government and the soldiers co-operate with everybody else. There is need for proper information to go in a given situation in order for the army officers, the planners of the war to put themselves properly at an advantage. Am saying this because when the President met us on the 20th of November last year I told him, “Mr President, you have your intelligence section, there is a need for the intelligence to be alert to get information, investigate it, analyse it and properly inform everybody else.” 

At the moment, Mr Speaker, as we said, there is a rumour going on in the Lango sub-region that when the guns, which were supposed to be for Amuka were delivered to Lira with uniforms, some guns were taken from Lira for Apala where Abia is. Then from Apala, some of these guns were taken to unknown destinations. I have got names, for instance a certain Sgt Major Okello is said to have been concerned about the guns that left Apala for an unknown destination. He even took trouble to inform officers in Lira where these guns were from. Those in Lira did not prove of any help to him. In the end this Okello mobilised some people to go to Goigoi where the guns were taken. I wanted to tell the President and I would like to tell this House that there is a need to investigate this information because it will help us. If you have not got proper information from this detail, we will defeat Kony, but all the same the war will continue. 

I would like to end by proposing the following as a way forward: we in Parliament must decide to act as one. We never know tomorrow we may get another Kony in the Western part of Uganda! Already they had one, years ago. We must come up with a policy of dealing with anything like Kony and the eyes of Uganda are on this Parliament. How will we answer the problem of the people, the killing, and the destruction on property? So, Parliament must come up with a leading way forward.

Two, it is not enough to talk about the Ministry in charge of Disaster Preparedness. I think several ministries must come in. For instance, we have got internally displaced areas where people are no longer going back. Should the children who are out of school continue staying like that throughout this year waiting to go back when they are uncertain of the time to go back home? 

I also want to suggest that the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Justice – Mr Speaker, we would want you to know that in these IDP camps there are a lot of bad things happening that justice should be dispensed. I suggest that that ministry takes up responsibility together with Lt Gen. Moses Ali. 

Finally -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we agreed to reduce time from seven to five minutes to enable as many people to contribute. But now we are moving from seven to ten minutes. You make the point but let us agree to strictly stick to five minutes. That will enable me to give chance to another five people, and then I can ask the Minister to respond.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One more thing then I sit down. It is said that once some people were in Barlonyo, the officers on site ordered immediate burial. I think this is bad. Some investigations should be made as to why these officers ordered immediate burial of those killed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.03
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues on behalf of the people of Isingiro North to mourn the tragic incidence that involved the loss of so many Ugandans. I stand to support the motion with some discomfort in some areas.  

We have been here with the Lord’s Resistance Army. It is known that Kony has no written, known agenda. It is known that Kony does not manufacture arms Sometime ago I did rise on this Floor on a similar occasion where the Minister made a statement about the war in the North, and I disagreed with the renewal of the protocol between Uganda and the Republic of Sudan. At my age, I do not like to treat symptoms and continue to believe that I am actually on the right truck. 

I am not comfortable with the motion’s resolution No.2 where it says: “We appeal to the Government of Sudan to assist Uganda to cause immediate arrest and disarming of Kony and his fighters”. I do not understand.  

Mr Speaker, Kony gets new arms Where does Kony live? Where does he derive his power? We have a proverb in Runyankole that when the owner of the cows runs short of wisdom, then the witchdoctors treat for nothing –(Mr Odit rose_)- I wish you would not eat into my time.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you and my honourable colleague, for giving way. As a person who has come from there, I want to say that the question he raised would be valid but Goigoi, the camp which has been occupied by Kony for the last two years, is not in Sudan. It is within the country and these people who raided the Abia camp came from that same camp. In the same way, these people who came to Ogur came from the same camp and the public knew that. 

The Army knows this area. It is within Pader and Lira districts. This is not in Sudan. If that is the question, to address where Kony stays and where he gets his arms from, this is a basic area, which we know. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well I thought these two are really directly affecting Kony. If Kony is in Sudan, the best we can do is to say: “Please he is a criminal give him to us.” If we do not do that, what do you want us to do?

MR ODONGA OTTO: If you read the book on Aboke girls, the last five chapters have released diplomatic and military information on Kony’s operation in Sudan very clearly. 

One, Kony has official bases in Sudan. They even have homes, they even rear goats, and they have children who live in Southern Sudan yet they are Ugandans. And when a team from Uganda, headed by David Pulkol, went through the Sudan Government under the influence of Koffi Anan to meet Kony, the Sudan Government deliberately transferred Kony from mile 36 to mile 41, far away from where the delegates from Uganda could access. So, it is beyond argument and that is what Maj. Rwamirama is saying. These people have official bases. They only have small platoons that operate from Uganda and take certain things to Sudan. But that group in Sudan is even involved in human slave trade directly to Juba.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, hon. Otto. Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that Government must go all the way and put pressure on Sudan to abandon support to Kony. Otherwise, today you fight Kony in Uganda, he is not there, he goes there and then he comes back. It is like we are not actually treating the disease but we are dancing to the tune of its symptoms I would like that this motion be amended so that Government should put pressure on Sudan –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give is that I am a student of international law and as such, when we say that we appeal to the Government of Sudan to assist to cause the immediate arrest and disarming of Kony and his fighters, we are in essence saying what hon. Bright Rwamirama is saying. Because when you talk about pressuring a sovereign entity such as Sudan, what are we in effect saying? We have a protocol, it is in existence, we have had understanding and, therefore, this is the premise upon which we have made this recommendation. 

To state that we pressurize them without defining what pressure is and taking into account that this is a sovereign nation, we would not be doing very much. The fact that we are appealing for immediate arrest and disarming of Kony goes to the root and reinforcement of what hon. Bright Rwamirama is saying. In essence we are speaking the same language. I thank you.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, for your information, hon. Byamukama. Mr Speaker, I would also once again like to say that recruitment of these local forces is good. But we need to strengthen our army and police. It is very expensive to use and train people and history has shown that it is so. So, I would like to urge my colleagues that government should come up with a strategic agenda to fight the war and bring a comprehensive budget for this House to support. Otherwise, we need trained people, we need equipment, and we need to provide a motivated professional army and police to deal with this kind of problem.

Finally, in the interest of time, when we are talking of security concerns I would like to say that even in the precincts of Parliament where we are, we are not safe. Mr Speaker, when there is no person responsible for many forces in the precincts of Parliament it becomes very tricky. If you go outside you will find people with guns in all sorts of uniforms This is another example of insecurity here. If something funny happened outside, who will take charge of these forces outside? Why do we not surrender our weapons, why do escorts not bring surrendered weapons to the Quarter Guard? Why has it taken long for Sergeant-at-Arms to be in control of the entire -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us deal with the motion. Otherwise, we shall move from here to Mulago. Let us deal with this motion because it has a purpose.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance but I thought it better to identify a problem before we lament when it happens. I thank you very much.

6.13
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion and to also express my condolences on behalf of the people of Wakiso to our bereaved friends in the Northern region. I would also like to thank the Minister for his statement and the honourable colleagues for the motion.  

I strongly believe the Government has tried its best, and Parliament too, although we have not succeeded in this struggle. It is true we have been hearing about this on the Floor of this Parliament, we have read about it in the newspapers and we have seen some of these atrocities in pictures. Mr Speaker, when our colleagues always reported this to this House we probably blamed them thinking that they were politicising the issues. But I think the time has come for us as Parliament to go a step further and probably visit the North as Parliament, just as our colleagues were proposing initially. 

Some of our colleagues have been there but when they explain to us probably we think they are not telling the truth. My colleagues have come up with solutions but we have not come up with a concrete solution. Probably if we go to visit that region, all of us as Parliament, we shall be in position to come up with concrete solutions to this problem that has hurt people for the last 18 years.

Mr Speaker, the hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness has just informed us - even in the Minister’s report - food has been taken to that region but our colleagues have just said food is not there. Now which is which? To me, the food that is being taken to that region is not enough. I suggest that the Minister for Defence should come up with another initiative. 

For example, in my area people have grown food, which is rotting in the gardens. They do not have market. Maybe the Ministry could come in and buy this food and take it there.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank you for giving way. The food situation in the North, as assessed by the World Food Programme, is as follows: - I am reading from a document issued by the World Food Programme. It states:

“The food net gap by the World Food Programme varies from camp to camp or region. For example, in Kitgum camp, World Food Programme is meeting a food net gap of 65 percent while in the eastern region the food net gap has been assessed to be 50 percent. However, in Pader the food net gap is 48 percent.”  

What it means is that, yes, some food is being delivered by the World Food Programme but it does not meet the total food requirements of households. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think we should labour this point. This motion was brought because we know things are not as they should be. We do not really need to go into those details. Let us deal with the motion hoping that we will solve the problem.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also trying to give a solution to this problem and I would like to assure the Minister that if this kind of initiative is taken up, we should be in a position to mobilize because the food is there in our areas. We shall help because we are all hurt by this problem.  

I believe lack of motivation to our soldiers is yet another issue that should seriously be considered. I also doubt whether our soldiers can fight in the bushes confidently when they are almost bare-foot and naked yet a lot of money is swindled by other officers. I think we need to go a step ahead and do something.

Finally, I would like to urge my colleagues, let us not blame the Government forgetting that we are part of it. Let us find solutions and try to work together. If we work together we shall be in position to succeed in this. If we keep on condemning the Government that means we are part of it. I do not agree with my colleagues who were saying that the Government should resign, if the Government resigns, that means we should also resign because we are part of it. So, we need to sincerely work together and see how to help the Government to solve this problem that hurts all of us. It does not hurt the people of the North alone but it hurts all of us. Mr Speaker, I thank you so much, but I hope we shall work together as Government and Parliament to solve this problem.

6.20
MS TIPERU NUSURA (Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for having at least given me a chance to contribute. 

I would like to convey a word of condolence from the people of Yumbe to the people of Uganda and the people of Lira in particular for the loss of our brothers and sisters.  

The situation in the North calls for a fresh definition, it is as though it is not war, it is no longer conflict, but it is now a way of life. Imagining what is happening there! I am happy that the Minister who is actually handling the issue of disaster was once a refugee; he knows what it means to live during war and I pray that the requests my friends have made here will be taken seriously.  

I was more touched when one of our colleagues talked about women leaving camps going to look for food and then some of them do not return. That is exactly what the people of West Nile faced in 1979 when we went to Sudan; most of our mothers crossed over to look for food but some of them never returned.  

Honourable colleagues, when you look at what Kony is doing, look at the targets. He mostly focuses on villages, looting people, attacking buses and they make sure that they time when businessmen are on their trips. So, they seem to be a group of people who have now taken on to rebellion as a business. It is like you choose to grow Vanilla so as to earn money. I do not think Kony really has interest in Kampala any more or in taking over Government. Kony and his commanders have reduced themselves into a group of warlords who are now earning money out of killing people and looting them.

Mr Speaker, my only problem is - could the Minister explain to Ugandans so that they get some solace as to how these bandits cross Gulu and Lira? Because when you look at Gulu, Lira and maybe Apac, it could be equated to the size of Rwanda, almost a country. But Kony passes through unnoticed, what is happening? Could you give us an explanation so that we get some comfort to know how this man passes by unnoticed?  

Secondly, is there no need for Government –(Mr Amuriat rose_)- my time is short. I am not giving up my time. Is there no need for Government to analyse the situation again because I have never heard of a very serious battle between Kony and the UPDF. I have never heard of Kony attacking a detach and if there are any, I do not think they are many. If you compare what Kony is doing to what happened when maybe this Government was taking over power; you remember they would say that, “NRA has captured Mubende, they have attacked detach X”, but the situation we are talking about is completely different. The enemy is elusive; the enemy is vicious, like I said, they are a group of thieves. 

I try to compare them to some of the rebel groups we have in Congo, warlords who tend to take over a mineral area and as long as that area is secure, business is guaranteed and life continues. I am, therefore, not surprised to hear from some sources that actually some of Kony’s commanders no longer owe allegiance to him, so they have now spread out. Some go to Teso - as long as that becomes their area of control.

The other thing, Mr Speaker, could the Minister explain to us, some of the people are complaining that is it still necessary to keep people in camps? As people in Lira voluntarily go to the camps, those in Gulu feel that they are being oppressed and are made to enter the camps forcefully. So, is it still necessary to make them go into the camps or to let them do what they feel is good?  

Then the other thing is, is it possible for the Government to increase its presence –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we cannot exhaust all the points. I have on my list - before I call the Minister - about five more honourable members. Could you wind up, please?

MS TIPERU: As I conclude, I want to thank Government for at least the efforts they have put in place. I remember at one moment Members of Parliament said the military option is not working, could we talk? When Government pursued the option of talking, the question now is, whom do you talk to? Where is Kony? That means actually that to a larger extent Government has responded. So, the issue of whether the Government should resign is uncalled for because you cannot resign because of a mad man - Kony. 

There is need now - because people are suffering, they need water and they need good sanitation - for the Government to sit down and design a proposal or an alternative approach to take services to the people. We should debate here a budget to help in managing that proposal. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed like this. I have on my list now – I am trying to be representative - hon. Alaso, hon. Oulanyah, hon. Odit, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Sauda Mugerwa and hon. Muzoora. Let us listen to these people, but please, take five minutes each because I have to call the Minister. Do you not think we should continue this debate tomorrow? Let us wind up; there is no disagreement apparently.  

6.28
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to take the very first opportunity to also express sympathy, from the people of Soroti and Teso in general, to the people of Lira, as a result of this very painful incident.  

This motion comforts me because it portrays a lot of harmony. The spirit of the motion seems to be the spirit of the House, the spirit of the Government and the spirit of the humanitarian agencies. For a long time we have cried out, we have said there is a problem. The humanitarian agencies have said for a long time that we have sent them conflicting signals. At one point we say we need food and at another point we say we can feed ourselves. I am happy that the motion tonight seems to say we really have a big problem, so we are harmonizing our positions.  

Mr Speaker, we happened to go to Lira and Teso and at the risk of being pre-emptive - I will try as much as possible to leave out that because we hope to present to this House a report. But permit me to just comment on one Lt Col Mulindwa who is being transferred. We found Lt Col Mulindwa a very acceptable man among the people of Lango. He did not have to tell it to us, the Langi told it to us. They said he was very committed and that they owe the success of the Amuka deployment to that man and -(Mr Eresu rose_)- Mr Speaker, my time is very little, unless you are adding me some time later? 

What I would want to argue out is that what would be the right way? Is it to move a good man or to give a good man the support and the backup he needs? A good man like Lt Col Mulindwa probably needs Amuka who eat not 375 grams, but Amuka who eat the ratio that the UPDF eats. If a UPDF soldier eats 500 grams and the Amuka boy, carrying the same gun and doing the same tasks, eats 375 grams of posho, maybe that would make Lt Col Mulindwa’s work difficult. If the man has no equipment then that would make his work difficult. 

So, I am of the view that UPDF and the management of security need to be revisited. If you are thinking about our continued argument that the Amuka should guard the camps, know that the LRA come in with such massive weapons and bombs, hitting the way they do. Is it any more rational to think that Amuka should continue to be the people guarding the camps poorly armed as they are? Maybe that is the question we should be answering tonight.

Mr Speaker, I want to urge the Ministry of Defence to trust the local community. When we moved around Lira and everywhere, the local community knew the signals. And in Adwali for instance, they told us that these people could be there in an afternoon, do it in one hour and they will disappear in the next; before the Mambas come from town. That is what they told us! How I wish that the people in charge of security would trust the local community! They seem to know the signals when the rebels are about to attack. When they cry about gaps, we do not need to take them for granted. And in supporting this motion, Mr Speaker, let me say that no district in the affected areas has received the special grant. I am comforted that this motion considers the need for a special grant owing to the magnitude of the problem.

Lastly, is the question of the disaster area. Let me ask this House what the people of Kaberamaido asked us. They asked, “What are you waiting for? What is the threshold before you admit that there is a disaster in the region? Do you want all of us dead then you declare it a disaster area so that there would be no people to help? Have we not died enough, are we not starving enough, is there no water for us, what are you waiting for?” So, Mr Speaker, I support this motion and I hope that because it tries to harmonize our position, we will all support it. Thank you.

6.33
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro Country, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank the Minister for a statement that is sensitive. I must say it is also the first time that a statement has come out expressing sensitivity on the part of the Government, and for this we are grateful. 

I would like to thank my colleagues, hon. Dora Byamukama and hon. Fred Ruhindi, for thinking of this motion at this time, that they should move it and that Parliament should take a serious step in trying to resolve this matter.  

I am greatly humbled by the tone of hon. Okulo Epak’s debate and the tone of hon. Margaret Ateng’s debate. It has greatly humbled me and it is very soul gratifying to know that the entire country, the entire Parliament, share in their grief and we are all concerned that at least now we must get a common position on how to deal with the situation.  

A great philosopher in America wrote several books and in one of his statements he said that, “These are the times that try men’s souls.” These are really the times that we must look into our souls. Whatever capacities we are in, whatever capacity we serve in this government, it is a soul-searching effort. What have we done to correct the problem? What have we done in error or deliberately that has continued to increase the problem?  

Mr Speaker, I do not intend to speak in detail about the facts of what has happened but I want to state here today that Uganda is not shaped by the boundaries contained in pages of the Constitution. Uganda is shaped by the common sufferings, the common joys, the common sorrows, the tears that we share as a country, the laughter that we share, and the jokes that we share as a country is what shapes our country Uganda into our destiny.  

It is, therefore, very soul gratifying as I said before, that when incidents happened in Kichwamba, it is gratifying to know the entire country was sad. When things happen in Atiak, in Pabo, in Lamwo, in Abia, in Ogur, it is very soul gratifying to know that the entire country is deeply concerned and wants to find a solution to it.  

This is the first time we are coming to this realization and for that we must congratulate ourselves and only now focus on how best to take the next steps. Mr Speaker, that is why I must thank, very honestly, the motion movers for thinking of this because it will be a failure of duty on our part as Parliament to ignore this motion or to even try to second-guess it. 

I want this Parliament, which I am a member of, to be remembered by history that when communities were faced with disaster, with extermination and total annihilation, the whole Parliament collectively came forth, rose and stopped it. I support this motion, and I urge honourable members to support this motion and we avert the tragedy. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.38
MR JOHN ODIT (Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to report here that on Saturday we were in Abia, the camp where 50 people had been killed the previous week during daytime, and we were taken round the graves of some of the people who died. One lady was slaughtered using a knife and she was crying, but these invaders cut her throat slowly until she died. She was buried next to her house. Another old man was resting, at 5 O’clock, on his veranda when he was shot at and he too died. He never shifted from his seat; he was killed while seated.

Then there was another house into which seven people, six women and one man, rushed for security. The building was surrounded. The rebels used heavy clubs, which they found in that house, to kill these six women and one man, and they were buried there. A number of other incidences occurred during daytime. We held a memorial service for the dead in Abia.  

The reason I am expressing concern with a bit of bitterness is that this camp had been there for nearly six months and these people even have been urging Government to send the UPDF to dislodge the rebels from some bases, whose existence most of the people had fair knowledge of. This base has been there for two years. We checked this information with the UPDF, they were aware but they could not reach the bases. We want the Minister to crosscheck this particular centre. There is no doubt that this is the same base, which was used for raiding this other camp.  

This morning, honourable members, if you listened to the BBC, there is a fellow called Kolo who was talking of an attempt by the UPDF to raid his territory and we were wondering whether his territory really exists in this country. But I want to make two or three suggestions, in the interest of time. 

Mr Minister of Defence, I have always referred to you as a Christian, and you have read the Bible and you know at one time Abraham argued with God when God was angry with some people somewhere and he wanted to destroy them. There was the debate: “Suppose among these people you find there are about 400 or 500 people who are good, will you still destroy the entire nation because of the bad ones?” The debate continued down to five and God accepted to spare these people because of the five good ones, if they could be found.  

We are appealing to you that this poor Col. Mulindwa is a very good person. This gentleman works day and night. If it is not too late, keep him there. These people have taken positions of responsibility very recently, including the new UPDF Commander. We have talked to the new division commander; these people actually have taken over responsibility at a difficult time, in a situation that has been bad for a very long time. They are trying to respond and in certain areas where they have moved there is some element of stability. They are now moving and if you can see that problem areas are now reduced, the process is making some remarkable and gradual impact. 

What is left is for them to get enough forces to dislodge these rebels from these places, which are already known. If it is not too late, Mr Minister, rescind this decision, keep him there, he is very useful.

Mr Speaker, most of these camps are located along the roadside; improve on the mobility of the UPDF.  The Amuka are established within the camps but UPDF would be very useful –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you my colleague for giving way. The clarification I am trying to seek is: we have been seeing a lot of money being given to companies like Zzimwe to open up roads there. Are you telling us this money has not been utilized to open up roads? Is the money being eaten? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: If the clarification is addressed to the honourable member, how would he know?

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that these camps for the displaced civilians are located along the roadside, in trading centres or at sub-county headquarters and these are accessible – there are roads, although some of them need some improvement. The Abia situation was just rescued by accident, by UPDF officers who happened to come across the battle when they were on their way to Pader. And this camp was only being guarded by 47 Amuka men to a total of about 3,000 civilians. 

In the last incident of Ogur, only 36 militia were guarding a total of about 5,000 civilians. So, where are these soldiers really to rescue the situation? If intelligence is perfect and mobility of the UPDF is good enough to reinforce areas where there are problems, I am sure this situation would be much better than what it is now; other than creating a lot of fear among the commanders who are there because they will not be sure whether or not they will serve the following day. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.46
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam North, Apac): Mr Speaker, before I touch on the motion, allow me to do three things. First, I want to thank all my colleagues who by words of expression and other forms indicated to us and sent to us condolences in respect to these tragic events. I was, for example, deeply touched last night when hon. Kiwanuka sent me a telephone message to console me. I thank all of you very much.  

But as it has been stated before, while we accept their condolence messages, we as a community cannot forget the parents whose children died tragically at Kichwamba Technical School, and in these other stupid events, which have been taking place. We cannot forget the people of Atiak; we cannot forget the people of Lukung; we cannot forget the refugees in Achol-Pi and many other areas in Pader District, where these events have been taking place.  

Mr Speaker, if you see some of us acting emotionally and sentimentally over these matters, you will forgive us because in matters of death, time is irrelevant. Any new death only rekindles emotions of past deaths. That is why I am appealing to all my colleagues who have not yet spoken on this debate that, please, let us not polarize this debate. Any words of polarization will be picked upon and dwelt upon so that they overshadow the amicable atmosphere that has so far existed in this debate.  

Secondly, Sir, I want to thank the Minister of Defence and the Minister of State for Defence for being available to us as a region every time any action of insecurity arises in our region. I want to report to this House that if there is one minister who is very popular in the Lango region, that minister is hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. (Applause). She has traversed the whole of Lango. She is known by the Langi, even the school children know her, and I would not be overstating it if I said that she is loved by the Langi for the concern she has shown about the plight of the people of Lango in the recent past. 

I want to thank her –(Interruption)

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the Minister of State for Defence, is also known in the Acholi sub-region. In fact she has a name and she is called Nyapaco, meaning daughter of the soil.

MR WACHA: In Lango we call her Akot, because she comes from a clan of Ogora. 

Number three, –(Interruption)

MR LOOTE: In Karamoja, Mr Speaker, she is called Nakiru. Nakiru means rain, which normally brings blessings. (Applause).

MR WACHA: I am saying this not because of her, because I know she could not have worked alone. If she is loved that means the Ministry is also loved and we want to thank them.  

I also want to thank this Parliament, the Seventh Parliament of which I am very proud Member, for coming out and giving the nation direction in respect to the problems of the North. I was in a Parliament before this one, and I must say there were times when I did not know whether I was in a national parliament or a parliament of tribes. At last I can walk with my head high knowing that there is a group of nationalistic legislators who are handling matters of this country, and I want to thank you.  

Mr Speaker, I support this motion because it is seeking for a way forward. The Minister’s statement is solo; it is one statement that I am proud that has been made in this House. But that statement falls short of the critical question, “what next”? We have had statements before; we have had statements being made by some very high-ranking individuals in this Government. Some are very serious, some unfortunately are laughable, but all of them are statements. But they all fall short of the question, “what do we do next after those statements?” and that is what this motion by hon. Dora Byamukama and hon. Ruhindi is trying to reach out to. 

We want peace in the North; we want peace in every single area of Uganda. As a person who comes from the North, even this motion is not good enough. But at least as it is stated elsewhere, it is a beginning. It is one step towards achieving what we are all clamouring for, that is why I support it. We must look at each item of the motion and understand it and appreciate it. A number of them are just appeals, others are far-reaching and that is where my problem is. The far-reaching areas, are we going to implement them? (Interruption) Mr Speaker, I am supposed to be a supporter and a seconder of this motion. I should be given the chance to make a sort of round up.  

There are critical areas that must be acted upon by the Government. Is Government going to act upon them, because if it is not, then all these nice words are just a waste of time.  

Look at No.6, Mr Speaker, of the motion. This is pleading for a special grant for the war-affected areas. It is not forcing Government to do it; it is an appeal. But a reasoned appeal from this House must carry a lot of weight. Is the Government going to act upon that? 

Look at No.8, which is the critical place. There are times when we must swallow our pride; there are times when we must say, however rightly that maybe we have not done enough, maybe somewhere, somebody can assist us to do this. Are we going to run backward and accept that somebody, somewhere can possibly help us out of this quagmire? That is the critical question. This is a well reasoned, a well researched, a well thought out motion without any emotion. This was a motion without emotions and I am very proud of even standing up for it. 

But can this House come out with one voice and tell the Government, “Look this is one step towards ending the carnage, whatever you are asked to do please, do it?” Can we all say that? If we could, I will thank you, Sir.

6.57
MS SAUDA MUGERWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Mr Speaker, allow me on behalf of the people of Masaka to extend condolences to the bereaved families, to pray to God to rest in eternal peace the souls of the deceased. 

Allow me to also refer to what you talked about when we were starting the debate. That actually contributors should aim at giving proposals on immediate action that can be taken. I would like to move in that direction, that the Government should go to those areas to check on the people who were affected again and bring those ones who were seriously injured and who may not be having the right medicine, to Mulago Hospital to a special unit so that they can be properly treated. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like Government to organise a meeting between Members of Parliament and the international community here so that we can get views from them about what they think we can do about the situation in the North.

Thirdly, I would like this Parliament to send representatives to the Parliament of Sudan to have a direct discussion between the Ugandan Parliament and that of Sudan. I think both governments have tried their best but we have not heard a word on what is taking place. I am saying this because Uganda is surrounded by countries and there has been a long-term agitation that actually the problem is originating from Sudan. How can we solve that problem? What is wrong with us vis-à-vis the Sudan? What can we learn from them, what do they want us to do so that we can help the Government?  

I support the motion, but as hon. Ben Wacha has said, it is somehow lacking. It is proposing some actions that have already been taken. I know that recently we met the President in the Conference Center and he told us about the Northern issue. We even asked him how much money he wanted. I think we have given him whatever he might want, but he has not found a solution, and I am sure he is doing his best. So, for the motion to say that we should see the President again, as is said on page 2, No.7, this has already been done but has not provided a solution. So, the motion is a bit lacking and that is why I am coming up with new ideas. 

If it is possible, can we put in what I have proposed to strengthen the motion so that we take immediate action? What is being proposed in a way is long-term –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This motion cannot give all the details. The framework within which we work - if we pass it – will allow the details to come out. A motion of this kind cannot have every detail. If you approve the framework, then the details will come up.

MS MUGERWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But as I said, I was responding to your call for the House to bring out immediate action, and actually my proposals provide immediate action rather than what has been proposed in the motion. I thank you.

7.01
MR AMON REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I am also sending my condolences to the bereaved people of Lango and Northern Uganda in general.  

I stand here to support this motion, but in the process to also thank the Minister of Defence who has given us a sincere report about the situation in the North, particularly this incident. I was in Kitgum two weeks ago but no sooner had we left that place than one of the camps was put on fire. Now, two weeks down the road, another camp has been set ablaze and so many other people killed. It is only unfortunate that Kony does not have a frontline where Government could go with all the forces. Kony is an elusive force; I do not know which methods of fighting he is using, they are not yet known to our theories. But the Government can promote a few things as per what the motion is suggesting so that there can be an immediate remedy.

One is about assistance in terms of grants.  As we talk now people are starving, still they will be attacked and so many other things are going to happen. Something, which we saw two weeks ago, in some of the camps you find the soldiers allocated in the middle of the camp. Then it is the people protecting the soldiers. So, we need to have the opposite. 

Two, the number: you cannot have 10,000 people in one camp and then you think 20 soldiers can guard it. The camp in the first place is so big, the communication systems are poor, definitely, large numbers are necessary immediately. Otherwise, those camps - as we talk now there are more than 80 camps in Northern Uganda and nobody can stay, I believe, outside the camps. So, it is a good target to have the camps but then they must be heavily protected. Otherwise, these are the soft targets any enemy, who is also weak, must target.  

Mr Speaker, I do not think the Prime Minister’s Office in charge of Disaster Preparedness has a single coin. I wish Government could arrange faster and arm the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness with some money. What our First Deputy Prime Minister there is doing is co-ordination. Do not be surprised next time to hear that he has no fuel to reach Northern Uganda. He needs money and I think this Parliament should be able to pass enough money for that Ministry because we are now depending on NGOs. Suppose they fail, these people will starve. 

The 50 percent food the honourable member was talking about means that these people can eat up to the 15th day of the month; they are not sure of the other 15 days of the month. Ten members of a family are given 70 kilograms of food, which lasts for only about four days and the rest is to the mercy of God. The World Food Programme and other NGOs supply this food. Should they fail, the Ministry of Disaster has nothing to do, then you wonder what its purpose is. It should be given enough money to do something on its own, not necessarily co-ordinating aid.

There is a problem in co-ordination of the relevant ministries. For example, Shs 3 billion is being withdrawn from Kitgum back to the Ministry of Finance because it was not utilised; it was there for a purpose. If it was SFG, if it was UPE, if it was a, b, c, d, it was not utilized. Then the Shs 4 billion for this financial year, which was supposed to be sent, will not be sent because there was no capacity to absorb the previous Uganda Shs 3 billion. That makes it Shs 7 billion for one district. So, this motion is very important on No. 6. There should be co-ordination where instead of this money being brought back it should be changed to another purpose so that it can assist these people accordingly.  

Finally, the Sudan question. Mr Speaker, I think more details will have to come when we have a closed session as you have promised. Otherwise, I attended the IGAD Conference, which the Sudan envoy also attended. When we came to discussing the Northern war regarding Kony being harboured in the Sudan, the envoy accepted that sometimes Kony is given a warm welcome in Juba and Khartoum where he and some members of his family are given hotel rooms to sleep in. He also gave reasons why they do that. I will be able to discuss this issue when we are in a closed session - assuming that members will not go and address press conferences after - so that we can look for a solution. Otherwise, if it is diplomacy where at point A, you lose 200 people, diplomacy continues, at another point you lose 300 people, diplomacy continues. I do not know how to define diplomacy if we continue losing people, because you are protecting the diplomacy between Uganda and Sudan. It is a very unfortunate circumstance, but for the time being let us leave it to Government to see how we can proceed.  

I remember when the President addressed us I talked about disarming the rebels after hitting them. The agreement was that they are returned to Sudan Government. I complained and said that these people can eventually support Kony again and give him the same arms The same thing happened. Now they are using brand new arms; big ones. If you look at the pictures where the holes pass through a building, you would know that he is being re-armed. So, the Sudan question should be handled expeditiously. Otherwise, this war will not end. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.09
MR OMWONY OJWOK (Labwor County, Kotido): Mr Speaker, I would like to profusely thank you for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this particular motion, and I promise you that each time I seek to get your eye, it is only to discuss matters of substance and seriousness and I do not repeat what others have already said. 

One, for the last eight months, I have been inundated by messages from my people - as you know I represent two counties in Kotido District - to express their deepest sympathy and condolences to the people of Teso, Lango, Acholi and indeed West Nile, which have been ravaged by the atrocities of the LRA. I take this opportunity to express this to them using this forum.

Two, I am talking not as a minister alone but I wish to commend my colleague, the Minister of Defence, for a very balanced and objective statement in the middle of a very difficult situation. He has been frank and His Excellency, the President, has been frank in admitting where mistakes have been committed. This is a positive spirit, which we must recognise and appreciate so that we work together to improve on it.

Three, I represent an area that has also been devastated by Kony and the LRA. In 1989, 1992, 1997, 1999, 2001 and last year, invasions, attacks, killings of people, abductions, have taken place. We really need to work together as people who have been and are being affected by this situation, and also to get the sympathy of the entire House.

Four, this debate is not a debate that should bring about finger pointing. Finger pointing is totally useless and in fact damaging. There is no shortage of fingers being pointed at virtually every single institution including this House in regard to the war that is going on. But we should not waste time and finger-point; instead we should bring constructive ideas about how this war should come to an end.

Five, the question of communication, mobile phone, is something really, which not only touches what has been brought. The problem is that the mobile phone industry and our policy towards it is actually aimed at giving the private sector room for operation, and that is good. But the mobile phone now and generally communication is not only a private sector issue. It is also an issue of security and defense for our people. Let us work together to ensure that the areas ravaged by the war are given an opportunity and facilities to be able to communicate with the Government, with the Army and even among themselves.

Finally, as a former Minister in charge of Northern Uganda and also as somebody with a postgraduate degree in International Relations from a reputable University, Geneva, I think we should look carefully at recommendation No.8 in this motion. It is the issue of declaring the areas ravaged by war as disaster areas. There is no doubt, Mr Speaker, that the spirit behind this recommendation is totally correct, nationalistic and very positive. And indeed by declaring these areas disaster areas we could actually achieve one or even all of the points that have been made here.  

However, I would like to appeal to my colleagues and particularly the movers of this motion that we should also look at the other side. What is the implication of declaring this area a disaster area? I am talking even of my own area. Government has programmes there, which are not only intended to deal with immediate humanitarian needs, but also long-term development needs. 

As a former minister, whenever I consulted with the international community on this issue they warned me very persistently that, “If you declare the area a disaster area, it becomes difficult for us to give money for long-term development”. So, I am recommending and I need to be very humble on this matter so that it will come out at another point –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. About three weeks ago I was part of a delegation of Parliament that went to Kitgum and we had the privilege of meeting with Officials from OCHA and WFP and AVIS, an Italian NGO. All these were telling us that the only way humanitarian assistance in the area could be stepped up is by declaring that region a disaster area. 

You have raised the issue of long-term development financing and programmes. Yes, as Parliament we are voting that money but that money is not being utilised because nearly 70 percent of Kitgum District has been abandoned; there are no people there. Why should we be worried that there will not be money to build schools in places where there are no people? Our main concern, honourable minister and colleagues, is to see how we can save lives and improve on the humanitarian condition. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I want clarification here. Is it humanitarian, or is it - what is it? Is there a difference? Is it talking about security; the plight of the people?  

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, what I am talking about is a very serious matter and we should really be very conscious of the needs of our people in that zone. In the process of saving one hand, we should not cut off the other one. That is the only point I am making. It is true that all the organisations my colleague is talking about actually are dealing with humanitarian work. Whether you are talking of World Food Programme, OCHA or the component of Italian Cooperation, which deals with humanitarian support; they are all emergency relief providers. But we are also asking for long-term development. 

Let me give you examples. The very power that we are talking about –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am in constant touch with the head of the European Delegation in this country, Ambassador Lee. He has even said it publicly that the only way we can end the problem in Northern Uganda is, one, to engage in peace; two, to declare the area a disaster area. The European Union injects billions of shillings in this country. I do not think the Ambassador is out of his mind to advise that we declare it a disaster area. So, what development programme is the Minister talking of?

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, when we went to Soroti, and the Rt hon. Prime Minister is here, to meet the President, one of the plausible suggestions - and I think it is even being considered in Cabinet - was that all capital funds, which were given to these areas, which they cannot utilise, should be re-organised and put to immediate security needs like construction of security roads and so on and so forth. I think this matter is in Cabinet. What are we talking about now; this reputable university qualification?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, in case the honourable minister is not aware, all conditional grants to the districts of the North, as we talk today, are not being utilized because the rural areas are not accessible. Therefore, even Government officers have been withdrawn to district headquarters. The net result is that the funds are being routinely returned to the treasury un-utilised. So, these are the development funds, which the Minister is referring to and already they are not being utilised. 

Besides, the Uganda Government that has the capacity to declare this area a disaster area has also the capacity to declare the end of a disaster area, marking the resumption of normal assistance to the area. I really do not see the need for the apprehension of the Minister.

MR OMWONY OJWOK: Mr Speaker, I have listened to the points and if it is repetition on the same issue, my position is as follows. I will not pursue it any further; this is a democratic method of work. I would like to suggest that the Government be given an opportunity to study this matter very seriously. I think that is all I would say at this particular stage. 

I end by saying that this motion is brought in a very positive spirit and I fully support the spirit with which the motion is given. Let us proceed to ensure that we implement the positive recommendations here and ensure that we work together in order to end this war speedily and effectively. Thank you.

7.22
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank my colleagues, Members of Parliament, for the clear condemnation of the terror and of those that have unleashed terror on our people of Northern Uganda. I would not say it is a rare occasion, but in the past we did not speak with one voice, but really I am more than pleased to say that I see unanimity in this House on this question. (Applause).

Mr Speaker, there were many issues that were raised. I do not think we have the time to respond to them to any great length. But allow me to respond to a few of the issues that were raised. 

The first issue was the question of international intervention. This was repeatedly stated and indeed what is implied in this motion in recommendation No.8. International intervention in the context of humanitarian help and relief, yes, I think that can work. It has been proved to work in many circumstances similar to ours where people are displaced internally. 

Of course, Mr Speaker, as we all know the international community has been very heavily involved in the provision of relief in the North: food, medicines and other things. But when we talk about international intervention in terms of military intervention, I wish we could have it, but I am afraid we might not have it because nobody will come to intervene on our behalf. Even if they did, I am not sure that they would have the desired impact.  

I returned from Kinshasa only two days ago. I had gone to meet President Kabila to express our concerns about security in Ituri and North Kivu regions of Congo. We have worked out and agreed on a mechanism for addressing these problems The President sent me to meet with President Kabila to discuss the details of these and the question of implementing those mechanisms, because we still have very serious concerns about threats emanating from that area against us. You know in Ituri we have an international force, United Nations Force, which was deployed under Chapter 7 of the United Nations Charter. Chapter 7 is the one that gives the United Nations power to use force to impose its will, and this is the mandate of the United Nations forces in Ituri. 

I am sorry to report to you as I was told by His Excellency Gen. Kabila, that this force has not stopped the killings in Ituri. Only recently 30 people were killed on Lake Albert and many more people have been dying. There is recognition that where you have not developed internal capacity to handle things of this kind yourselves, it is unlikely that forces from outside will come and effectively handle them. If it were a big war like the Americans fighting against the Taliban, it is easy because the Americans can easily defeat a conventional force of the Afghanistan. 

But to fight against terrorists, like the Americans are trying to fight against Osama Bin Laden in Afghanistan, as you all know, it is not easy. So, we should not put too much hope in that.  

In Rwanda, when the genocide took place, there was international intervention; we had the United Nations forces there. The lady Prime Minister who was killed was actually in the hands of a military unit from Belgium. I am simply raising this word of caution that out of desperation we may think that maybe we can get help from outside militarily, but history has shown that that does not work. It has not worked anywhere especially in the fight against terrorism.  

The second question I want to talk about is UPDF’s capacity to win this fight. Questions have been raised as to whether we have the capacity to defeat these terrorists or not, and in fact one asked me to account for the money, the 23 percent cut that was made in Government to give defense more money. Yes, I can account for it because - in fact we did not get the 25 percent, we got much less; we got only UD $17 million. 

I have had the occasion to tell this Parliament that we used the US $17 million to buy three attack helicopters, which we have put to very effective use. As you may have been following the successes of UPDF in the battlefield - I do not have to repeat them now, but the UPDF has scored greater success now than previously because of the use of helicopters against these bandits.

It is true that Kony has bases in Sudan, and hon. Odit I want to assure you that Kony is in Sudan, that is a fact. It is known to us as a Government, it is known to the Sudan Government, we all know it. He did come in one time for a short time but he went back; even Otti has now gone back. As I reported to this Parliament again, our forces overran the camps of Kony in that area. We did not eliminate him, obviously, but we denied him what he had wanted at the time - a base from which he could take all these abductees and train them in peace; a base where they could go after they have been chased by UPDF to rest and re-organise. This base, which was behind the Sudanese Government defense lines, is no longer available to him because we overran them and the Sudan Government does not give him that support anymore.  

I would like to repeat that whereas Kony is in Southern Sudan, the Government of Uganda is convinced that the Government of President Bashir has stopped giving them support as a Government. It is true that elements within the Southern Sudanese Armed Forces have been supplying Kony, but at individual level. We have been to Sudan, we have made presentations to the Government and the Government of President Bashir has undertaken to take measures even to stop that. As a matter of fact, I will be travelling to Khartoum next week to continue the discussion of this matter and to see how we can take it forward –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I just want some clarification from the Minister. You have just said that actually the Sudanese Government does not support Kony. You also added that there are individuals in the Sudanese Government that support Kony. I do not know whether you have established what the interest of these individuals could actually be? Also, how are they able to access arms to the capacity that Kony actually possesses? Maybe if we got this information, it would be helpful to our Government and indeed to the Ministry of Defence in trying to combat this rebellion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are in dilemma here on this point. We have a motion under (2), which is calling upon the Government of Sudan to co-operate and cause the arrest and disarming of Kony. When we have that one, whereas we may have some lingering doubts as to its sincerity, we may not have to express it officially here. Because, if you have doubted me and you have gone on record to doubt me, and then at the same time you ask me to co-operate! 

So, let us on this issue give them the benefit of doubt. Otherwise, it will make our No.2 meaningless because he may say, “after all you say you do not trust me and at the same time you ask me to help?” We have to be careful with how we handle this issue. Let us not express that doubt and then we ruin what we are trying to do. That is my opinion. I am sorry I should not contribute, but that is my assessment of the situation.

MR OGOLA: Mr Speaker, I would like a little clarification from the hon. Minister of Defence. Currently, the Sudanese Government is in serious discussion and negotiation with the SPLA. At one time our President played the diplomatic part of inviting President Bashir from Sudan to Uganda and then he brought Garang and put them together. That has yielded results to the point that perhaps Sudan may strike the gold of peace. Would you consider, as a counter policy, that if Sudan were requested to reciprocate this action it could invite the President of Uganda to go to Sudan and meet with Kony, to begin talks? Would you conceive this as a possibility? Reciprocity could work. Rather than condemning the Sudan Government we could now appeal to them to return the favour we did to them. Will that be okay? After all, diplomacy is war by other means.  

THE SPEAKER: But as he said, really, why do we not leave this issue so that we stick with our motion? But we are ruining what we are putting in our motion by going into a serious discussion on this. I would rather we left this thing.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make an additional point to inform this House. I am not sure that Government has done so formally - that the Government of Uganda did refer the case of Kony and the crimes he has committed against the people in Northern Uganda to the International Criminal Court. 

Recently while in London, President Museveni met the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and they actually made a public statement announcing that the Government of Uganda had referred the matter to the International Criminal Court. Following that meeting, I went to Hague. I met the President of the International Criminal Court and the entire prosecution group, and we have agreed that we will give them as much support and help as we can in carrying out investigations of this matter against Kony.  

What are the implications of this action? The implications are that if they find evidence, as I know they will, that Kony has engaged in acts, which amount to commission of crime against humanity, they will issue an international warrant of arrest. He will be indicted, first of all, in the International Criminal Court and there will be a warrant of arrest issued internationally. This will particularly impose the duty on Sudan, where he is, to actually do what you are asking. It will now be by the international community and not Uganda appealing to Sudan or things of that kind, or even Sudan in that case will have no say in the matter. They will be bound to do that. 

Two other points –(An. hon. member rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What do we do? We have ended the debate as such. We are only having the remarks by the Minister and then the mover will wind up. Maybe we can adjourn now. Hold on for the Minister to complete and the mover to wind up and then we pronounce ourselves on the motion. There will be no more debate on the issue. It will not make any difference because there will be no debate. 

Let me now tell you this. I am getting chits here saying there is no quorum; do you want me to proceed? I am closing this debate and the only people I will hear tomorrow are the Minister, to answer his queries, and the mover, to wind up.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, it has been the practice that unless a member rises and says there is no quorum - We have been patient, we have sat here, listened to all the arguments, we have a lot of business tomorrow, I do not see the reason why we should actually postpone this vote to give people opportunities to go and caucus and do arm-twisting.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have seen what happens in this House - I have four chits here of members pointing out that there is no quorum - and the following day somebody will deny that there was quorum. I know that is the practice, but I am sealing this debate. I am going to hear from the Minister making his remarks and a final contribution by the mover and then we pronounce ourselves on the motion. The House is adjourned until tomorrow, 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.43 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 February 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)



