Wednesday, 22 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I just want to clarify that I had issued an Order Paper in which I indicated that the Ministry of Finance will make a statement giving an update on the economy. When I received the text, it was another update like the one she gave last time. 

I also noted that our Committee on National Economy has made its quarterly report, which I think in all fairness ought to be discussed first such that Government can respond to the proposals and recommendations from the committee and inform the House. I will defer that particular update, but I will permit the one on the youth fund. The other update will have to wait for the Committee of National Economy because they have been doing some work and you ought to hear from their side before we proceed.

2.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have bad news for the House. One of us hon. Nabilah, was hit by Police and as we talk, she is in intensive care unit. Yesterday, there was an agreed rally to take place in Katwe and the IGP was aware and had accepted. Some of the participants included our party President, Dr Kiiza Besigye, and some Members of Parliament from the oOpposition. But when the rally started, Police came and broke it up. They started firing teargas and bullets which were both live and rubber. These hurt the people. 

I want to find out from the Executive; if we agreed to have multiparty politics and you have allowed a rally to take place, is it again necessary for the government to come and break it up using force? Why should we hurt the people by shooting live bullets as if they are animals? Even animals have rights. Have we changed from the agreed position that we are a multiparty country and we should hear dissenting voices or different views from people?

We have found out that whenever members of the Opposition are holding any function, there will always be teargas and military personnel. When the NRM colleagues are holding theirs, there is nothing. Is the Army meant to fight the Opposition alone or is this the military for the ruling party?

If you went to Case Clinic, you will cry tears. A whole Member of Parliament has been badly beaten while she was in her constituency trying to address her constituents. It is very bad! When you go to our party President, Dr Kiiza, he was clearly hurt. What is the rational of shooting him and his supporters? We want to seek an answer from the Executive or the government if this is right? If it is not right, why should they do it? Why should they abuse our rights as Ugandans?

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the government.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I am standing here as an institutional memory because I served in that sector of protecting people’s lives and property. And since the Leader of Government Business is not here, I thought it would be appropriate if I respond on behalf of Government.

I watched on TV some of scenes that hon. Nandala Mafabi has described. I did not like them.  I even rang the IGP yesterday and I said, “I have seen something on TV; people with bullet wounds, what has happened?” But as I said, that is not my sector now. What I want to promise this House is that Government will come back here with a comprehensive statement on what exactly happened. 

I cannot be very specific because I am not a sector minister, but it should come very soon because this matter touches on people’s lives. Anything that touches on people’s lives cannot be delayed by Government. 

I feel very bad for what I saw yesterday; it was very unfortunate and I want to assure this House that all necessary measures will be taken against the officers who did what they did yesterday. That is my view.
 
MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for accepting to take the cross on behalf of Government. You have clearly indicated that you are making a commitment on behalf of Government. But because of the gravity of the matter at hand now, affecting lives of people and also bearing in mind that it is only appropriate for Government to come up with a statement when this matter is still very fresh in our minds so that we can be able to comprehend what we saw on screens with information that we have received and the situation as it is, I would like to ask if it would be appropriate for the honourable minister to be succinct and tell us when this statement is expected. 

Last evening Government made a commitment, through the Media Centre, that they were going to come and present an explanation to the nation. That was for today and now it is already 3.00 p.m. Can you tell us when it will come and if possible, not later than tomorrow such that we are able to debate it.

THE SPEAKER: Can we require you to invite the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell us, because that is his docket. Can you ensure his arrival here before we close?

MR AMURIAT:  Madam Speaker, thank you and I wish to thank my brother hon. Matia Kasaija for stepping in. What happened yesterday is reminiscent of what happened on Kitante Road last year when Arinaitwe shamelessly attacked Dr Kiiza Besigye. I said here that the person who was beaten is the one who won over two million votes and you would know what kind of reaction his supporters would engage in. Indeed, the following day, there were riots in Kampala. These rallies for A4C are going to continue with these activities countrywide. Today, they are going to Kalerwe, next week they will be in Ntungamo, on the 10th they will be in Kumi, and on the 8th they will be in Tororo.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who you are asking. I have asked the minister to bring the Minister for Internal Affairs who owns the docket. I do not know what the person you are haranguing will say. Let us wait for the minister to come so that we can address this issue.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, most obliged. I will inform the Minister of Internal Affairs or whoever is responsible to get to the House as soon as possible.

3.01
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Madam Speaker, you remember that we had His Excellency the President, on 10th February and he addressed this House. You remember that last Thursday you guided that on Tuesday the 21st, which was yesterday, this Parliament would have the opportunity to debate the President’s Speech.

Some of us had strong reservations about that speech and they come from the facts surrounding the oil sector. As you may have heard, the farm down is continuing; money is exchanging hands to the extent that as we speak now, transactions in form of trillions of shillings are taking place. All these are embedded in the President’s statement.

Today is Wednesday and we have not received the official text, but we have the Hansard. This House cannot debate matters outside speech; as long as we have them transcribed on our Hansard those are genuine materials to use for debate.
 
Madam Speaker, can you prevail on Government to produce the copies bearing in mind that it is the President who brought himself hear? It was not the official state of the nation address. He should have prepared to have a statement. Since these documents have not been delivered to Members, can we continue with our Hansard and we debate the President’s statement without further delay?

MS ALASO: The clarification I would like from you is whether the House would be comfortable proceeding with a document other than the way it was relayed to us. In my own view, what the House should be proceeding on is the exact words as uttered by the President and as recorded by Parliament, because you could have an edited speech where some of those very important remarks will have been removed as an afterthought. You will have no way to guard against that, but if we proceeded with the Hansard, it is as portrayed and as presented on the Floor. That is the clarification I want.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Since we are scheduled to debate that speech, I would propose that we go with our Hansard because that is what we have control over. We may be constrained to demand State House to produce and bring the text of his speech. May I, therefore, move that you put it on the Order Paper and we proceed to debate that statement basing on the Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the President undertook to give us a refined text; so I will ask the Government to follow it up and you give us an update.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

I. ON THE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY 2012

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, because of time, I have a summarised version and the Members have a detailed one. So, allow me to read you a summarised statement.

Permit me to present before this august House a statement on the upcoming International Women’s Day scheduled for March 8th 2012. The UN designated this day in 1975, while Uganda gazetted it as a public holiday in 1991, and it has been observed annually henceforth.

The day gives us an opportunity to underline our commitment towards our esteemed goal of equality for all, and equity for women, particularly the ideals clearly embodied in the Constitution.
 
Madam Speaker, on this day, we evaluate the achievements registered in line with the above benchmarks, and most importantly, we recognise those exemplary persons who have played distinguished roles in promoting the women’s well-being in the country. We are mindful that the men are key partners in the effort to uplift the status of women. Therefore, their participation as primary duty bearers should continue to be harnessed. 

Considering the decentralisation model of public administration, apparently in force, the local governments are targeted as one of the most significant terminal points in the promotion of the empowerment of women. This is because they undertake the majority of policy implementation and also make locally relevant policies for their areas of jurisdiction.

As the responsible Government department for the transformation, my ministry continues to coordinate the duty bearers in gender equality promotion and also provide the much needed technical support.

The theme under which this year’s celebration is being held, as advised and formulated by the United Nations is: “Connecting Girls, Inspiring Futures”. The theme implores all the duty bearers, including the government, to empower the girl-child in order to improve the social and economic status of women. The theme further calls for motivating, encouraging and causing enthusiasm within girls to aim for a better future. 

The attainment of this target entails a recognition of female achievers, motivation of the girls to strive harder, provide them with exemplary models and in retrospect support their economic and academic endeavours.

Madam Speaker, the theme is also appropriate for Uganda as it re-emphasises the NRM Government’s commitment towards women’s empowerment, and relates with Uganda’s Golden Jubilee celebrations. 

As we celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Uganda’s Independence this year, it is appropriate to focus on the girl-child to sharpen the kind of future we aspire to attain for the women of Uganda and the country at large, in line with the vision of Uganda.

Why the women’s movement started in the 1940s

The affirmative action policy has seen overdrive in participation of women in politics and education, which have had quantifiable and manifest results in such dimensions as career development. 

However, it is imperative that the women strike a balance between the new found emancipation with their primary maternal responsibilities. You may recall that during last year’s International Women’s Day celebration, His Excellency the President launched the African Women’s Decade 2010/2020. 

One of these dimensions was inauguration of the Young Women’s Movement. The importance of this venture was energising the African women’s movement as well as mentoring the young women leaders and professionals to be champions of gender equality and women’s empowerment. 

It is fitting once again that His Excellency the President, being the champion of the women’s emancipation, has accepted to officiate at this year’s national celebrations being hosted by the Nebbi District Local Government. 

The day is annually preceded by the Women’s Week, that is from March 1st to 7th, during which duty bearers showcase a range of events reflecting the vivid roles of women in the national development spectrum. These activities also add spice and embolden the role of women in the country. 

I enjoin you to participate in the celebrations to bear witness to the creativity of our women. The duty bearers that may not join in the national celebrations are encouraged to organise their own versions of the day at their own convenience and resources. 

I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members that is information about the forthcoming Women’s Day celebrations. Brief comments hon. Kabahenda, hon. Ibi, hon. Akena; two minutes and we end there. Just the four of you.

3.11
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA RWABUHORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate that the minister has made a statement about the Women’s Day, and I would like to appreciate that they chose to go by the international theme. However, I have some comments and observations. 

I would have loved that the minister’s statement justifies why Uganda chooses to take the international theme wholesale, to the effect that they even propose to us during that Women’s Week, the activities that we can carry out that reflect this theme. 

Secondly, the day before yesterday, I was in my district. I tried to meet with the CBS staff and the vote controller, and also the executive committee of the women’s council and the executive of NRM Women’s League. We were trying to talk about issues of the Women’s Day. What I discovered from the staff members is the way the district leadership regards this day and any other days for special interest groups. 

I wanted to know how much money was designated for the Women’s Day in my district. They told me, “We can tell you the money, but when we requisition for the money, they may either give us less or what they release will come very late.” It will then end up in a few hands and the day will be in a mess. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to see the ministry trying to implore upon the local governments to regard and commit themselves to such events, because they come once a year. Whenever such events come, it becomes expensive, but when it is their thing, that is when it becomes easier for them to release monies in time and even in excess. 

3.13
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Somebody behind me said, “Are you a woman.” I stand in support of women because I know that without women, this country cannot exist. 

I was listening to the honourable minister of Gender. There is one pertinent issue, which this country must observe, but I am seeing it omitted in some of the things they want to do: The rate of female school dropouts is very high. Girl-children are dropping out of school just because they lack the basics. Consider their physiological phenomenon - things that happen to girls when they make 12 years. 

I would want the Minister of Gender in collaboration with the Ministry of Education to say, “What do we do in an attempt to prevent girl-children from dropping out of primary school because of lack of sanitary pads.” 

Madam Speaker, we cannot hide from the truth. We are tired of seeing girl-children dropping out of school because of such simple things, when people are stealing Government money every day. Why don’t we get that money and push it into the Ministry of Gender and Education, and they buy these simple things for our children. I need an explanation from the Minister of Gender and the Minister of Education. Thank you so much. 

3.15
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for bringing this information this time round early. Madam Speaker, you will agree with me, almost every year, the message has been coming either a day to the International Women’s Day or two days to the day, and at times, you find the women MPs have already gone to help out on the activities in their constituencies. So, I must really thank you for bringing this information much earlier this time, so that we are able to tell the people the theme of the day. 

My first concern is on the issue of the guest of honour. The Eighth Parliament had the women MPs fighting with the RDCs all over the country, regardless of the party. You would find RDCs warming up to fight the women MPs on this day. The male RDCs are made the guests of honour and then the woman MP has no space completely. We don’t want this day to turn into a day for fighting between –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you colleague for giving way. I am here to give information and to affirm what my colleague is trying to present to this Parliament. I was one of the victims of Women’s Day celebrations. The harassment I got from the RDC - actually there was not even a chair for me as an area woman MP, and yet the women councillors had resolved that this is their day and their woman Member of Parliament should be their guest of honour.

The RDC had to tell me that, “This is a national celebration in the district. I represent the President and as the President is presiding over the national one, I represent him and preside over the one at the district.” My colleague, hon. Betty Aol, literally had to fight with the RDC over the same. So, the problem is more than what we know and it is good that you have discussed it so that we have a resolution over this. Otherwise, most of us are even shying away from joining in. Thank you. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much colleague, for the information. Madam Speaker, we honestly appeal to Government; we don’t want female MPs embarrassed on Women’s Day by the male RDCs. Honestly, if this is one day out of the 365, kindly make the women happy and let them own the day and feel they belong. Thank you very much. 

The other concern is the issue of the theme. Last year’s theme was something to do with reproductive health. I don’t know what mechanisms the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development have, to make a follow-up on the issues of the theme. Is it just a one line to console the women and then nothing completely is done? There is no budget implication, nothing completely. You talk about the theme of the whole year being reproductive health and you don’t liaise with the Ministry of Health to see how they are encompassing the component of the year’s theme. This year you are saying: “Connecting Girls, Inspiring Futures” and you are going to leave it to fate to decide on the fate of the girl-child. What do you have in store to follow up this issue? When you make a theme, let it go beyond lip service. Let it go beyond talking, and make it accompanied by at least an action, and then we shall know that you are moving a step forward to implement what you are doing. 

Madam Speaker, the last thing is the issue of funding for these days. In fact, if you ask these female MPs the burden they go through in funding Women’s Day celebrations, you will find you have dipped into your pockets and you have really struggled with the activities of the day. The Ministry of Gender is the second least funded as far as sector ministries are concerned. Will Government come up with at least this one day - even if Kaberamaido District is given Shs 500,000, if this is what they can afford. Can you foot at least something to make a blanket figure to cater for strictly Women’s Day celebrations? You do finance other activities such as Heroes’ Day and Government goes full blast into funding them. Why is it that you don’t do something just for –(Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, hon. Ibi, for giving me this opportunity to pass over this information. Through you, Madam Speaker, I want to inform my colleague the minister that actually, the districts have not funded this day because a directive came from the Central Government that the women councils and the youth councils will be catered for by the Central Government. And the districts actually look at even the Shs 500 that they put into their budget towards the women as a token, and they believe that the budget of Women’s Day is supposed to be solely financed by the Central Government. 

The little that goes to the accounts of the women in relation to the activities of the women councils is actually, like a Member said, eaten by a few men who are running the accounts at the district. So, we are requesting the ministry to style up. Look for money, put it on the accounts and make sure that on this day, it goes down to the districts to help the women have their celebrations. You are aware that most of the women cannot make it to the venue of the national celebrations, but even wherever they are, let them also feel that they are loved and cared for in their small way. 

The Central Government accepted that they will bear this responsibility and that it will put it in its budget. The districts have denied these women a chance to be included in their budget because they say, “You are a concern of the centre” and the centre that accepted to shoulder them has denied them the chance to be looked after. So, that is the reason why most districts are not budgeting for the women because the Central Government said it is taking on the responsibility of the Women’s Day and the Youth Day celebrations and activities. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. 

3.23
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for bringing this statement, but firstly, I would like her to elucidate on something which I may have misheard. I thought I heard that the first time it was celebrated or declared a public holiday was in 1991. I wish she could clarify to me what exactly we celebrated on the 8 March 1984. As far as I know, that was the first time in the history of Uganda that Women’s Day was celebrated in Uganda. Obviously, it was under the Congress. (Laughter)

Secondly, as we approach or rather we are in the year of the jubilee, I think it is important that we recognise that the struggle for the women did not begin in 1991 or 1986, but begun much earlier. It is important that if we are going to mark this day and inspire future generations, we recognise those who led the struggle, and who brought it this far. If we talk about education, let us also look at the aspect of the girl-child education. Where is the history of the girl-child education? (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Akena, for giving me the opportunity to give information. Madam Speaker, I wanted to inform hon. Akena that when the coup of 27 July 1985 took place, Jimmy Akena’s mother was leading a delegation of Ugandan women to attend the Nairobi conference on women. And I think most of you who are at the forefront on the women struggle remember the Nairobi Declaration on the women struggle -hon. Jimmy Akena was too young to remember.(Laughter)
 
MR AKENA: I thank the honourable member for that information, but I also wish to inform her that I actually attended the UN Decade for Women’s Conference in Nairobi. I was due to return on July 27th, but ended up spending the next 20 years in exile. 

On another note, Women’s Day is one of our truly national celebrations. The last time I tried to participate in the Independence celebrations, I met a lot of obstacles. It is not an NRM day, but that of Ugandan women and all of us who were born of women. We cannot avoid this issue and I am, therefore, asking the minister that, if the other political parties wish to come and share in that day, please, do not put any obstacles in our path. This is a national day; women are not only in NRM; we have Congress women, there are women in FDC and there are women across the board, plus those who are apolitical. (Applause)
 
3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members for their contributions on the statement of the Women’s Day and those who have appreciated our efforts to bring it a bit early.  

Madam Speaker, we came up with this theme of connecting girls, inspiring their futures, because it is one of the themes which we launched for the Women’s Decade. That is why we, this time round, didn’t domesticate it, though we always domesticate our themes basing on what the UN sends us.

The activities which are supposed to be undertaken during that week are quite many, but I couldn’t enumerate all of them here. We have things like debate, cleaning and quite many others that I will enumerate here for the House to debate. I, however, request Members that I pass a list, especially to the women, so that they get to know the activities which are going to be undertaken during that week. 

The local governments are supposed to recognise that day like any other national days such as Independence Day. Sometimes they need a follow up because I don’t know whether they just undermine women, but they are supposed to fund that day like any other national day. We may get compelled to write to them so that they can attach some importance to the Women’s Day. 

About the dropout of girls, we have to work with the Ministry of Education. But because this is a very wide topic that we cannot exhaustively tackle now, we shall have to work hand-in-hand with the Ministry of Education, to see why there is an increase in the dropout rate.
 
MR TANNA:  I would like to thank the honourable minister for coming up with this statement, and I would like to seek clarification on that particular issue that she is trying to shove off.
 
Madam Speaker, during the last recess, I was in my constituency and it is a major problem when girls, especially those around P6, P7, S1 and S2 get into their menstrual periods. Just like hon. Bitekyerezo has said, it is a problem accessing sanitary pads in most of the schools. What makes it worse is their disposal, because of the shyness of the young girls. They go and drop the pads in the toilets and yet the schools don’t have facilities for incinerating or disposing of the used pads. 

Madam Speaker, I would like, through you, to request the minister to come with a statement rather than saying they are going to communicate to the Ministry of Education and in the usual style of management, allow it to pass. I would like this House to urge the honourable minister to come back with a statement, maybe within one or two-weeks’, time and explain to us what they are doing so as to alleviate that problem.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe for the record, I just want to say that ever since the Sixth Parliament, the women’s caucus of this House has been trying to lobby Government to make sanitary pads part of the UPE materials, but each time we bring it up we are defeated. I would like to go on record on that one. (Applause) We tried in the Social Services Committee, but we were told that we were bringing strange ideas. We tried in this very House through our committees - but it should be part of the UPE materials because that would make the children stay in school.
 
MS NAKADAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  As you are suggesting that it should be part of UPE, the Ministry of Education has to come in.

THE SPEAKER: With your help.

MS NAKADAMA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.  On the issue of the chief guest, I would request my colleagues, women Members of Parliament, that we sit together and agree, because as a national function, the women MPs are supposed to attend.  But since we are not all able to attend where the national function is, we always stay in our respective districts and negotiate with our women and the leadership at the district, and agree on who is supposed to be the chief guest.  

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of guidance to the honourable minister, basing on the Constitution, where Article 28 empowers us as women MPs. Basing on the fact that we are the women MPs, on Women’s Day is it really imperative for the Woman Member of Parliament to enter into arbitration as to whether she should be the guest of honour? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please answer. We have got other work to do. 

MS NAKADAMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is an issue for Government to discuss internally and come up with somebody who should be the chief guest on that day.
 
Madam Speaker, we talked about how the function should be funded. I am requesting that let our districts fund the Women’s Day like any other national day. They should not undermine Women’s Day; it should be funded fully like they fund other days like Independence Day and others. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is a matter, which our Committee on Gender should follow up. I think it is really serious; you are saying districts should fund, but I do not know if the budget is there. You are saying negotiate - I do not know. Can we ask our Committee on Gender and Labour to take up this matter so that we can engage the government on the issue of the guest of honour and the funding, so that we have a lasting solution?

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, like I said, this is a national day like any other day in Government, which is supposed to be funded nationally and by our local governments.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I had guided that our committee should engage with the government on this matter and clarify the issue of the guest of honour and that of funding. I doubt whether we can finish it on this Floor.

MS NAKADAMA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

II. ON THE YOUTH VENTURE CAPITAL FUND

3.38
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to present this paper on the Youth Venture Capital Fund that was launched on 1 February 2012.

The objective is to provide information on this pioneer initiative for reference and use by honourable members to assist the youth in their constituencies to develop viable projects for loan application.

The fund is worth Ugshs 25 billion made up of a contribution of Ugshs 12.5 billion from Government of Uganda and KFW with matching funds of Ugshs 12.5 billion contributed by the participating commercial banks namely: DFCU, Centenary and Stanbic banks.

These banks have already signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Government. The Ugshs 25 billion is deposited in the banks. The source of Government’s contribution to the fund are the debt service reflows from sources provided by the KFW, the German NGO that had been reserved for financing small and medium enterprises through DFCU bank.

The purpose of the fund is to provide debenture capital debt finance to viable projects proposed by youth to participating banks, as well as to enable them to benefit from mentoring services from the same banks. Thus, the fund will be used to support growth of viable and sustainable small and medium sized enterprises in the private sector.

The funds can be used for the following purposes: Working capital, import and export loans, bank guarantees, leasing facilities, invoice discounting and term loans in most business activities.

This programme is designed to address the existing shortcomings, which hinder funding of the lower end of small and micro size enterprises, especially those operated by the youth. Such enterprises tend to suffer from the following: Lack of adequate collateral, under capitalised businesses, start-up with limited business skills and poor record keeping, low levels of corporate governance and the informal nature of a business, leading to its early collapse.

The obligations of the Government of Uganda

The Government of Uganda and KFW are
responsible for the following:

•	Provision of Ugshs 12.5 billion, which is equivalent to half of the fund.
•	Provision of the overall policy framework and guidance on eligibility criteria as well as monitoring and evaluation.
•	Encouraging established institutions and individuals to support entrepreneurship growth through mentoring and provision of selective business windows.
•	Obligation of participating commercial banks

The participating banks have agreed to undertake the following:

•	Provision of an equivalent matching contribution of Ugshs 12.5 billion to the fund.
•	To conduct due diligence on all loan applications in line with their credit policies and agreed parameters governing the fund.
•	Provision of quarterly reports on the performance of the respective portfolios indicating the quality of the portfolio and a summary of the beneficiaries.
•	To provide, upon request by the Government of Uganda or KFW, any specific requests, and reports relating to the performance of the loans advanced under the fund.
•	To provide an officer in each branch that is directly responsible for managing the applications related to this fund. The designated officer shall also receive and attend to all the queries by the applicants. The name and phone number of such a staff and his or her counterpart at the headquarters and national level, shall be reflected on each application form.

Madam Speaker, we have already provided to the Parliament the names and phone contacts of the national officers in each bank, who will be dealing with any problems that arise at the branch level.

Eligibility criteria

The fund is available to support the business ventures owned by youth entrepreneurs. Eligible sectors include: Manufacturing, agroprocessing, primary agriculture, livestock, fisheries, health, transport, education, tourism, construction, printing and service contractors.

The eligible youths shall be aged between 18 and 35 years. The eligible beneficiaries should be ready to undergo some mentoring in entrepreneurship and financial skills for proper business management.

Madam Speaker, it is well known that money does not come with instructions. You will also note that there is no education requirement.

Eligible borrowers shall be required to commit themselves to establish formal businesses that will be registered by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. The maximum credit facility that can be provided to any one individual or sole proprietor is Ugshs 5.0 million, while a legal entity with at least five eligible shareholders or partners can access up to Ugshs 25 million.

Eligible businesses must have been in operation for a minimum period of three months with a demonstrable potential to grow. Each business project should be able to provide employment to at least four people over the loan period. They do not have to have them at the beginning of the loan.

Each borrower shall present at least two guarantors who must be persons of good repute within the community. The borrowers will also be required to provide or execute personal guarantees of the directors, partners or business owner, and a debenture over the assets of the business.

The beneficiary of the fund shall be required to contribute or to show that he or she has invested the equivalent of at least ten percent of the loan amount in the business venture.

Lending terms

The following are the applicable lending terms:

•	The purpose shall be business growth or expansion.
•	The tenure shall be a maximum of four periods inclusive with a maximum of one year grace period.
•	The currency or loan facility shall be denominated in Uganda shillings.
•	Loan amount. The maximum credit facility provided to any one individual or sole proprietor is Ugshs 5.0 million, while a legal entity with at least five eligible shareholders or partners can access up to a maximum of Ugshs 25 million.
•	The interest rate. A fixed interest rate of 15 percent will apply for all loans lent out until June 30th 2012 when the applicable rate shall be reviewed and mutually agreed upon by the participating banks and Government. The review shall be done on the 1st day of July each financial year.
•	Facility fee will be equivalent to one percent of the loan amount.
•	Loan security will include personal guarantees of eligible borrowers and a floating charge on the business assets. I am sorry, Madam Speaker, because that has already been mentioned. The fund will only support first-time borrowers; the banks will be encouraged to support repeat borrowers with a good track record using their bank resources from outside the fund.

Madam Speaker, in order to demonstrate the considerable advantages of participating in the fund, I have included the following comparative terms that a new borrower with a business experience of six months is likely to face in the open market outside of the fund.

To begin with, commercial banks, except under very exceptional circumstances, do not finance newly started businesses.

An interest of 30-33 percent would be determined on the basis of adding a mark-up of five to six percentage points to a prime lending rate of 27 percent. A detailed list of requirements that would include a business profile, nature of the target market, record of previous business flows et cetera. 

A grace period that would depend on the nature of the business project, but that would not exceed three to six months. 

The loan period, typically, would not exceed two years. Madam Speaker, this demonstrates the comparative attractiveness of the fund which the government has negotiated with the banks.

Looking at the summary of the guiding principles, by implementing this fund through the commercial banking system, Government will be able to realise the following principles: 

(a)	Countrywide access – the three banks, between them, have a very wide countrywide access of branch networks to ensure easy access by applicants.
 
(b)	Expert handling of scarce resources – the banks’ every day function is to enable the efficient handling and distribution of funds while ensuring timely repayments which can be lent out again. On the other hand, Government itself is not best equipped for evaluation and selection of likely sustainable winners.
 
(c)	Transparency – all applicants will be evaluated using a generally accepted loan criteria as to their capacity to successfully invest the limited resources available.
 
(d)	Accountability – the banks will provide quarterly reports to Government and KFW.

(e)	Sustainability – the banks will collect the loan repayments through the existing collection mechanism. The loan repayments will provide investment funds for other eligible youth entrepreneurs.

(f)	Focus – the banks’ existing loan criteria system will ensure that the funds are used only in productive ventures as per the agreed parameters.

Madam Speaker, many of us will remember that the first time we borrowed money we were tempted to use it in consumption. But Government has learnt many lessons about encouraging business ventures and hopes to put all these lessons to good use in this present fund. I beg to submit this information paper to Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the shadow youth minister? Is he not here? Is hon. Fungaroo representing him? (Laughter)

MS AMODING: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for that good presentation. What is at stake now is not the Youth Venture Fund, but the guidelines which have been submitted to these banks. 

We had earlier given a document, from the DFCU Bank and Centenary Bank, where these funds are, to the Department of Clerks to make copies so that Members can debate what they are seeing. The uproar from the countryside is just about the guidelines. I request that the copies of the leaflets be brought so that they can guide the debate.

3.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I can see here, “Government/KFW Funding”. I recall we passed a budget here with Shs 45 billion for the youth; what happened to the rest? We need to sort this out before going to the methods of acquisition. Now, we can see banks are matching up; KFW is coming in - what happened to the Shs 45 billion for the youth that we passed here?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the Acting Shadow Youth Minister before we go back to the others.

3.52
THE SHADOW YOUTH MINISTER (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand in for my colleague, hon. Acire. Some concerns are here and more information is coming, especially indicating the banks that are going to be used. But it has not been clearly indicated here what happens with areas where banks do not exist. For example, Centenary Bank and DFCU have limited branches in West Nile. Is there any provision to cover the youth entrepreneurs who are faraway from the banks in terms of distance? 

The other one is the concern of recovery - this is a loan to be paid back; it is not a donation. There are cases of loans which were given in good faith, but were badly handled, unfortunately, from both sides, especially by microfinance institutions. And many people these days have left their homes and have gone to exile because they failed to repay the loans and yet the system of recovery involves a bit of harassment. So, here, in the terms and conditions, we need the minister to clarify on the recovery procedures so that the youth are aware. We do not want this fund to fail like it was the case with Entandikwa – you remember that scheme for the poor whose recovery was mishandled and, therefore, it did not yield fruit.

There is also the question of enterprising youth who have never been to school. If you look at most of the successful businessmen and women, their track record in terms of education is a bit of a challenge. However, having dropped out of school at an early stage or having missed a chance to go to school entirely, he or she goes ahead to develop business acumen. What are you going to say about this category? 

MR ALEX RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my colleague for giving way. There is evidence on what he is saying because yesterday I met a group of youths from Fort Portal and their major concerns are reflected in this document. The last time we were here, we asked the minister to go back and come with a revised, and realistic version. Otherwise, the way these conditions stand, it shows that Government is not prepared to give money to the youths. 

This is what I can deduce from here; they have just put in place a roadblock. How can you ask these youths for a VAT registration certificate? For someone who is just starting business? But you have gone ahead and shown that you will be giving to company first-timers. How do you expect a first-timer to have a VAT certificate; is he already in business? I think the minister should go back because we agreed last time to be realistic and get friendly conditions for these youths. We need to let them move on. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much for the information hon. Ruhunda. On the terms of eligibility, if you look at the DFCU one, age has been given here as 21 to 35 and the minister’s statement talks about 18 to 35. There is already a variation and a deviation. Which one are we going to use?

Madam Speaker, we as Ugandans know that many attempts of this kind have been made to improve the conditions of the poor, the youths and the women. But if we go down to do an audit, we find that little progress is made and effort and time are wasted. I would, therefore, like to appeal that this time round we make sure that these attempts do not go down the drain, but that they become a take-off stage for the young people. 

And do not forget the rural people who do not have easy access to the bank, particularly those of Obongi, where from Obongi to Arua the nearest Centenary Bank and DFCU Bank is over 72 miles. Why don’t you think about another mechanism to use? A prominent SACCO, for example, like the Moyo SACCO is the bank we use even for the big people and Government. So, you should think about other financial institutions which can handle such issues, and include them here as the bank institutions to handle these loans. I thank you very much. All this I say for God and my country. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the difficulty I am seeing is that this is the third time we are discussing this matter and each time the minister comes with the same or varying conditions; not addressing the plight of the young people. Actually, we expected you to come with softer conditions because each time we go out, this is what the young people are telling us - the third time in the same session? Minister, we have been appealing for variation of these conditions.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, you remember last time, when I stood before you here, you raised some very fundamental questions: the question of age and the question of qualification. We went back, reflected on this and although the banks were insisting on this we said, “No, the question of education should not be included as one of the qualifications -(Interjections)- hold on -(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of Finance is here. When the same paper and proposal was being presented here, he was around. We talked about age and he knows it very well. He knows that we have got very many youths who have not even gone beyond senior four; people who are still “small”. Now, he has brought the same paper. Is he in order to tell us about age when he has brought back age and eligibility again? Is he in order, Madam Speaker, to come and start talking about education when he knows that we had told him to bring a document that caters for less education, so that the P.7 dropout can also access this money? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the problem I am seeing is that you have not satisfied our requests on the banks. We talked about the distance for the young people. We talked about the need for the certificate. We are going round in circles.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I wish you had allowed me to complete my statement. (Interjections) If you listened carefully to my minister, she specifically said there will be no need for referring to levels of education. (Interjections) She said it. I agree with you. I am agreeing with you that this form indicates education, but we are the managers of this fund. (Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable minister in order to deceive this House by claiming that issues we talked about were rectified, specifically the certificates required, when we have two documents given and detailing the education requirements that are needed? 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, you said you are partnering with the banks. This document is from the partner and the partner is saying education, VAT, etc. 

4.03
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. These documents that are being circulated were prepared outside the ministry. We have been -(Interjections)- negotiating with the banks for a very long time and we were still negotiating at the time the youths were very keen to have the money as soon as possible. So, what has happened is that these documents were got from the bank while we were still negotiating. What I have said on the Floor today is the latest update. These documents will be updated by the banks when we leave here.

When it came to access to funds, many banks wanted to join us but we had already -(Interruption) 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, we have received two sets of documents. One is a statement that has just been read on the Floor of this Parliament. The Minister of State for Finance thereafter stood up and said that the issue of education was waived. Whereas the full minister, in her statement on page 3, point 11, says that eligible beneficiaries should be ready to undergo some mentoring in entrepreneurship and financial skills for proper business management. And if you correlate that information with the documents given to us from the banks, it says, “Certified attendance of training in entrepreneurship from an institute approved by MoFPED e.g. Enterprise Uganda.”

Madam Speaker, if we are here just to use a lot of English to hoodwink the people of Uganda, especially the youths - is the honourable minister in order to read the statement saying that the interest rate shall be 10 percent and the banks are claiming 15 percent? The document is here. If you read the requirement on page 2 given to us about the banks it says, “Fixed interest rate of 15 percent per annum shall be charged on a declining balance.” If you look at the document by DFCU, it says exactly the same. Pricing; interest rate fixed at 15 percent up to July 31st 2012.

When you read the statement given by the honourable minister, it says that interest shall be fixed at 10 percent. Is the honourable minister in order whereas the implementing agencies on the ground are doing something different, to present false information to this House? Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you must tell us, are these your partners or not? -  because this is Centenary Bank, this is DFCU bank, and the quotations are here, and this is what we have been complaining about.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to join my colleagues in this august House to categorically say that, if this is meant to be the Youth Fund, then this is not the way it is supposed to be given out to the young people.
 
I want to give some information. I went to a bank as a youth who wanted a loan two days ago and I posed -(Interjections- yes, I am a youth although I represent the people of Ngora. When I went to the bank, first of all, no one was attending to me until another person realised I was a Member of Parliament, then they ran to me and gave me details in regards to accessing the Youth Fund. Imagine, I am in Kampala, how about that young person from Ngora?

When the minister presented here about the age, there was already conflict of interest. The minister shows us that they are not liaising with the financial institutions that are supposed to disburse this money. I would also like to know -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank my colleague from Ngora for giving way. The information I would like to give is; there is no Centenary Bank branch neither is there a DFCU branch in Ngora. Therefore, for your youths to access this fund, the nearest point they can get this money from is Kumi, which is about 20 kilometres away.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you for that information because that point was already mentioned. I would love for purposes of the poorest youths of this country - the youths were actually meant to get this money - for the minister to go back, sit - we have a Parliamentary Forum on youth affairs in this House and we have a Committee on Gender in this House, please, honourable minister, sit with the Members of Parliament and come up with harmonised modalities for young people to access this money.

I am insisting that we have a Parliamentary Forum on youth affairs in this august House, we have a Committee on Gender in this august House and this matter has been brought to this Floor thrice and yet we need to come up with clear modalities on how young people can access this money. It is my plea that the line ministry sits with this committee and we come up with clear modalities. Otherwise, I can assure you, if we are to represent the interests of the young people of this country, these modalities are not working to our interest. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can see that we are not making progress.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In view of the document circulating which has caused confusion, I suggest I come back with a document signed by all the banks. This document will be signed by the MDs of all the three banks which will give the most updated and coordinated positions, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you know, the financial year is coming to an end. We passed this budget and informed the young people that we are giving them money and now we are going into nearly the last quarter.  Minister, please, can you bring this statement next week so that we give these children money before the financial year ends?

MRS KIWANUKA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. She has undertaken to bring a signed statement from all the banks.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE MICROFINANCE SUPPORT CENTRE LIMITED (MSC) FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE, 2011

4.14
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for the year ended 30th June 2011 covering the Micro-finance Support Centre Limited. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that statement is from the Auditor-General’s office. He is an officer of this House and we are sending it to the Public Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

REQUEST FOR PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO 
$75 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP AS ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR THE TRANSPORT SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, in line with Article 159 of our Constitution, a request by Government to seek authorisation from Parliament for a loan of $75 million from the International Development Association(IDA) of the World Bank Group as additional funding for the Transport Sector Development Project to upgrade the Fort Portal-Kamwenge road to be implemented by the Uganda National Roads Authority under the auspices of the Ministry of Works and Transport. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that request is remitted to the Committee on National Economy and we shall ask the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to give them support if they need it. 

MS ALASO: Thank you Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance. I did not get the impression that the Order Paper had been amended. I was hoping that we would be given a ministerial statement on 3.II about the performance of the Ugandan economy. It seems the minister has gone ahead of the rest of us. Was the Order Paper amended? Should we expect this to come fourth and we debate this very important issue which the minister actually committed the ministry to, last week? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. I think you were not here when I made my communication. I said I would be happier if the quarterly report of the Committee on National Economy, which is ready, is debated first before this one. 
		
REQUEST FOR PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $30.28 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) FOR FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION OF A SPECIALISED MATERNAL AND NEONATAL HEALTH CARE UNIT AT MULAGO NATIONAL REFERRAL HOSPITAL.

4.17 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table in line with Article 159 of our Constitution, a request by Government of Uganda to borrow $30.28 million from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) for financing the construction of a specialised maternal and neonatal health care unit at Mulago National Referral Hospital to be implemented by the Ministry of Health.

I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is something the women of Uganda have been asking for, for a long time. We send it to the Committee on National Economy and we ask the Committee on Social Services to give them support and report back urgently. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, I said I would allow only five more contributions. 

4.19
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The document, which is the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that we are considering, encapsulates the national budgeting process to a reasonable extent. However, I want to contend that budgeting without planning is tyranny in itself. In fact, there is an old saying that failure to plan is like planning to fail.

Parliament as the people’s representative and an overseer of Government, needs to own the destiny of this nation through development planning. What I note in our Rules of Procedure is that the issue of development planning has not been given adequate attention while we give so much attention to budgeting. There is no way we can delink planning from budgeting. In fact, budgeting is a way of implementing Government’s plans. 

Therefore, I would like to note that the framers of our national Constitution saw it fit under Article 125 to create the National Planning Authority. I want to quote Article 125 of the Constitution, Madam Speaker, “There shall be a National Planning Authority whose composition and functions shall be prescribed by Parliament.” 

In my opinion, Parliament should further interest itself in the destiny of this nation through planning by including in our Rules of Procedure an arrangement for receiving, discussing and approving the following documents as provided for under the National Planning Act, 2002.

1. 	The national vision;
2. 	The five-year National Development Plan; 
3. 	A mid-term review report of the National Development Plan to determine how we are performing in relation to targets; and 
4. 	An annual report on the performance of the economy.

All these are clearly articulated in the National Planning Act. 

Uganda is a poor nation that desperately needs planning to achieve its development goals. Parliament should, therefore, seriously monitor to ensure that resources are applied based on our national development plans to avoid ad hoc expenditure. 

I beg to submit. Thank you very much.

4.24
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank the committee for the report and particularly, for Rule 153 on the functions of the Committee on Government Assurances. 

You all know that the Committee on Government Assurances is one of the committees which have been very redundant. Anybody being posted to this committee either as a Member or as a chairperson – we used to think that Government Assurances is not a committee which is functional. 

The amendment being brought forward by this report is going to make this committee very relevant to this House. When you read Rule 153, the committee’s work has been very limited to scrutinising the assurances, promises and undertakings given by the ministers and other agents. That is all. That means our rules have not even been recognising the assurances made by His Excellency the President; not even by the Vice-President; not even by the Prime Minister. Our rules have not been covering this. 

However, the proposal of scrutinising the assurances, promises and undertakings given by the minister, Prime Minister, President and Vice-President is a very good move. I only request the committee to consider the issue of protocol because the order is not very good. You cannot start with a minister, then Prime Minister, then President, then Vice-President. The order should be put right for purposes of protocol. 

I am also very happy that the rules now provide for the withdrawal of an assurance – because if you make an assurance as a minister on the Floor of the House here, you are given an opportunity to withdraw, although with much shame. This is a very good move to deter ministers from coming to the Floor here to make endless promises, which they are not able to fulfill. 

If you do not have the funds to fulfill a promise – if the assurance you are giving to the House is not tenable, our rules are very clear on that. So, I urge Members that when it comes to page 44 on the amendment of our Rules of Procedure, please support the committee on Government Assurances on all these proposals. Otherwise, all the promises we make to our constituents will never materialise and –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one more minute.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The new amendments in the Rules of Procedure – you are giving us a day to present the promises made by ministers to our constituents. But once the ministers respond to these queries, they automatically become Government assurances. So, I urge Members to support the amendments on the Committee on Government Assurances. Otherwise, this committee has been very redundant and I am very happy with the move of the committee. 

4.29
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to comment on 3.1, on the issue of creating more committees. My first comment is on the Standing Committee on Human Rights. I seek guidance from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on whether they are overworked to the extent that to handle human rights necessitates another committee. 

All of us are trying to find ways of reducing public expenditure. It is not about just making another committee; it is about having public expenditure reduced. So, in my opinion, having a separate committee on human rights, vis-vis the objective noted here, I propose that this work remains with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

Another issue is, I am aware that we have a challenge of the minority groups. While we talk of minority groups, we must also protect our culture. So, I foresee minority groups come out strongly to demand for some of the issues that we do not plan to discuss here, and introduce aspects of our different cultures. I think we do not need a committee on human rights; let the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs handle these issues.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwang, just for the record, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is one of the most loaded committees in this House. But the committee is not just about human rights; it is to do with the Report of the IGG, which we never handled throughout the Eight Parliament because we were overloaded; the report on the Human Rights Commission which we never handled in both the Seventh and Eighth Parliament. So, that is where we are coming from; they are really snowed with work. 

MR OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker; that is why when I rose up, I wanted to be guided on why such a committee should be put in place. 

The other issue I would like to raise is the Committee on East African Affairs. I am an executive Member of the East African Parliamentary Forum. But I would be very happy if we remained under the committee on Foreign Affairs.

The other issue is on page 19: Backbench Committee. I need to be guided here as well, Madam Speaker. What will this committee be doing? The Constitution and our Rules of Procedure state clearly that Government Business should be given priority. (Interjections) In my opinion, whenever I have issues, I will always bring them in my caucus. And there, if the caucus feels that the issues are very important for the Executive to consider, they will be brought up there. But to have a committee on backbench business, is to me not necessary. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.33
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the committee for the work well done. Whereas our Rules of Procedure derive their existence from Article 94, I have areas that I truly support. For instance, gender consideration in leadership of committees; use of electronic gadgets in the House – I think the heroes of technology in this world comply with advancements; institutionalisation of the forum of chairpersons among others. These are some of the critical proposals that I support.

However, there are areas where I have reservations, especially on creation of new committees. The creation of a committee in charge of subsidiary legislation – I am aware that under Article 79(2) of the Constitution, Parliament delegates its legislative powers to other bodies like ministers to make statutory instruments, district councils, the question of ordinances, etc. 

But to have a specific committee in charge of subsidiary legislations; there are subsidiary legislations that do not require the approval of Parliament and that would make the committee a bit inactive. But I support that of human rights. So, for us to create a committee in charge of subsidiary legislation; I have a lot of reservations in supporting it.

And on the Committee on Implementation of Government Loans, agreements and programmes, Article 95 of the Constitution makes it mandatory for the terms and conditions of all loans to be laid before Parliament and to be approved by Parliament through a resolution. Despite that fact, that I have reservation in supporting this particular amendment, I want to poor out my fears and concerns on the Committee in charge of National Economy. The rate at which we are borrowing can break us any time. I must say that ever since I came to this Parliament, there is no single loan that has been rejected in the reports of the Committee on National Economy. I beg to be challenged on that. 

So, for issues of scrutiny of our loan requests, I think is an issue that the committee should be very strict on because we cannot sit here each and every time a loan request comes in and we just approve it –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank this committee for the job well done. The methodology used by the committee makes the report good. They tackled issues one by one as raised to them and consulted widely especially on relevant laws, the court ruling and practices of other Parliaments and for this, I want to commend the committee.

On consideration of the proposals, observations and recommendations as contained on page 3, and especially looking at item No.3 on accountability, I hope the reference should not be made on individual Members of Parliament, but institutional bodies of Parliament like the leadership of the House and the committee, the Parliamentary delegation, Members of EALA and PAP, because individual Members of Parliament are more accountable to people who elect them.

Madam Speaker, allow me to comment on the Speaker’s Panel on page 4. There is one salient issue, and this issue is the possibility of a member of the Opposition chairing as Speaker and if addition is to be made, this salient issue should form part of the informed decision that will be made on this matter.

On page 10, Rule 102, which talks about Certificate of Financial Implication; at the moment, the certificate is issued to show the effect of a coming Act on the budget. What I have been wondering is that if a member of the Opposition wants to present a Private Member’s Bill, can Government refuse to issue the certificate?  This means that Member would now not proceed. I do not know whether such an experience has been realised in this august House. 

At the same time, if Members were to introduce Bills and all of them succeed, I think it would lead to redundant laws due to the lack of money to operationalise them, because they would be too many for Government to handle. 

Madam Speaker, allow me draw your attention to page 12 and Rule 139(2), there is that last part of that proposal which asks to allow debate of the report of the committee by the Whole House. As it stands at the moment, the report is brought to the House and no debate is done. If an amendment is introduced, I foresee the following scenarios: It would reduce the work of the Appointments Committee almost to nothing, and also ties the hands of the appointing authority, and in case of ministers starting work, it would take long as the House debates the fate of these ministers. 

My view is that as long as the committee is made transparent, I think this should be open and the committee can do the delegated role of the Whole House in handling these affairs. This would avoid the deadlock between the appointing authority and Parliament.

On page 13, concerning the issue of deletion of Rule 146, as it stands now, where the President’s nominee is not approved by the committee, the President may appeal to the House to take decision on this matter. This rule should be amended to ensure that the committee has all the powers to exercise it on behalf of the Whole House. The way it is currently, Rule 144 does not allow debate of the committee report and yet Rule 146 allows a petition to be presented. This presents double standards because allowing a petition amounts to debating a committee report. 

So, with or without amending this provision, my recommendation would be that Rule 146 should be deleted. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.41
MR STEPHEN BAKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me also join colleagues in thanking the committee for the way they expeditiously handled the report. 

Before I proceed to the specific provisions and the rules of my concern, I wish to draw the attention of this House to the fact that we are in a multi-party dispensation and if we are to be in a multi-party dispensation after a very long time of unitary governments and one party rule, we must nurture multi-partism. We must be able to develop institutions that are going to help us to move correctly on the path of multi-party democracy.

When you read through this report, there is a flavor that is offensive to the tenets of the multiparty democracy in a Parliament of this nature. I have issues with very many rules that have been proposed and I think would erode the authority, independence and the strength of political parties in this House. 

Before I get there, allow me just make a comment on the Speakers’ Panel that has been suggested. I have never seen any meeting flop in this House because the Speakers are absent. To the contrary, as you heard yesterday, meetings have flopped because Members are absent and, therefore, I would strongly suggest that we drop the idea of the Speakers’ Panel. The two presiding officers are adequate to run this House the way they have done in the past.

This is also offensive to Article 82 of the Constitution that clearly spells out that we shall have a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker. On the issue of the whips; the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip under Rule 13, I would push for the provision of the Deputy Chief Whip and the Deputy Opposition Whip because as you realise, at times it is extremely very difficult to mobilise Members in this House.
 
Right now, you have the numbers, but there is going to be a time when you will sit in this House and you will not get Members because sometimes, the Chief Whip and the Opposition Whip are constrained and not available. For example, on the Government side, we cannot see the Government Chief Whip. I think there would be an arrangement for them to have deputies as a way of mobilising Members. 

I do not agree with the assistant whips where there is a proposal that for every 50 members, there would be whip - that would be too much whipping, I think –(Interjections)- that would actually be tantamount to caning.

Under the creation of new committees, I do agree with the committee report and this is buttressed by Article 90 in this Constitution where we are free to form committees for the efficient discharge of our duties in this Parliament. Therefore, the proposition to create a Committee on Human Rights is welcome. It is true that in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we have grappled with reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and up to now, we have not completed them and are not yet up to date.

We are also not up to date with the reports of the IGG and some times, we have to go and be holed up in hotels to be able to complete those reports on top of our usual legislation in the committee and oversight of the Parliamentary Commission. 

The idea of a Human Rights Committee is very welcome and as a committee, we support it. The split of the Social Services Committee – the Committee on Education and Sports and the Committee on Health, is a welcome idea because this committee has been too big and handling too many amorphous areas.

Let me go to the offensive provisions that tend to water down the independence of political parties. The idea under Rule 34 that membership of committees and designation of chairpersons and deputy chairpersons should be through elections in committees. This will water down the very essence as to why we are in such a House, because parties must have the power, authority to direct how they want their affairs to be run in this House. 

The idea of proposing that we have a Dean of Independents in this House as if we are in a Movement System, is not acceptable to us. How can we allow Independents behave as if they are a party to the extent of proposing that they should have a dean? Independents should be independent of each other – (Interruptions)

MS GRACE NAMARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that regardless of the party affiliation here, we are all equal. So, if you continue to think that you are only trying to favour us, I do not think – we are seated here as independents – so, is the honourable member in order to say that we should be treated this way because they are only favouring us?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think all of us are meeting this challenge of having Independents in a multiparty system. But since it is a constitutional provision, we should find ways of accommodating each other.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. But my contention is that the Independents should be free to associate, but we cannot put that in our rules or even legislate for that association. Let them associate freely without us providing for that in our Rules of Procedure. Thank you very much.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I think your advice is very correct. But also the observations of the honourable member holding the Floor are pertinent. However, I believe that we have got some guidelines in our Constitution under Article 73, and when you read it, you realise that clause 1 reads as follows: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, but notwithstanding the provisions of articles 29 (1)(e) and 43 of this Constitution, during the period when any of the political systems provided for in this Constitution has been adopted, organisations subscribing to other political systems may exist subject to such regulations as Parliament shall by law prescribe.” Article 73(2) reads thus: “Regulations prescribed under this article shall not exceed what is necessary for enabling the political system adopted to operate.”

So, whatever we put in place, we should not encumber the adopted multiparty dispensation to operate. (Applause) Otherwise, it will fizzle out in the air. So, I intend to see a fair compromise where we accept to accommodate them, but to recognise them as if they are a political party or an organisation within this House is not fair at all, both legally and logically. (Applause)

4.50
MS RUTH JOY ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to add my voice to those of the Members who have thanked the committee for the good work done. However, I have some observations to make. It is true I thank them for considering crucial issues like those that concern gender, but it is also my humble prayer that the rules consider the political parties that were not considered in the old rules.

Page 14 of the report talks about the Committee on HIV/AIDS and other related matters, stating that we should have that committee handling only issues of HIV/AIDS; but the committee forgot the fact that there are opportunistic infections and other complications that come along when a person is HIV positive. I agree that this will help us in fighting HIV/AIDS, but I request that the committee reconsiders this point.

On the issue of splitting the committees that are presumed to be large like that of social services, I would like to say that I agree with that recommendation. I am saying this because when you put education and health together, you create a vast committee. This is because education is a wide sector from pre-primary, primary, secondary, institutions and so on. You cannot imagine such issues being handled alongside health issues, which are also so many. The committee might end up not being effective. That is why I move that we split that vast committee to create another Committee on Education and Sports to ensure efficiency on service delivery. That will leave the health committee to stand alone and be more effective.

On page 17, the report talks about the Committee on Government Loans. I recommend that we should have a committee on loans because our Parliament has been approving so many loans; we need a committee to look into the issues of securing loans as a country. That committee will be charged with the duty of scrutinising these loans before they are approved.

This committee will also do a follow-up and ensure value-for-money is achieved. I am saying this because a lot of money from loans has been misused. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.54
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I also wish to thank the Odoi Committee for making this presentation. 

I appeared before this committee and I am happy that my issues, from page 30 to 31, have been reported upon . However, I have noticed that the recommendation that concludes my submission did not relate to it. My submission was to do with the deletion of Rule 154(1)d from the current Rules of Procedure. This particular rule takes away the function of monitoring from COSASE, which makes it impotent.

The argument of the Committee on Rules is that this particular rule is in conflict with Rule 161(e) of our current Rules of Procedure. However, I would like to disagree with this. Whereas Rule 161 relates to the functions of sessional committees, sub-section (e) of this rule talks about the duty to monitor the performance of ministries and departments. In the case of COSASE, we monitor statutory authorities and state enterprises, authorities where Government has an interest in and, therefore, in my view, I do not see any conflict in these functions. I would like to move later when we come to amendments that this particular recommendation be deleted. 

Secondly, on the same issue, currently we have got a great challenge as Parliament and especially the accountability committees; the challenge in dealing with project accounts and value-for-money accounts. We have more than 30 value-for-money accounts that have not been handled through the life of the Seventh, Eighth, and now, the Ninth Parliament. 

It is my view that you support either the creation of a new committee to handle particularly value-for-money audits and project audits or we integrate, and specifically mention in our Rules of Procedure this particular function and assign it to the relevant committees that handle accountabilities. With this as well, I would like to inform the House that under the National Audit Act, the office of the Inspector General has recently been mandated to audit gender, environment and procurement. And nowhere in our Rules of Procedure is such a provision made. I think this merits forming a new committee. 

I notice the tone in the Rules Committee report is combative and is labeling its guns against the official Opposition in Parliament. The kind of recommendations that they have made make the official Opposition dysfunctional. They talk about the committees of Parliament that the Opposition holds and say well, you can only have the chairmanship. What powers will hon. Nandala-Mafabi or anybody else who comes after him have over the committee?

The committee has recommended that even in the Parliamentary Commission, the majority Opposition party in Parliament is already represented by virtue of the office of the Leader of the Opposition. I beg to disagree with this. 

We know the composition of the Parliamentary Commission and I would like to -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for you to conclude.

MR AMURIAT: If the argument of the committee has to be held, we know that you, Madam Speaker, who is elected as NRM Woman Representative for Kamuli, sits on the Commission. Your deputy sits on the Commission. The Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business sit on the Commission. The Minister of Finance sits on the Commission. And besides, there are a whole three NRM Backbenchers sitting on the Commission. 

What does the Opposition have, the Leader of the Opposition and one Backbencher Opposition Member of Parliament. 

I would beg that the status quo stays. I know we would like to have the smaller political parties in the Opposition represented, including Independents. By the way, in my view, Independents are individuals. I do not know what the number is, but you cannot put them as a group. (Applause) They represent different political interests because they come as individuals to this House. I do not know how we are going to treat them, but maybe we need a discussion on this. It is my view that we as Parliament leave the status quo in the Commission as it is. And thinking about the East African Legislative Assembly, and the numbers, to say that the main Opposition takes one position, is really being unfair. 

I would like to appeal to the inner understanding of my friends on that side to see how we can – in fact, if anything, it is the NRM that should cede some positions to take care of certain groups within –(Interjections)- I know you will murmur; you will not like what I am saying, but this is my view. I would like to propose that rather than take the two places away from the main Opposition party, in order to fulfill the aspirations of the other Members of Parliament in the Opposition, NRM gives away two positions. How about that? Thank you very much. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I think let us hear from DP. We have not heard from them. 

5.02
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will make two points. The first is on the relationship between the East African Legislative Assembly Members of Parliament and the national parliaments. I have read with interest the arguments which are being given by the committee that there are other avenues through which Members of EALA communicate with national parliaments, and that is through the Nanyuki Series, which are seminars that are organised and are attended by various Members of Parliament from the assemblies. 

These Nanyuki Series are sponsored seminars. They are not sponsored by national assemblies, but are donor dependent. If there is no donor money, then there is no Nanyuki Series as a seminar whereby the national parliaments are going to interface with the EALA Members of Parliament. 

I attended two of those Series in 2008 and 2009, when I was on the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I can report to this Parliament that that interface was not adequate and indeed there was no report to this Parliament for debate. 

Therefore, I am saying that the interface between the East African Legislative Assembly and the national assemblies is very minimal, and Members of Parliament have not got adequate time to debate what goes on in the East African Legislative Assembly and regional integration in general. 

When we were debating it as a caucus in the Opposition, we found that you would need a Constitutional amendment to allow Members of EALA to report directly. I was suggesting that they needed to account to the national assembly, which elects them, just like we also go to our voters and explain what we have deliberated in Parliament. 

I suggest that there must be a mechanism by which the national assembly must of necessity interface with EALA Members and they report, and get questions directly from the Members of Parliament other than reporting to Parliament through the Foreign Affairs Committee. I strongly recommend that.

Secondly, I have heard a number of submissions for the split in the Social Services Committee to have a committee on education. They talk about the workload. I find this rather flimsy. I have been on this committee for four years; I was in the Eighth Parliament and I have continued serving in it. Although you are talking about workload, we must also know that there are learning experiences from various disciplines. We get to know what happens in education, for those who have the health background and those Members on the Committee on Social Services who have an education background get to learn about what happens in the medical world. The summation of both is beneficial to this Parliament. That is why you can hear people debating with a lot of substance on things concerning health, and people with a medical background competently debating on issues concerning education.

I would want to recommend that this is reconsidered such that this committee continues to work as one. And besides, it helps Members of Parliament to be very active because it is a busy committee.

Lastly, I beg to differ in principle with the pre-current speaker, my brother who has gone out. In principle, it is not about the NRM ceding positions or the FDC ceding positions on representation at EALA. In principle, that is not the case. I believe that the Mbidde case puts this one categorically clear, and I know our friends in the NRM caucus are debating how this is going to happen to enable other political organisations represented in Parliament, which are shades of opinion, to have a say in the EALA representation. So, if the NRM must cede, then even the FDC needs to reconsider its stand about having two members so that even DP, CP, UPC and others are represented. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.07
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to address myself on the issue of the UPDF on page 24. I notice that the committee is trying to assist the UPDF in the awkward position they find themselves in this House. 

First, the UPDF should not be in the House because we are in a multiparty dispensation. I notice in the Constitution that everybody in this House belongs to a party but it was forced there. When we make another constitutional amendment, we should be asking the UPDF to get out of this House so that they are not in the awkward position that they are in now. They are not supposed to be partisan, and we have seen in the past in our country that the Army was never in Parliament. Actually, Uganda is the only country in the world where the Army sits in Parliament. It is an awkward position. 

I can see the committee is putting the UPDF together with Independents. The UPDF are not Independents because Independents are independent individuals. The UPDF is supposed to represent an institution called the UPDF. Although they are not elected by everybody, they are nominated by the President and basically they represent the NRM in this House. Twice there have been soldiers who have spoken their minds – Col.  Bogere and Brig. Tumukunde – and they were punished for speaking out of turn because they are supposed to tow the line and ideally, they are supposed to be supporting Government. 

So, I think that the UPDF is not independent and definitely, they cannot sit on an elective office. How can the committee recommend that the UPDF be elected in elective offices in this House, so that Gen. Aronda can chair the committee on defence – (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My understanding is that we are not discussing amendments of the Constitution. We are discussing amendments of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The honourable member has made a statement that the UPDF is not supposed to be in this House. This is a matter of the Constitution. Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance as a matter of procedure; is it procedurally proper to continue discussing a constitutional matter instead of discussing amendments of our Rules of Procedure? Is this procedurally correct? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the members of the UPDF are elected and they were sworn in and are members of this House. Until that changes, we cannot push them away. So, you address where they should sit but not that they should get out. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I am saying that the UPDF are the only Members of Parliament here who are public servants outside Parliament. They are employees of Uganda. Gen. Aronda, Brig. Angina and others are employees of the Government or the State of Uganda, so how can they do oversight over themselves? Does it make sense to you? I gave an example before I sat down that if you want to elect them, Gen. Aronda at one time will vie for the position of chairman of the Committee on Defence; how will that be done? 

The committee is saying they should sit with the Independents. They should not sit with the Independents. They should sit on the NRM side because they are NRM since the President has said they are his defending posts. They listen for him, so they cannot go and sit with the Independents because they are not independent. 

I just want to say that when the time comes, honourable members of this House, let us take the UPDF out of this House. Right now, they are supposed to be here constitutionally and I agree, but they should not sit with Independents because they are not Independents. They should not take elective office because they cannot do oversight work over themselves. 

Second, the issue of PAC; as far as I am concerned, the Public Accounts Committee includes the local government and COSASE. All those others fall under PAC in other countries - here they were broken into bits for whatever reason – and this is the responsibility of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. So, Parliament should not legislate to distribute positions of oversight of accountability committees because it is the responsibility of the Leader of the Opposition. (Member timed out)

5.14
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not intend to be too long, just to point out a few issues which I think have got legal implications. 

I will start with the Appointments Committee. Article 113 (1) of the Constitution reads: “Cabinet ministers shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected Members of Parliament.” So, if the Constitution demands the approval to be done by Parliament, then we need to go to the Constitution and define Parliament. I think it is on page 182. Parliament is defined in the interpretation section under Article 257 as follows: “‘Parliament’ means the Parliament of Uganda.” 

These powers of approval have been vested in Parliament and Parliament has been defined. The committee therefore has no constitutional authority to have a final approval; it would have usurped the powers of Parliament as enshrined in the Constitution. Committees of Parliament act on behalf of Parliament and whatever they do, they report to Parliament for approval. They are agents. Any rule that says that my agent can determine in finality any issue and I am not entitled to look into it would certainly be offensive to the Constitution. That is why I agree with the redrafting of that particular clause in the report.

What we have been doing has actually been unconstitutional. The Appointments Committee has usurped the powers of Parliament. In any case, it also makes common sense because once the Appointments Committee approves, then we are all bound. In fact, we all go ahead and defend that position. How do you expect me to defend that position? How do you expect me to defend a decision I was not party to? It does not make sense! So, any suggestion outside what is provided for by these amendments would certainly be unconstitutional. I hope the learned Attorney-General guides the House properly, let alone our caucuses. Let us not do something which is unconstitutional. 

I also see that the committee is trying to define “contempt of Parliament” on page 55. I will again refer you to the Constitution, Article 28(12). You see, any lawyer will tell you that contempt of Parliament is not a definable offence. It has never been defined anywhere. That is why even in the Constitution it says: “Except for contempt of court, no person shall be convicted of a criminal offence unless the offence is defined and the penalty for it prescribed by law.” 

Contempt of court is viewed from the person who is exercising the authority. In a court of law, a judge may look at you smiling but in a contemptuous way. You might smile, like I imagine the hon. Kabakumba is smiling and I will get offended and say, “this is contempt of me”, and if I have the position of authority, I will take a proceeding. It is the only offence where, for example, the judge is the accuser, the judge is the prosecutor, and the judge is the judge. It helps in orderly management of institutions. So, if you look at what the Constitution envisages, there is no way you will go ahead and sort of define it. 

On the rule of sub judice, I think we have moved well. It is the presiding officer, and in this case the Speaker or the chairpersons of committees, who might interpret that the information brought to the chair or the issues being raised are sub judice. So, I do not think that we have reasons to amend. 

Before I conclude, I have two other points, Madam Speaker, about Independents. I think we need to be respectful to each other. Independents are a creation of the Constitution. They neither need favours from us nor party arrogance. (Applause) They have rights as enshrined in the Constitution. They are not secondary to political parties; they are not! If they were supposed to be secondary to political parties, the Constitution would have said so. 

Having said that, do not be tempted to move as a group. (Applause) It will create legal problems, and I am giving this as an honest opinion. It will create legal problems. So, Independents in their own right can associate, like we have had forums, because they also have rights. 

The issue about representation in the Pan-African Parliament allows them compete like us. We cannot just sit back and say we are just dividing up positions. When you look at the Protocol setting up the Pan-African Parliament, which I was privileged to serve for almost five years, and the legal regime that establishes the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), it is talking about shades. What is envisaged? It is envisaged that all the political opinions and actors in national parliaments should be reflected either in the Pan-African Parliament or in the East African Legislative Assembly. (Applause) It is not about positions. 

I see people excited and saying, “Oh! These are our positions”. Please, for heaven’s sake, that will be defeating the essence of those regional organs. You are supposed to reflect –(Interjections)- I hear people saying, “the Opposition”. I am FDC but for heaven’s sake, I was once a member of the UPC but I quit because I did not, of course with due respect, agree with what was going on there. So, you cannot bundle us - this business of saying, “DP, UPC and so on, this is what we are giving you.” No! That is not what was envisaged under the Protocol. (Applause) What was envisaged was “shades”, and the shades here mean that DP is a different shade from FDC, the NRM - (Interjections) - I will get the information.
 
MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the member is that the Independents are really not independent in ideology. We have noticed that some of them have a leaning to NRM and other political parties here. So, the issue of sending representation in terms of shades becomes a problem where the so called Independents are concerned. That is the information I wanted to give you. 

MR KATUNTU: I would have taken information as much as possible and maybe this discourse would have helped us.
 
MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the most learned hon. Abdu Katuntu. He has passionately tried to explain to us what the law is. I would like to read Article 72(4) verbatim: “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or political party.” The Constitution is silent on the so called propagation of the former chief whip of the NRM that an Independent member is independent of another Independent. 

The Constitution, which is the supreme law, says that an Independent is independent of political parties, full stop. We are independent of any political organisation and that is where it stops. So, we should not usurp the role of the Constitutional Court and start interpreting this. I would like to seek the opinion of hon. Abdu Katuntu on that particular law as stated. I thank you. 

MR KATUNTU: I do not want to say I am an authority on this as that would be arrogant on my part, but I can give my opinion. I am not in any way saying that my opinion is superior to any other person. Let everybody who listens draw his own conclusion.

You are Independent. I am -

THE SPEAKER: Please give your opinion.

MR KATUNTU: I am concerned about this because it is a very big debate and it might continue to form the basis of the amendments we are going to make. The Constitution says they are independent from political parties and that defeats hon. Kamateka’s point because she has said they are allied to parties. Anybody telling you that I am an independent allied to a political party is unconstitutional. So, that should not even arise, that I am Independent but allied to FDC. That does not arise. If you want to be FDC, join FDC. Do not move around with an Independent’s skin and yet you are FDC. That would contradict the Constitution, and that is my colleagues on this side.

At the same time, there is no law which says that – You see, you are an independent; you are not independent. When hon. Sanjay Tanna stood in Tororo Municipality, he did not know in any way that hon. Mujungu was standing in Ntoroko. Whatever issues hon. Mujungu was giving to the electorate to be elected in Ntoroko are not in any way related to those of hon. Tanna in Tororo. So you came as an independent of everything whether parties or individuals. That is my honest interpretation. That does not take away their rights to participate. I am sure it is in that right that this House found it appropriate to elect the hon. Sam Otada to the Pan African Parliament as an individual. 

I plead with the House; let us not be greedy about positions. These institutions like the Pan African Parliament and the East African Legislative Assembly were established for a purpose. It was not about competition or political powers like here. They were saying, “look here, can we have all the political actors bring their opinion to this particular organ.” So they should be reflected there, and that includes Independents. I think let it not be seen like parties are fighting Independents. That will not be correct. All of us should move together, recognise their constitutional rights and give them their due respect like they give the parties due respect. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before I call the Leader of the Opposition, may I inform the House that this matter is really serious. Before coming here, I was served with summons to go to the East African Court of Justice on Wednesday on the Rules of Procedure. I have been summoned there on the issue of these rules, so it is not a joke. The summons are here. I have just been summoned to go to Arusha.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, in fact I am sure the Attorney-General has read the ruling of the Mbidde case, and I hope he has interpreted it to his caucus. I have had the opportunity to interpret it to my caucus and I am sure others have done so. So really, we need to assist our colleagues. As we talk, there is an injunction because the case has not been finally determined but there is an injunction on us not to proceed.

Whereas locally we might joke around with the law and institutions, internationally it is not possible. So, do not put the country in a situation where the learned Attorney-General goes to the East African Court of Justice and he does not look very good because we have done something and they will ask where the lawyers were. So it is a very important matter. Do not rush it, do not be selfish, no emotions about it; it is not about positions, for heaven’s sake. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to also thank the committee for the report. It is the basis on which we are discussing. I also want to thank all of you who have made contributions and I know we still have time and we shall make contributions during the time of amendments.

I want to start by saying we are in multi-party politics and this calls for two sides in Parliament, the Opposition and Government. If there are two sides, it is what we should try our level best to respect, unless we are going against multi-party politics. I have seen these rules and the amendments which are being made. They are very good at trying to destroy multi-party politics. I will give one quick example. The committee says the committees reserved for the Opposition should be shared like this. They do not talk about committees reserved for the ruling party and how they should be shared. But for the Opposition, they are coming to prescribe for us how they should be shared. You can imagine how people can plan.

I agree with my sister who said that there are some Independents who are not really independent but are leaning to some sides. I think they carry forward such ideas when they are given responsibility.

On page 5, we proposed that we wanted to have a deputy Leader of the Opposition. We did it in good faith because when the Leader of the Opposition is not available, the office should not be away but available. However, from what we are hearing, members have said this needs a constitutional amendment. This gets me thinking; do we have in our Constitution a deputy Prime Minister or do we have in our Constitution a deputy Leader of Government Business? If it is about the Constitution, then whatever the deputy Leader of Government Business has done is illegal if we go by that. There are many things which Gen. Ali has promised and done that we are going to say are illegal because they are not provided for in the Constitution - (Interruption)

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I want to inform the Leader of the Opposition that what he is saying is out of place. He is now making himself a judge in a court of law by saying, “That man, the Deputy Leader of Government Business, all that he has done is illegal.” Where did they get the power to decide? 

I would advise that he takes my activities here to court so that court makes a ruling on it rather than saying it here. Now the whole world is listening to this, that I have been working illegally. (Laughter) I suggest that the Leader of the Opposition withdraws that statement because it is sending a wrong message to the entire world.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: The information I would like to give to the Leader of the Opposition is that the Constitution (Amendment) Act 2005 provided for items that were dealt with in the amendment. In the amendment, it was decided that the post of the Prime Minister be constitutionalised. In that amendment, taking into consideration that multi-party politics was now a reality, the position of the Leader of the Opposition was created. Now, if the Office of the Prime Minister was constitutionalised and that of the deputy equally constitutionalised and we have three other deputy prime ministers, I do not see any contradiction in allowing a deputy Leader of the Opposition. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thank all members who have given me information. I also thank Gen. Ali for advising me to go to the Constitutional Court. But if we went by the Constitution, there is no deputy Prime Minister and neither is there a deputy Leader of Government Business. 

Yesterday, we were told that you were appointed as a Cabinet minister. We confirmed you as members of the Appointments Committee but when you came, you came as Third Deputy Prime Minister/Deputy Leader of Government Business. I am ready to go to the Constitutional Court to pronounce itself on whatever I am saying here. The reason we are talking about the deputy Leader of the Opposition was because this was done in good faith and it was for the purpose of efficiency.

Yesterday, I heard my sister Betty talking about how she has read about how jobs are done in the UK, Australia and Canada. I have downloaded several documents and for ease, I can give her copies to read. Here it talks about the official opposition and a party in power; it talks about that. The other side is led by the Leader of Government Business and this side by the Leader of the Opposition. 

If one of our colleagues comes here and says that we must make a provision for a Parliamentary Commissioner to come from another party, who will come to present this name of the person here? It should be the Leader of the Opposition, and I should present what I have agreed to. You cannot come and usurp powers when you have been created by the law and we have agreed to go multiparty only for you to say we should have another centre of power. 

Madam Speaker, we have even done it very well. I am entitled to appoint the shadow Cabinet and I consulted and now my colleagues are here. I am entitled to appoint the chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of the accountability committees and I have done it. After consultations, I have put my colleagues in different offices. Internal arrangements should be carried out internally; they do not need a law. 

To my brother, the committee chairperson, the law you are trying to introduce is not in good faith. The Administration of Parliament Act is very clear. If you read Section 2 (b), it says: “Nomination of the candidates for election to the Commission of the four members of Parliament referred to in sub-section (2) shall be made by the Government and Opposition sides.” The one who is in charge of the Opposition is Nandala-Mafabi. So Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR JAMES AKENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from you, the Leader of the Opposition, is this: Do you, in all honesty, feel you can speak on behalf of all of us who may have come here on a different political platform? We have our own political party and standards. 

What I have seen in other parliaments - in the British Parliament - we have the government side, the Leader of the Opposition and other parties responding to issues because not in all instances is our position, as the Opposition, unanimous. Uganda People’s Congress may have a different view on maybe education and health compared to FDC. We recognise the role of the Leader of the Opposition but we must also be recognised as a separate political entity in this House. We must be able to speak and have our own voice heard on issues that concern us. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I wish to read the definition of the Leader of the Opposition, maybe it will help us to understand. It says: “The Leader of the Opposition means the Member of Parliament who is the leader in Parliament of the party in opposition to government and having the greatest numerical strength in Parliament.” I may not be taking your view but I have found myself in the position by law. 

I have been a very good person in that I have a shadow Cabinet and whatever I come up with, it is the shadow Cabinet’s position. This shadow Cabinet consists of all shades. So if there was an issue of speaking, I have no problem; if my colleagues want me to speak anything, I will do so.

I also want to say, like hon. Katuntu said, we are all former members of UPC, and I know very many of you seated on the other side are UPC. (Laughter) You cannot pretend. In 1980, there was an election and those who were 18 years and above voted. Basically, there were two parties, namely, DP and UPC. I know what hon. Amama Mbabazi voted and what Gen. Moses Ali voted. So we should not change the goal posts but tomorrow we can - (Interjections) - I am trying to bring this to say that when we are making laws, we must make laws knowing that there are institutions we are building. Do not make laws looking at today’s Opposition. Tomorrow you can be the Opposition, and that is what we want. We want to make laws which must stand the test of time. 

Madam Speaker, on EALA, I have nothing much to say. My Attorney-General has talked about it. I have been reading the Constitution and I recall what the Attorney-General said, and I want to go back to it. Article 72(4) says, “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate - not as candidates - independent of a political organisation or political party.” That means, if you want to count all the Independents here, they are equal to the number of the independents which are equal, if you want to call them, to the shades because each of them came with his own shade. So, if they are 40, we have 40 shades here. Are you getting it? 

Now, to be accommodative we must find a better formula but we should not make a law to make sure that these 40 shades override the others - (Interjections) ­- Please, for the Pan-African Parliament, it was easy because we were doing it internally in Parliament but now we are going outside in the public. I want you to tell me who an Independent is. Is there a sign on his face that he is coming as an Independent? Please let us be realistic on some of these things. So, members who are – (Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my brother that the issue of Independents is a constitutional problem. However much we debate, it is already in the Constitution. 

I was a member of the Constitution Review Commission before I became a Member of Parliament. I remember in our report we wrote, when we were recommending Article 69 on the political system we should adopt as a country, that you have to decide the game and draw the rules. Under the Movement system, individual merit and independence was flourishing but under a multi-party system, individuals will always find problems. That report was brought to Parliament. I wonder how you, Members of Parliament who were in that Parliament, could have smuggled in the interests of the Independents. 

The issue of Independents is not only in Parliament here but it also touches on all the political parties. When you look at the Multiparty and Other Organisations Act, if you participate in a party primary and you are defeated, under normal circumstances you do not qualify to continue contesting because you are defeating the generic of a multi-party system. 

So, I think the issue of Independents should be debated a little deeper. It is already in the Constitution and now we need to find ways of manoeuvring around the systems. For instance, we are going to elect Members of the East African Legislative Assembly here and we cannot say – (Mr Oboth Oboth rose_) I thought I was given room to inform. I am not the holder of the Floor. You will give the clarification to my brother. 

If we are to elect Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and we say we need to bring interests of the Independents on board, that means everybody who is independent of any of these political parties and who is interested in contesting for the East African Assembly must come and register his interests with the Clerk and contest in Parliament and we vote for him. We are also saying those who are coming through different parties should go through party primaries. Now, I do not know; these are double standards. 

How are we going to manoeuvre through these rules? It is becoming difficult. Here you are saying, “Let us play a game where the groups are playing but individuals should also be recognised as they play.” How are we juggling this? That is where the confusion is, and I think the constitutional lawyers should help us. We maybe amend the Constitution to completely do away with the independents’ interests and maintain party interests. In the Constitution, Article 69, we have three systems of governance, - multiparty, Movement and any other system - unless we qualify what we are practising to be “any other system” where we are mixing the two. I thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I stand on this issue of Independents. I do not know why it should be contentious for members to want to discriminate against their fellow members when they know that any one of us can end up here as an Independent.

This question of how Independents should be treated has already been subjected to the Constitutional Court and it has been ruled on in two cases. First was in Tinyefuza v. Attorney-General; it was a constitutional petition case. It was equally captured in the more recent case of Jacob Oulanyah v. Attorney-General, Constitutional Petition No.8 of 2006. 

The import of the ruling of Justice Mpagi in reference to rule 11(1), Appendix B, which is basically on the elections of the EALA representatives - Justice Mpagi had this to say: “The direct and inevitable consequence of this rule - that is rule 11 which does not capture the aspects of Independents - is to impose a restriction on the exercise by the Independents of their right to participate in and contest for any elective office as guaranteed under Article 72(4) and (5).” She concluded by saying, “This situation is tantamount to unequivocal discrimination against the Independents. They are undoubtedly denied equal protection by the law, which contravenes Article 21.” 

What does Article 21 say? Article 21 of our Constitution provides for equality and freedom from discrimination and it states, “All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law.” 

It pains me when we have to come here and try to convince fellow honourable members that it is very important to cater for the interests of Independents and that it is equally a constitutional right and not a privilege. We are not seeking for a privilege; it is a constitutional right. Like I earlier stated, being an Independent is not a profession. Any member, who is here, in the tenth Parliament could actually be an Independent member. That is my submission, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you can see that –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. Let the Leader of the Opposition conclude then we hear from the chair of the committee. We have to move. Others will contribute at committee stage.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know hon. Katuntu was just being kind when he said that the moment you form a group, you cease to be independent and that means you cease to be a Member of Parliament. So the moment you make a group, we shall take you as a party and you will cease to be Members of Parliament because - (Interjections) - I want us to call a spade a spade -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the clarification I would like to seek from the Leader of the Opposition is: first, what is the basis of that legal deduction he is making, that when you form a group you lose being Independents, that this is a different shade and that when the shades come together even if the shades are of a mango tree or of a Mvule tree, they lose being shades? They are shades even when they are similar. 

Article 29 guarantees us the right to associate and this is Parliament of Uganda, the only place where laws are made. This is the Parliament of Uganda; this is the only place that when the laws are made, they are not supposed to discriminate. 

I may understand, with a lot of pain and difficulty, the sentiments and the agony that the honourable members from both sides are having. This is as a result of the recently concluded general elections. You stood with Independents; if you think that it was right to only win by having the flag bearer, why is it that we have 43 here? If you won somebody to be flag bearer and they won you in the general elections, who is better? We do not want to appear like anybody is going to do us a favour. This is Parliament where we have to assert our rights. 

The Rules of Procedure clearly define who an Independent Member is and they are only saying, in rule 4, “‘Independent Member’ means a member elected independent of any political organisation or political party”. It does not say - The constitutional interpretation has been given but I can understand, honourable members. Let the sentiments from the general elections, the pain that you went through when you were contesting with Independents and the headache they gave you, not overshadow the beauty of having three shades in this House. 

I want to seek clarification from the Leader of Opposition. I would like him to tell this honourable House the basis of his legal argument about when the Independents associate - not even forming a group because this is not a “malwa” group; Members of Parliament cannot be said to be in a group, but if they are in association as the Constitution guarantees. What is his legal basis? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am going to give you the definition of what I am meaning -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude. We should conclude and we go to the committee stage.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have heard from the lawyers, you might as well hear from an assessor like me to get the ordinary perception of things. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence and thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way.

I thought that as an assessor, I will just buy from the submission of my colleague from Nwoya and just put him in perspective. When the law was being enacted and the provisions, the amendments, were being made to provide for Independents, I think we were cognisant of the fundamental right of individuals to participate. That is a given, and that is what was provided. However, the arguments we are pursuing under EALA also constitute the right to participation. I think that they are better addressed if we move away from the issue of proportional representation because under proportional representation, that is where we were having trouble accommodating all sorts of shades. They will move to the shades and then we run away from proportional representation.

I also want to ask the lawyers in this House: why are you having trouble in believing that there was also a case - you are quoting cases - in the very recent past? We had a case involving a certain man called Owori and a question of Independents who are trying to participate as organised groups. I think that is where the contention is. If you choose to be an Independent, you are not going to come here and become an organised group. What articles of association or memorandum of association are you presenting that make you a group? I am just asking as an assessor, a very lay woman. 

You show us what binds you together. The FDC, UPC or NRM is bound by what they presented during registration. What binds you, the Independents, together? Under what are you registered that will help us know why you should participate as a group? What gives you the right to participate is as individuals catered for in the Constitution. For me those are the fears I have. Really, if I can be helped then I would appreciate.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in fact if you read Article 83(1) (h), if you have been elected to Parliament as an independent candidate, that person joins a political party and a political party is defined in the Political Parties and Organisations Act. It says, “A party is a group or organisation...” The moment you say that you have a dean, - like in the university, you have made yourself a university - you will be treated as a political organisation. That is very dangerous and I must tell you as much as you can - (Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for allowing me to give you this information. Madam Speaker, you recall that I am the pioneer of Independents for very good reasons. All these things we are discussing were discussed in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments and there is a clear definition of Independents, so I do not want this to make us as parties disagree. 

It is a fact that Independents must exist and it is well described in the Constitution, in the preamble. The preamble’s principle of democracy is there to guide us. We are now making rules for Parliament and what we are doing is to say that as a Parliament, we must accommodate all shades. When we accommodate all shades, we are talking of different political beliefs and different political ideologies. Therefore, I do not want this matter of Independents to cause a division, to make us polarised, because we all have admitted, and it is a matter of reality, that Independents will exist and that we must acknowledge that they exist.

I am asking the Leader of the Opposition to provide space for the Independents. We are not going to take your position, but provide space for Independents.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of Opposition, please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is a serious thing and at committee stage it might be one of the things to talk about. Of course, I wanted to finish on the issue of the Commission. I am a member of the Parliamentary Commission not as Nandala-Mafabi. I am there because I am the Leader of the Opposition. That applies to the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; the only person representing the Opposition is hon. Elijah Okupa. So, do not confuse things - offices in the Commission and parties represented on the Commission. If you go by that, then we shall have a big problem. 

On whips, I think this has been clearly stated. We cannot over whip our people. What we need is to have a better method of operation. We have the Government Chief Whip and we have a deputy. So, whips whip 50 members. A method of whipping can be decided by any party; you do not need to make it a rule. (Mr Kafeero rose_) Please, wait. Give me some time. The Speaker is on my case. I am good at giving.

As I said at the beginning, we are in multi-party politics. I went to the committee and took ideas on how multi-party politics is functioning in other countries. I made my presentation, for example, on the rule where the Leader of Government Business presents the business, then the minister and a member, but when I made my case, I can see here the committee is saying the Leader of the Opposition should not be included. The moment you are in multi-party politics, you agree. When we are presenting papers, the Leader of the Opposition is not “any other member”; a shadow minister is not “any other member”. This should be clearly provided for in our rules - after the Leader of the Opposition, the ministers, our shadow ministers and members - but not to say it is supposed to be done under private members as a mere Member of Parliament. That is wrong! This is a multi-party country.

I do not have a problem with these committee creations but we have to be very careful. We have had a problem with committees. Honourable members, I want you to agree with me because this touches us. Gen. Ali said we need to talk about ourselves. You are on a sessional committee, you are on a standing committee; a member goes to the Committee on Finance, he signs and runs away because he is going to the Committee on National Economy. He goes there and signs and he runs away and goes for a workshop. He has not attended any committee and you, the whips, cannot be in a position to whip these people very well. 

I want to make a proposal that these committees be the same. If they are the same, you should serve on one committee. That will be easy to manage. If we are 30 members on the Committee on Natural Resources, for example, when the minister of land comes, there will be 30 questions; what time do you finish? With big numbers, you will not be efficient, but if you are 15 or 13, you will deliver and it will be easy to even monitor attendance. 

The reason we are having a problem with work not getting done is that instead of delivering a document in one day, because you are 30 members and each of you has 30 ideas, decision-making becomes so complicated. In the end, you take two weeks to deliver a document, creating a backlog. I propose that these committees be the same, we have every member on one committee and we reduce the numbers and we shall have efficiency. The moment we have efficiency, tasks will be done. 

I do not agree with my chairperson of COSASE. He can also disagree with me. If you have done value for money in the Ministry of Education, it is the Public Accounts Committee to handle it. Why should you create another committee to handle value for money? It does not make sense. What they are doing is a financial audit and now they should move to a value-for-money audit. 

When we come to committees, there are committees we shall agree to, like the committee on subsidiary law - I am trying to be convinced – and the committee on human rights. In fact, human rights should add the IGG and Auditor-General so that they look at the Auditor-General’s accounts. We should put human rights, IGG and Auditor-General together to look at the Auditor-General’s reports. The committee on health and social services, I think that one we can agree. For the one to deal with monitoring loans, does it mean the Committee on National Economy is telling us it has failed to do its work? You have approved, you must follow up to see that what you approved is being done as you agreed. If you are not doing it, then you are proving incompetent. 

In the same vein, I want to answer my colleague who said, “I have never seen a loan being rejected here.” I want to tell you it is true for this Parliament and the last one but in the Seventh Parliament, I was the chairperson and we rejected some loans because we were serious. Now we are approving without even knowing some of these loans. They bring and we say, “Approved”. They will say it is overdue; overdue from what? As soon as you say “approve”, the people sitting the other side are happy because they are the implementers and they are busy going to say, “Now we are going to eat” while you are busy saying, “Aye,” without knowing what you are saying “aye” for. 

On East African Community, - (interruption)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for an honourable member to say that we, on this side, just say “aye” without any knowledge or information? I need to be guided. I do not believe that he is in order to say that we simply say “aye” without any knowledge or information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, to the best of my knowledge,  all the loan requests are presented here meticulously, diligently debated and passed with knowledge and understanding. So, you are out of order, Leader of the Opposition. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to tell you to read the Auditor-General’s report where it says that the loans we have approved have performed at 20 per cent and we are paying commitment fees. Why do we approve? Do you know how much commitment fees? They are in billions! What would that money have done if it was used instead of going to pay commitment fees? We are kindly requesting that those who are doing it should be effective. So, I do not think the committee on implementation is okay. 

Again, I am talking about Parliament and multi-party politics. In other jurisdictions like UK, Canada, Tanzania, Ghana, which we have tried to study, even Kenya, the Opposition is given space. We have a report from the Commonwealth. Unfortunately, it was not presented to you, Madam Speaker, because the Deputy Speaker was the leader. I hope it comes to you. The Opposition is given time in each session, 19 to 20 days. The purpose is for you to come and say, “We gave you time but you have delivered nothing.” Why do you say the Opposition is not doing anything when you have not given it an opportunity that, “these are your days, bring your alternatives, debate them here and we see what you have brought”? It is very important that the Opposition is given space and 19 days to deal with their business as is done in other jurisdictions. 

Madam Speaker, gender is a constitutional matter. If we are not doing it, it is illegal. Those who are not practising it rightly should be held liable.
 
Madam Speaker, on the sitting arrangement, you requested me to allow my brothers and sisters, the Independents, to sit this side but from what I see they are abusing the - (Applause) - gesture. In the House, we have two sides, Government side and Opposition. I am sure our colleagues who are independent and the UPDF will be shifted to sit that side. At this rate, even if we are two in the Opposition, this is our side and that is the NRM side. I am calling upon my colleagues who are Independent; if you want to really assume that that is your area, I am going to evoke my powers - (Laughter)- because this was done in good faith and there is no way -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you will be breaching the agreement you made with the Speaker. The agreement is with me not with them. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am saying that we agreed, but the way they are behaving abuses the kind gesture I extended to them. So, on the seating arrangements of Independents – (Interjections) - This applies to our colleagues of UPDF. I think it is very important for us to be very careful when making some statements.

Madam Speaker, on the staff committee; I do not know how we can bring the staff committee into our Rules. The staff are guided under the Civil Service Standing Orders. How do you bring a committee of staff in our Rules? This is very dangerous –

THE SPEAKER: Where is that?

MR KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Speaker, I have listened very attentively to the Leader of the Opposition and he did mention, and actually threatened, that he may be forced to evoke his powers in regard to the seating arrangements in the House. 

Rule 8 (4) of our Rules of Procedure reads: “An Independent Member shall notify the Speaker in writing about the side of the House he/she wishes to sit”. Therefore, is it procedurally right for the LOP to indicate to us that he may evoke his powers and chase us from his side?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I made an agreement with the Leader of the Opposition to permit the Independents to sit there because I had nowhere to put you. The conference hall was not convenient for our sittings; I wanted you to sit in the Parliament. So, I negotiated with him and said, “You have space, can you permit the independents to sit on your side?” Nobody applied to me; it was my initiative with the Leader of the Opposition. Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I honoured the agreement but I am just telling my colleagues that I can do so; I can evict them. 

On contempt of Parliament, I think we have done a lot of investigations. I was one of those who wanted us to define the word “contempt”. However, we discovered that if you define the word, that would fix you in a box and it would cause a big problem. Today, if I came with my coat turned around, you would not be able to call me to order because I would say, “That is not contempt because it is not included in the rules that we should not put on the coat that way”. So, contempt of Parliament is a wide thing. I went to the committee about it and now I want to withdraw my support for the definition. I say that “contempt” should remain as it is. Our committee of rules and privileges will determine and judge on matters of contempt of Parliament.

On the certificate of financial implications, there are so many good laws which members want to bring but this issue of certificate of financial implications hinders them. That is why sometimes government does not bring in the good laws hiding behind the challenges of a certificate of financial implications. I think this is not necessary. Members should think widely and bring in all the laws they want and support them. If they are good, the Executive should take them up. Failure to do that would be tying the hands of our committees. 

On government assurances, Madam Speaker, you are right that this committee has been hindered. However, we shall not restrict ourselves to assurances made in Parliament. If a minister goes to Ntungamo and says, “We are bringing water here”, that should be taken as government assurance and we shall capture it because we have local governments, which are a replica of Parliament.  

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Leader of the Opposition that the Committee on Government Assurances took note of that. If a minister goes to Sironko and makes a promise, we request the Member of Parliament to come and raise it on the Floor of Parliament and then the minister should respond on that issue. There and then, it becomes a government assurance. But if we take any promise made on weddings and birthday parties, then we shall be overstretched; we cannot handle all those as government assurances. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am concluding. This should warn the ministers not to make promises after taking wine and beer because they will be held responsible for committing Government unnecessarily. As a minister, when speaking out there, you can say, “I am speaking as Nandala and not as the Minister for Health.” It is very dangerous and the moment you do it, we shall bring it here and you shall be held responsible. 

I thank the members for whatever they have done. I call on you, members, to agree that we are in multi-party politics and we have two sides - Government side and the Opposition side. At the appropriate time, I would like to move an amendment to define the term “Official Opposition”. Again, I thank you all.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Attorney-General had a few issues to raise, which I thought I would also address when winding up, if you could let him come first.

 6.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I also first wish to thank the committee for the good job done and to say that I have also listened very carefully to the contributions made. By and large, this has been a good debate on the subject matter. 

I do not want to take much time because I believe there will be a lot said at committee stage. I want to say that in drawing out these Rules of Procedure, the benchmark is the Constitution under Article 94. These rules are made subject to the Constitution and I am glad that throughout the debate, this issue has come out and has been well captured.

I am not in any way saying the proposals made, which would ordinarily be in the Constitution, are bad proposals. They are actually good proposals and for me, I look forward to a good debate when we are considering amendments to the Constitution. I look forward to considerations on matters to do with the Speaker’s Panel, Deputy Leader of the Opposition which is a constitutional office, chief whips and whips, which may be considered in the amendment to the Administration of Parliament Act. I also look forward to the debate on matters to do with votes of censure, removal from office of the Prime Minister and the Vice-President, which should also be in the Constitution. I look forward to that time. But for the time being, let us stick and focus on our Rules of Procedure.

I also have liked the debate on matters to do with EALA and Independents. I agree, to the greatest extent possible, with the submissions made by the Shadow Attorney-General. Independents have a right to be here but we have to be careful on the way we transact our affairs. I really do not think there is anything to stop Independents in the shadows of Parliament to have their dean or to associate, but to translate that by operation of the law is certainly setting a very dangerous precedent, which cannot stand the test of time in our courts if law. I am sure that hon. Oboth will agree with me on that. We have to be careful the way we transact our business too because if you are an Independent, let us agree, you know you cannot put your leg in fire and put another one on ice and say that you are on average. (Laughter)

I heard some deliberations on the Appointments Committee. On our side, we thought we should maintain the status quo. We are worried about a situation where, for instance, a person who is nominated for a post, which he or she is not sure they are going to get, goes to the Appointments Committee and is thoroughly exposed. Sometimes he even loses out on that opportunity and his image is at stake – he has lost the opportunity – (Interjections) - Before you say “so what” or “so when”, I am raising issues that we should bear in mind as we debate this matter.  

I know, of course, the challenges that that committee faces in terms of lack of exposure. When the issues come out as, “what did you exactly do?” that too becomes a problem. So, let us debate and maybe we can follow up this issue at committee stage. However, in terms of approval by Parliament, as much as I agree principally with hon. Katuntu, more often than not Parliament has delegated its responsibilities. 

To me, I think the greatest point that could be raised on this matter of Parliamentary approval is that maybe we can have a reporting mechanism. I know that a reporting mechanism has been absent. If the Appointments Committee does its work and it reports here, we can even say “without further debate”, it is up to you, but for as long as there is a reporting mechanism. My worry is that to reopen debate on the Floor of the House on people you cannot even recall for re-interview or re-examination on the Floor of the House can also be problematic. Let us continue with the debate.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Attorney-General for surrendering, temporarily, the Floor. I think the point that I was raising is the constitutionality of approval by Parliament as enshrined in the Constitution. That is the point that I am raising. 

Our rules also provide for closed meetings; you could have them, whether it is the committee on appointments or even the House itself. However, to say that whatever goes on in the committee on appointments is final without the approval of this House will clearly infringe, in my own view, the Constitution. We can debate on the modalities of approval of debate; whether you are going to have an open debate or not is another issue. 

The mistake that we have been making, and sometimes we do not want to go to court to challenge some of these decisions, is that we have not been having parliamentary approval - (Interjections) - We have not! Matters have ended up in the Appointments Committee of Parliament and that is not Parliament approval. A committee of Parliament is not Parliament. The Parliament of Uganda is defined by the Constitution. It is like PAC deciding something which is binding on us or any other committee. All committees report to this House and whatever they have transacted is approved and then it becomes Parliamentary work and not committee work.

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to go to court five years ago and I had secured a lawyer from Busoga – (interjections) - not hon. Katuntu – because Parliamentary committees are equal, be it appointments, PAC, agriculture or government assurances. 

The Constitution does not say other committees are more powerful. Therefore, the way the Appointments Committee has been doing business, to the extent that Geoffrey Ekanya, Member of Parliament from Tororo County, cannot even attend proceedings, is very illegal. I can attend all proceedings of other committees except the committee on appointments; is that constitutional? I really want to seek your indulgence. It means that you are locking me out of the entire Parliamentary business regarding that business. So, is there representation of the people of Tororo County on the Appointments Committee? 

The issue of closed or open is a different matter, but first all, committees of Parliament should be accessible to all Members of Parliament at any time. Secondly, all the reports of the committees are reports of the entire Parliament.

MR RUHUNDI: I thank you very much for those interventions. The only thing that I can say is that the constitutionality of the mandate of Parliament vis-à-vis the mandate of that committee will precisely depend on the powers you give them and which is what we are debating. Let me say something more about EALA because we tend to leave it hanging and yet it is alive with us. 

We are of the view that we should have an arrangement for the participation of Independents for EALA. We should have an arrangement for parties, both those in the Opposition and the Government side, to participate in this exercise. The method that we employ, I do not know at what point it will be determined and debated. I do not know whether this will be passed at committee stage, but the judgments are very clear that they should participate. So, I think that is no longer an issue.

About this issue of sitting arrangement, Madam Speaker, we are already short of where to sit. The moment we begin talking about allocating space, which is even in my mind not clear, I think that - My honourable colleague quoted a provision, which gives the Independent the option to inform you where they would be comfortable to sit; I think we should maintain the status quo on the sitting arrangement.

There was an intricate issue on the creation of new committees. There is a committee on subsidiary legislation, but I would like to point out that the way the provision is couched in the amendments – By the way, principally, I would support it. However, my only problem is about its operationalisation. If you have to lay all the subsidiary legislations on the Floor of this House for vetting, – we are not clear whether we should have a provision for them to be vetted before they become effective legally - we may easily create an impasse in the functioning of Government. 

I am of the opinion that for the time being, we should channel these resources to institutions where we have technical people to scrutinise them. There is no instrument that should be enacted without going to the office of the First Parliamentary Counsel. Hon. Katuntu, the Shadow Attorney-General, knows how handicapped that First Parliamentary Counsel office is. If we strengthen that institution by, for example, recruiting staff purely for scrutinising delegated legislation, we would be going a better distance than creating a committee on that subject in Parliament.

I agree with the Leader of the Opposition and the shadow Attorney-General on the issue of having a provision on contempt of Parliament in our Rules of Procedure. As the shadow Attorney-General clearly stated, an offence must be clearly stated except it must appear only in an Act of Parliament. These are Rules of Procedure and not an Act of Parliament. So, if you are creating offences, you must specifically put them in an Act of Parliament, in my opinion. So, I think we are not quite comfortable with that provision appearing in our Rules of Procedure. 

In any case, I know, of course, that the court has lifted the ban on the progress on your work. That means you can give us a report in the near future because Parliament detailed your committee to give us a report on this particular matter. We can debate it in a focused manner and we can even amend the necessary legislation, for example, the Penal Code. 

Before I take leave of this matter, my attention was drawn to our Rules of Procedure, particularly rule 59 (2), which says “It is out of order to attempt to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current Session...” There was an expression that was deleted in 2006, but which existed in 2002 and research has shown that it was deleted under unclear circumstances because there is no specific record to that effect. At the end of that provision there were these words, “except upon a substantive motion for decision.”

To me and many other people I have consulted, this is a very good arrangement because even courts of law have got powers to revise their decisions. They also have got powers to review their decisions. So, I think it would be upon a substantive motion by Parliament. At an appropriate time during the committee stage, I will beg your indulgence to allow me move a motion to reinstate it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to clarify on the actual management of the elections of Members of EALA, we shall review the appendix and then get back to this House to agree on the actual modalities. For now, let us look at the principles, but the appendix will be reviewed to take into account the court ruling. May I now invite the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to make his concluding remarks.

6.43
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I will not make any comments in respect of me being either in the right or wrong place. From the outset, I must thank all the colleagues for having a very informative debate. On behalf of the committee, I want to state, without any fear of contradiction, that we are wiser than we were when we first walked in here. So, we thank all of you for contributing to this issue. I also would like to thank those who contributed by just listening; we thank you immensely.

Let me start with the very last issue raised by the Attorney-General on contempt of Parliament. I would like to state that the committee received a number of submissions in regard to this matter. We studied the practices in the several jurisdictions and got to find out as a fact that the Standing Orders, which can be the equivalent of the Rules of Procedure of our House, for example, of the Parliament of Ghana, are very elaborate on what constitutes contempt of Parliament. So, we are not re-inventing the wheel here.

Actually as a matter of fact, we probably only copied and pasted that part of those Standing Orders, though with modifications that would suit our circumstances. The same applies to the Standing Orders of the Lok Sabha of India and the Philippines. There are many jurisdictions that actually provide for contempt of Parliament.

The committee was mindful of the fact that we need to live in certainty, so we do not have to take guesses. So, we must provide for how we want to operate, which practice must be reduced into a write-up. If you ask me tomorrow where our regulations in respect to contempt are, I should be able to say, “Refer to this rule in our Rules of Procedure.” I do not see any difficulties that my colleagues have with this particular matter.

There was also a controversy on the creation of the committee on subsidiary legislation. This has been another issue of debate, and I noticed the discontent the Attorney-General expressed. I would like to say that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs sometime back considered the need to have a committee on subsidiary legislations. The rules committee received submissions to the effect that legislation is primarily the function of Parliament. So, if Parliament delegates that function, there must be a reporting mechanism. 

If you delegate a minister to promulgate statutory instruments, for example, what control do you have after that? If, for example, it breaches the Constitution, what remedies do you have? There must be a committee of Parliament that will sit and scrutinise this legislation. There are so many statutory legislations out there that we need to look at as Parliament. It is still the view of the committee that this matter needs to be considered and this is a very vital committee. 

I will make a few comments in respect to shades of opinion. I should declare my interests here. I am an Independent Member of Parliament; I do not have to apologise for that. My being Independent has never had any bearing on my position on this matter. 

It has been said before, and I will only repeat, that you only have to read Article 72(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 4 of our Rules of Procedure to know who an Independent Member of Parliament is. It is not correct to say that an Independent Member of Parliament is independent of the other. That is false. It is also not correct to say that an Independent Member of Parliament has no right to associate. It is probably correct to say that Independent Members of Parliament can never be a political party in the House, but that does not limit their right to associate. 

This has been a matter of litigation and this afternoon we beg to lay on the Table a number of decisions. Madam Speaker, the first decision we beg to lay on the Table is in the question of crossing the Floor by Members of Parliament, a presidential referral No.2 of 2005 reported in 2006. This is a constitutional case from Malawi. For the information of the House, Malawi has pretty much the same constitutional provisions like our own. They had the same difficulties before. The President felt it necessary to refer this matter for judicial determination and the judiciary pronounced itself on this matter. It is very interesting reading and we encourage all of you to read it. I beg to lay it on the Table. 

The second decision is the Attorney-General and another v. Lewanika and Others, the Supreme Court of Zambia, judgment No.2 of 1994. I beg to lay.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I would like to know whether the chairman of the rules committee is making this submission on behalf of Independents as an individual or as chairman of the rules committee. If so, has the committee been able to scrutinise the documents he is laying on the Table? 

I think we need to demarcate his responsibility as chair of the rules committee and as a Member of Independents. I want to be guided. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he could explain to us.

MR ODOI: Madam Speaker, the committee considered all these documents and if you read the report correctly, we make reference to them. I am not bringing anything new. 

The next issue that I would like to respond to is the leadership of accountability committees, the committees ring-fenced for the Opposition, if I may use that word. The Leader of Opposition took exception to the recommendations of the committee and even insinuated bad faith on the part of the committee. If I got him correctly, it was his view that as a committee we intend to kill the Opposition. 

The committee did receive submissions from members of the Opposition that they needed to equitably distribute all responsibilities that are available to them. They proposed a formula that the committee considered. In view of the fact that we take the view that we are all equal partners while here in Parliament, we made recommendations that in the case where you have leadership from one party, it is only fair enough that the deputy should come from another party. This was not in any way intended to undermine the Opposition. It was not intended to undermine anybody. It was intended to empower every member of this House. We take the view that this was intended to help your management, Leader of the Opposition. 

The Speakers Panel; there have been submissions on the Floor of the House at length in respect to this matter. The Committee carried out several studies. We conducted studies of the Zambian Parliament, the Kenyan Parliament, the Philipino Parliament and we thought - (Interjection) - The Philippines is a democracy with a functional Parliament. It was the view of the committee that this is necessary for the efficient discharge of Parliamentary functions. It was not an attempt to breach the Constitution and we still think this is necessary. 

Appointments Committee; for purposes of transparency, it was the view of the committee that we need to conduct public business in public. That is why we recommended that vetting in the Appointments Committee should be carried out in broad daylight in full view of everybody. (Applause) 

We also take the view that it must involve public participation. If I have issues to raise with proposed appointee x, I must have an avenue of expressing this to the committee. We had even proposed that the Speaker should publish in the gazette all the nominees that she receives, invite protests or recommendations from the public, receive them and consider them. I see nothing wrong with this. 

Of course, I have taken note of the Attorney-General’s concern that we may breach people’s privacy, but if you put yourself out to contest for a public office, you must be prepared to defend your credentials. I do not see any reason as to why we must cover up people’s deficiencies and weaknesses. We must expose them. They must be able to meet public scrutiny. 

Committee on HIV/AIDS and Other Related Matters; as the committee considered this matter, the health committee had difficulties with the operations of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Other Related Matters. The submissions we received from the social services committee was that the committee on HIV/AIDS sometimes performed functions that were ordinarily the preserve of the Committee on Social Services. Malaria, for example, can be said to be an opportunistic disease. It can also be said to be a stand-alone disease. So, where does it fall? Is it a function of the committee on health or the Committee on HIV/AIDs and Related Matters? 

To streamline the functions of these two committees, we took the view that we should rename the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Other Related Matters. That does not mean that we preclude them from handling matters that are only incidental to and directly related to HIV/AIDS; it was only streamlining the functions of the two committees. 

Reporting Mechanisms for EALA; we still hold the view as a committee that with the creation of a new committee on the East African Community Affairs, the reporting mechanism of EALA will not be a fundamental problem. Of course, we had also indicated in our report that they still report through the Nanyuki series, which is still our position, and the available reporting mechanisms. 

There were also submissions in the House, and I think this is the last one, that the Committee on Presidential Affairs is too big and the mandate needs to be split. We went through the mandates of all the committees that are existent and we did not find any mandate that was too big that we did not recommend for a split. For the social services committee that we thought was too big a mandate, we recommended for a split. 

I think those are the only outstanding issues that as a committee we would like to comment on. We beg to move that the report of the committee be adopted. We beg to move. 

MRS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. The clarification I am seeking is about the use of that small bell. I have been attentive and I have read the Rules of Procedure but I have not seen where the small bell that we always use has been applied. When you look at page 6, we have “Paper”, which means any document in any form that may be laid on the Table. On No. 8, we have “Table”, which means the Clerk’s Table. I wonder why the small bell has not been catered for. Does is it mean that we have to laugh or keep quiet? I feel that we should cater for that small bell. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I tried to convince the clerks to use that gadget over there to time members’ speeches but I think it is not something they are used to. That thing there is the timer and it runs for five minutes. So, he turns it and it starts going and by the time it reaches the bottom, you know that the time is over. But I realise that members speak while looking up and they do not look at it. Maybe that is why they do not use it. But that is a gadget for timing. I know that from the other side and this side, you cannot see. That is why we use the bell. 

Honourable members, these rules are very important and someone said the Speaker is always here but the members are not. So, I think I will again reluctantly defer the completion of these rules to tomorrow. We had other business that we wanted to handle but I think we should do the committee stage of these rules.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for the opportunity. I recall you asked the former Minister of State for Internal Affairs to call his friend of internal affairs to come and tell us when he is bringing the report about the shooting of Dr Kiiza Besigye, hon. Nabila Sempala and others in Katwe. I am sure the minister is available, unless he is not – 

THE SPEAKER: I think I see hon. Baba, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. 

7.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I have had a difficult day today. I had to appear before the Committee of Foreign Affairs and I had a paper to present in Cabinet. So, I delayed coming here when the issue was raised. So, permit me to bring the statement tomorrow when House meets in the afternoon. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow afternoon. 

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 23 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
