Tuesday, 23 February 2010

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. When we adjourned to this day, the intention was to have normal business. Actually, we have a lot on our table but as fate had it, last Sunday we received tragic news of the demise of our colleague hon. David Ringe Chan, Member of Parliament for Padyere in Nebbi District. He died suddenly at his home on Sunday. The body was transferred to Kampala and this morning there was a requiem service at All Saints Cathedral and afterwards the body was brought here and many of you have already viewed it.

It is quite unfortunate. When I received the news on Sunday, I was a bit confused because this is the third death of a Member of Parliament between December and February. I asked whether it was an accident but I was told it was a natural death. 

I realise that we are talking about God’s plan. The scheduling of our travel to heaven is not in our hands. It is in His hands. We do not apply for a visa to travel there. Whether you like it or not, the ticket is brought to you and you have to travel. So, there is no bidding farewell. 

As we do normally, we are here today in a special session to pay tribute to our departed friend. That is the business that has brought us here and we are expressing our heartfelt condolences to the family and his constituency in Padyere County. That is the reason we have convened; sorry about it.

(Entrance of the late David Ringe Chan)

National anthem (One Verse)

Laying of wreaths

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the following messages have been received. One is from the Parliamentarians Co-operative Savings and Credit Society and it reads: 

“The Management and the entire membership of the Parliamentarians Co-operative Savings and Credit Society Limited have learnt with shock, the untimely death of our member and friend, hon. David Ringe Chan. The late joined our society in July 2008 and has been one of our good savers till his death. We shall miss him for his great ideas and wide experience. As a policy we have contributed Shs 1,000,000 to the bereaved family. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace! 

Signed by hon. Jalia Bintu, Chairperson.”

Another condolence message reads: 

“It is with profound sadness that we learnt of the sudden death of our colleague and brother, the late hon. David Ringe Chan on Sunday, 21 February 2010. The Teso Parliamentary group and the people of Teso join Parliament, his family, friends and West Nile Community in mourning the early demise of our great friend. We shall always remember him for being hard working and committed to the people of Padyere County and this country as a whole. David was outward going and unreservedly fought corruption without fear till the time of his unfortunate passing away. We shall forever miss him. Please accept our most sincere condolences upon this great loss. 

May the Almighty God rest the soul of our departed hon. David Ringe Chan in eternal peace! 

Signed by Patrick Amuriat Oboi, Chairperson of the Teso Parliamentary Group.”

The next message reads: 

“I extend my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family of hon. David Ringe Chan who has been our colleague and Member of Parliament for Padyere County, Nebbi District. At moments like these, the wise option is to humble ourselves with humility and support, in praying for the bereaved family of our dear colleague. May the Almighty God take us through this difficult time and may his soul rest in eternal peace till we meet again. 

Signed by hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende, Coordinating Secretary of the East African Legislative Assembly, Uganda Branch.”

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. DAVID RINGE CHAN, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR PADYERE COUNTY, NEBBI DISTRICT

2.51
MR SIMON D’UJANGA (NRM, Okoro County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, this is a motion to pay tribute to the late hon. David Ringe Chan.

“WHEREAS Parliament learnt with profound shock and disbelief of the death of the late hon. David Ringe Chan, which occurred at his residence on Sunday, 21 February 2010 in Padyere County, Nebbi District;

AND WHEREAS hon. David Ringe Chan has been an illustrious Member of Parliament who is remembered as a good debater since he joined in 2006 till the time of his death;

NOTING with appreciation that he was instrumental in revamping the Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament of Uganda of which he was the vice chairperson;

AWARE that the late hon. David Ringe Chan was the District Speaker of Nebbi District Council from 2002 to 20006 where he distinguished himself as an astute analysts of issues and preferred excellent guidance to the council during its deliberations;

COGNIZANT of his invaluable contribution to the development of Uganda when he worked as an accountant from 1989 to 2001;

APPRECIATING his outstanding contribution as a Member of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government;

NOW, THEREFORE, let it be resolved by Parliament as follows:
1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives and friends, his constituents of Padyere County, the People of West Nile Sub Region and Uganda at large, for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished son of Uganda, hon. David Ringe Chan.

2. 	That it takes cognizance of the dedicated services and contributions that the late hon. David Ringe Chan has, in the course of his illustrious life, rendered to the people of Uganda as an accountant, Speaker of Nebbi District Council and Member of the Eighth Parliament who will specifically be remembered as a former effective Vice Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament; and 

3. 	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants our departed colleague, David Ringe Chan, eternal rest.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by hon. Okello-Okello.

MR D’UJANGA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, hon. David Ringe Chan was born on 23 May 1962. He attended Oringi Secondary School in Goli, Nebbi District up to senior six after which he joined Uganda College of Commerce, Pakwach where he studied Accountancy and ACCA. After his education, he later worked in various places as a journalist, as an Accountant and also as an auditor. He joined politics in 2001 as the district councilor for Parombo Sub County in Nebbi District where he was elected Speaker to the district council in 2002, a position he held until 2005.

Hon. Ringe Chan was elected MP for Padyere County in February 2006. While he was with us, he was a dedicated legislator who effectively contributed to issues in the plenary and served on the Committee of Public Service Committee and that of Local Government Accounts where he was the vice chairperson.

Hon. Ringe Chan’s method of working was non-confrontational. Indeed, death has once again robbed us of a dedicated servant. He leaves behind a widow, Evelyne Atim and eight children. He will be buried on Thursday at Parombo sub-county, Padyere County, Nebbi District. May his soul rest in peace! 

I beg to move.

2.57
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, first of all let me, on behalf of Uganda People’s Congress Party and on my own behalf, convey our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Padyere, Nebbi and Uganda as a whole.

I have known the late hon. David Ringe Chan for more than 15 years. I met him in 2001 when he was campaigning to join Nebbi District Council. I also met him when he was already the Speaker of Nebbi District Council in 2002. While there, he joked with me that he was to continue to Parliament, but still as Speaker. (Laughter) I would like to say he knew what he was doing, but that is how he joked. However, after swearing in here in 2006 and electing both the Speaker and his deputy, I asked him what had happened to his joke. 

The late was very developmental. Last year I toured his project. He also took me to a school and a commercial building, which I think is still under construction and some other small buildings. I must say he was doing a lot of work.

Over the years, right from 2006, I persuaded the late to join Uganda Golf Club to start playing golf as a way of fighting weight. I am sorry to confess that I failed to succeed because he always told me he did not have time. I actually had even offered him a free golf kit, but he never took it up.

Last Thursday, we wanted some little money. So, I called him as our Treasurer in the UPC Parliamentary Group. He said he was in Nebbi, but he also told me he had been discharged from Arua Hospital the previous day. I had not known he had been hospitalised. However, he told me he was okay and coming to Kampala the following Friday. 

Because we had to have our national council meeting, I wanted him to arrive here before the banks closed on Friday. But when I called him in the morning, he said he was feeling weak and that the day had been so hot, so that he would travel during the night. 

On Saturday, I never saw him during our UPC National Council meeting. I could not find out what had happened. On Sunday at about 4.45 p.m., I received a call from hon. William Nokrach who was in Gulu, saying that there was some funny rumour in Gulu that hon. Ringe had died. He asked me to verify and get back to him. I immediately called David’s number and the call was received by a relative who was talking and sobbing at the same time. This relative said he had been looking out for my contact, but that he could not find it, but that David had died and that the body was still in the house. They were looking for transport to take it to Angal Hospital. 

I again called and talked to somebody, but the body was still in the house. Unfortunately, the phone went off, which made me lose contact. That is when I called you, Mr Speaker and other people. Again everybody I called was upcountry. I was greatly shocked, saddened and I could not believe that David was dead.

Mr Speaker, politically, we are all harassed. But I think the late Ringe Chan was subjected to harassment – political harassment and other methods of harassment more than anybody else. First, his political opponents, both within his own party, UPC and the other parties whom he defeated in 2006 did not allow him to settle down and do his work. 

I know we are all harassed, but his was so much that the late could not spend three consecutive weekends in Kampala without going to the constituency. He was politically kept on his toes all the time. 

Mr Speaker, his school, Padyere Progressive Secondary School is doing well. In that school, he had offered 200 free vacancies every year for orphaned and needy students. But his generosity put a lot of pressure on him. People took it politically, “Why not my child to be sponsored, let them vote for you!” He thought he was doing a favour to his community by providing free education to the orphans. 

The third harassment was witchcraft. We talked about it very many times and I tried to persuade him not to believe in those things. When I shared this with hon. Jachan Omach, he told me that he was undergoing the same kind of harassment –(Laughter)– he did. I think we Africans should wise up, as the Americans say. Really, witchcraft is primitive and cannot bring you to this Parliament. Witchcraft does not vote. I would rather you work with the voters. So, this idea of harassing somebody mentally is useless. I do not believe in it. 

Hon. Ringe Chan was friendly and humorous. Wherever he was, he was always cracking jokes, even on telephone. When you called him, he would always say something that would make you laugh. 

In 1982, I went to Canada on Government duty to value and negotiate for a house to be bought by our High Commission there. We came across a landlord – a very huge one; he had estates called Mr Doe. When we were in his office, he told us that his friends in Nigeria were getting finished; they were dying so suddenly because they never checked themselves. So he advised me, “You young man, start today. Check yourself annually”. I took that advice, and since 1982, I regularly check myself. I am not saying that I am the healthiest person, but I do check ups. Actually, now I do it twice a year. I know how my body is and I think it is very important that we check ourselves so that we are not taken by surprise. If you discover the problem early, it may be easier to handle. 

Finally, our diet - we Africans consume a lot of delicious poison and we call it food. These diseases that are now taking us, Hypertension, Diabetes and what have you – these things came by roads and through airports; our fore-fathers were eating true food, not the kind of things we consume these days. 

So, I appeal to all of you to take matters of our health very seriously. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of Government and on my own behalf, I wish to express our deep condolences to the widow, children and to entire country on the loss of hon. Ringe Chan. 

What has been said clearly indicates that he was diligent, modest, amicable and generous. He was a faithful member of UPC who related very well with members of other political affiliations. In this way, he practiced principles of good governance. We have also noted that he was the Vice Chairman of the Local Government Accounts Committee for two and a half years, a task he accomplished very well. 

Many people have died of diseases they were not aware of, and I wish to advise all Members of Parliament that at Mulago Hospital, there is a Wellness clinic and you are advised to check yourself every six months not yearly. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved!

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, in the book of Revelations, Chapter 12:11, it says, “We defeat the devil by the blood of Jesus and by the testimony of the Word”.

HON. MEMBERS: Amen.

MR OMACH: Recently when hon. John Okello-Okello was sent some food by some people and he somehow got scared of it, I said, “Please cover yourself with the blood of Jesus and none of those things will affect you”. So, once you are covered, none of those will touch you.

For us in Nebbi, it is very sad that we have lost our brother hon. David Ringe Chan. It is very sad because in the Seventh Parliament also, Nebbi District lost a Member of Parliament, Hon. Esther Dogira Opoti. We feel extremely saddened today that we have lost hon. David Ringe Chan.

The demise of hon. David Ringe Chan found me at home. At about 4.30 a.m., I was rang by the RDC of Nebbi rang me and I immediately left Pakwach for Nebbi to ensure that we make appropriate arrangements for the burial of hon. David Ringe Chan. We decided that there was need to have a post mortem of the cause of death.  

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing us to bring the body back from Nebbi to Kampala and to have this respect paid to him today. I would like through you to thank the district administration of Nebbi for giving us an ambulance which brought the body to Mulago Hospital.

The preliminary cause of death of hon. David Ringe Chan is acute cardiac arrest, which happened on Sunday, 21 February 2010 at his residence in Nebbi town. Hon. David Ringe Chan had been admitted in Arua hospital for about three days and he was diagnosed with sugar diabetes and some of these complications when they reach certain levels could easily become fatal.

Hon. David Ringe Chan was a very progressive Member of Parliament. He has done a lot of development in Nebbi District. The school that hon. Okello-Okello has referred to, Nebbi Progressive Secondary School is doing very well and indeed he has been offering scholarships to a number of students from Nebbi District, particularly from the constituency that he represented. He has left a lot of structures uncompleted in Nebbi town and we pray that these will be completed by the people who are still remaining alive on this earth.

Hon. David Ringe Chan, although he was a Member of Parliament on the UPC ticket, the three of us who were on the Movement ticket from Nebbi District interacted very well with him. We never had any difficulty in sharing since we all belong to the same Parliament. Soft spoken as he was, we went on very well and we pray that this example will permeate all of us, now that we have started this Parliament which is multi-party.

Hon. David Ringe Chan has left a widow and eight children and the widow is here with us, in the names of Atim Evelyn, and it is our responsibility as friends of hon. David Ringe Chan to also take care of these children as our own children having been together with hon. David Ringe these four years that he has served us here.

Nebbi District Council learnt with profound shock of the sudden demise of Hon. David Ringe Chan and they are all gathered waiting to have a service tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. in Nebbi Town, and after that the body will be taken to the final resting place as has been mentioned to you by Hon. Simon D’ujanga Padyere in Parombo sub-county, Nebbi District. 

We urge all of you to come and be with us at the last fellowship of our late brother. I would like to thank, through you, Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament who at very short notice were able to come here today in such large numbers to pay their last respects to our fallen and beloved brother. May the good Lord rest his soul in eternal peace!

3.21
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I fit in the shoes of the Leader of Opposition who would have loved to be here in person but is still on bed rest on the advice of his doctor.

Therefore, on behalf of the Leader of Opposition and on my own behalf, I would like to extend our heartfelt condolences to the entire Parliament of Uganda, the bereaved family, the people of Nebbi and Uganda Peoples Congress, for the loss of a senior citizen, hon. David Ringe, Member of Parliament Padyere County.

Mr Speaker, we are here to mourn and celebrate the life of hon. David Ringe. Although we were aware of hon. David’s health condition of having diabetes, the sad news of his death has shocked and surprised the entire Parliament owing to the fact that for the last there months, this Parliament has lost three Members of Parliament. We cannot understand what is happening.

We have lost a leader in the name of hon. David Ringe; we have lost a role model - it is a common belief in the Uganda of today, and in the world, that politicians must make noise in order to make points. I want to note that hon. David Ringe was not only a politician, but a leader and a role model of our time.

Hon. Ringe Chan started his political career in the 1980s as a Youth Wing member of Uganda Peoples Congress. In 2002 to 2006, he became a District Councillor where he was elected the Speaker of the District Council. Thereafter, he served in different capacities.

Hon. David Ringe will be remembered for his many contributions to his country, Uganda Peoples Congress and his unending love for education in his country. He honestly believed that to rid this country of its backwardness, Uganda must educate her children, give her children quality education and some of us share his vision; the more reason that he opened up a school and has been offering 200 scholarships to the needy children. This is the man we have lost right now.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, if God knew the challenges we go through whenever we lose a Member of Parliament, He would have mercy on us. He would have mercy on us and save us the challenges of losing a Member of Parliament. These challenges range from grief, going through the by-elections with its associated problems of bribery, corruption, violence, harassments and sometimes death. God should have mercy on us.

To the family, I recognise that while Parliament can replace another Member of Parliament, the family of hon. Ringe Chan has lost forever. The children will never have their father again; the wife will never have the husband again. I call upon the members of the family to be strong and pray to the Almighty God to give you strength and stand by the bereaved family especially the children. In this challenging moment, the family needs love, care and the highest degree of understanding.

Nonetheless, I thank the Almighty God for the life of hon. Ringe Chan and the contributions he made to his country. May God rest the soul of our departed colleague in everlasting peace! I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for listening to me.

3.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I too would like to speak in support of the motion paying commendation to the work performed by the deceased while serving as a Member of our Parliament and while still in this world.

I would also like to register sincere condolences to the family of the late David Ringe Chan, the widow and the children. I would also like to pass on similar considerations to the people of Padyere, the constituency and Uganda Peoples Congress and the party which he has been representing in this Parliament.

I got to learn of the demise of Hon. David Ringe Chan on Sunday at about 2.00 p.m. when I received a call from hon. Catherine Mavenjina. She informed me that there was a problem in Nebbi; that our colleague had passed on and that we needed to do something.

Like hon. Okello-Okello, I started making telephone calls and I think most of us were upcountry. I must thank the leadership of Parliament, our Government and the local leadership in Nebbi for the work so far done to ensure that we give a befitting send off to our fallen colleague.

Those who have spoken before me have already made reference to the excellent legislative skills of our fallen brother. He did serve this Parliament with total dedication. He also did serve his constituents with utter commitment as we have already heard.

Hon. David Ringe Chan was a highly approachable person who was always eager to associate freely without inhibition. In the course of performing his duty as Vice Chair of the Local Government Accounts Committee, he was always prepared to go beyond narrow partisan political interests for the sake of the general good of our country, and for the common good. On that note, we need to pay commendation to him, but also try to emulate him so that we can be in a position to serve this country better. 

Our fallen brother here had an open mind and capacity to discern opportunities wherever they were. The constituency of Butembe is a cosmopolitan one with a lot of opportunities. Hon. Ringe Chan got to learn of some of these opportunities when he was in search of employment; he decided to leave Nebbi and Kampala and come and take up employment in Butembe, in Kakira Sugar Works. His name is still remembered by the many people in that part of the country. He did a wonderful job while out there. Unfortunately, he stayed there for a very short time; but he is still remembered for the good performance that he had put up while still in employment in Kakira Sugar Works.

This attribute of having an open mind and the capacity to discern opportunities led him to invest in the private education sector. When the NRM Government opened up opportunities in the education sector, by encouraging the private sector to invest in schools and other educational institutions, Hon. David Ringe Chan saw the emerging opportunities and sought to seize them. He decided to invest in an education institution, Nebbi Progressive Secondary School and he has been able to provide excellent educational services. At the same time, he has been in position to address the issue of unemployment and income generation in that part of the country.

Many of us need to do what he did. Many of us happened to be extremely good debaters when it comes to some of these things like investing in the education sector and other avenues in the private sector. However, when it comes to taking on this business as individuals, we always find it very difficult. Obviously, we don’t all happen to have the same attributes but it would help when we legislators go beyond simply coming up with excellent debates and submissions on this Floor, and go back and practice what we always debate, articulate and appear to amplify wherever we go.

This government has been in the forefront of encouraging inter party cooperation and dialogue. We recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding after several years of discussions between various political parties that are represented in this Parliament. 

I was extremely encouraged when hon. Okello-Okello talked about harassment, but amongst those who have been harassing hon. Ringe Chan, at least the NRM has not been there. It is this kind of politics which encourages observance of constitutionalism and the tenets of democracy that we want to preach and encourage so that all of us can feel certain of the future in this country.

It is our view that if we can all practice this kind of politics, then politics will become an undertaking that all of us will be in a position to cherish. I would like to end my submission by saying, may the Lord God rest the soul of our brother, David Ringe Chan in eternal peace. I thank you.

3.37
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to those who have eulogised our colleague. I too received the information of the death of our colleague with deep shock. I was utterly shocked and couldn’t believe it. 

Just a couple of weeks ago - I think it was late last month - I was together with my colleagues on the Local Government Accounts Committee in the company of Ringe Chan. He was upbeat and full of life and you could not tell that within a few weeks, he would be no more.

The particular incident I would recall, as I said, late last month, our committee moved to Arua District. On our way there, we got a mechanical breakdown at a place called Puranga in Amuru District, Nwoya County. We were stuck, travelling in the parliamentary bus. We had to raise our colleague who was by that time in Nebbi. It is a long distance from that town to Nebbi. The moment he received the information, he got a vehicle, dashed to the spot where we had got the mechanical problem and rescued us in the evening.

The vehicle he came with could not carry all of us. So he volunteered to remain behind and said, “No I will find my way back to Nebbi.”  When we got to Nebbi, some of us could not proceed to Arua and he accommodated us at his place called Lodge Dong -

THE SPEAKER: It seems he was a Rotarian whose motto is, “Service Above Self.”

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, he gave us accommodation at his place and we spent a night there at a place called Lodge Dong. The kind of hospitality he extended to us was extraordinary. We felt comfortable, actually it was like a stop over, but we said, “No, for us we are staying here”. Some of our colleagues proceeded to Arua at night but many of us who were there, like hon. Otekat and others, decided to spend a night there. It was so nice.

One particular interesting thing is that he served us with sweet matooke and I asked him, “Isn’t this matooke from my home in Masaka the way it tastes?” He said, “This matooke is grown here in my constituency, particularly the newly created district of Zombo.” He said, “In the near future, Zombo is going to be a food basket not only for the West Nile Region but Uganda as a whole”.

In particular, he said he looked forward to a day he would see a truck full of matooke heading this way from Zombo and not the other way round. I implore the leadership in that region - hon. Omach, carry on with that vision. Hon. Ringe Chan had a vision for his area. He looked forward to a day when his county, Padyere and the region at large would be uplifted. The conditions there are pathetic. So, it is a challenge he is leaving to you and all of us, as to how we can improve the standard of living in that area; its productivity and all the other aspects.

I will leave the rest of the matters concerning his performance in the committee - I can see my chairman and other Members are around, but one thing I would like to say is, hon. Chan detested corruption; he fought it. Even when we reached Arua at that time, there was a team which came from Yumbe. He assured them that, “You are my brothers and sisters, but when it comes to value-for-money and accountability of public funds, no business to do with kinship”. He would not wink an eye and said, “Please, accountability is accountability”. He leaves us with that challenge to continue with the struggle to fight this cancer called corruption. May you rest in eternal peace, hon. Chan!

3.43
MRS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I stand here to support the motion. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Kitgum, I would like to convey our sincere sympathy to the widow, children and the family as well as Parliament for the loss of our dear colleague, hon. Chan.

I was set aback when I learnt of the death of hon. Chan. As I stand, I want to give a small experience. We are so many in this Parliament representing the different constituencies and sometimes you can fail to peg a name to a face of one of your colleagues because we are over 300. 

I have been thinking, members of parliament, that at the rate we are going and sitting in this honourable House remembering each other, I said, I Beatrice Anywar, what do I leave behind to be remembered? It can be a joke, but I have started to think very seriously about what the preacher today said in church. He said that David left behind footmarks; he walked like an elephant. Whenever he moved, the footmark remained. We colleagues are parting at a terrific speed. What are we leaving behind to be remembered as we are remembering my brother David Ringe? 

He has fought a good fight. We are standing here to give testimony and encourage the children that your father left footmarks that members of parliament are giving testimony about. To the widow, take heart. Behind every strong man there stands a woman. My namesake, you stood behind David Ringe. He has left a footmark, which we are all giving testimony to.

I want to say that I have been humbled by the humility of David Ringe. He is a humble man, an honourable that you find in the corridor and he is smiling and walking gracefully. I just see him walking in the lobby and patting you on the back. 

That brings me to share this with colleagues. That as we come to this House for five years, let us learn to cultivate interpersonal relationships; we need to cultivate this so that at the click that a team member has died or something has happened, you don’t have to look for the face to peg to the name. You can quickly rewind to some small touch you experienced with the person and that is what makes a person be remembered forever. You touch somebody’s heart and once you touch my heart positively and you give me a shoulder to lean on, I cannot forget you. 

For sure, I just want to believe that God the Creator - if all of us say that somebody is good, how can God pass a wrong judgement that this person is wrong? I believe the judgement of one’s life starts on earth and starts with where you work and associate. I think we should go an extra mile apart from legislating and representing, to cultivate interpersonal relationships.

Secondly, when I listened to what has happened to my brother and I look at myself having two sides, how are we prepared spiritually and physically? We are on the journey no doubt. 

Last Saturday, I was attending the burial of a mother of the family of Sebutinde on Entebbe Road and I was told that the mother fell on the steps and was rushed to Mulago Hospital. They said that she should either be flown to Nairobi or India but later she died. The same is what I am trying to relate here. We are not exceptional to the rule; we fall sick. How quick are our services in place to help the situation we fall into?

I think that when my brother was admitted, the doctors did their best but what went wrong? I think you should be ably advised and helped even within your own locality. The minister said they had to transport the body for post mortem all the way to Mulago because they couldn’t get the facilities in Nebbi. This is also an indicator that we should make our health services good enough not only for members of parliament but for our countrymen.

I also wanted to take note that when we prepare ourselves spiritually, what about the physical? Members of Parliament are so stressed and the stress has been explained here. We are busy all the time. 

I remember, Mr Speaker, four months ago, I wrote to your Office. I had earlier contacted the Deputy Speaker and the Vice President, and I proposed that we have a health club for members of parliament in this Chamber around our offices here. I wrote to your Office because I do believe that we are much stressed and we are very busy. The Leader of Government Business said that there is a well-fitness club in Mulago. How many of us have the time to rush to Mulago when stressed, to go and help our physical bodies? 

I do propose, Mr Speaker, that with the rate at which your Members are going because of so many factors, including not making ourselves fit, the idea of a fitness club in this Parliament should click to ease the stress and excess baggage on members of parliament. 

With that, I want to say that what my brother Ringe David has done especially in the education sector, needs to be applauded, and I hope the government – I heard the Government Chief Whip say that the government brought in place the private sector - I think it is also high time we realised that the private sector in education are giving this country quality education without Government coming so much to their help. 

It is high time we recognised such contributions of this Member and others, and Government should give a hand to the private sector to give quality service to this country. I want to say that my brother Ringe David, you have walked the good walk; you have fought a good fight. May the good Lord receive you in His big house and give you eternal rest. I thank you. 

3.53
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My sister the widow, the children, friends of hon. David Ringe Chan and the people of Padyere County, I stand on behalf of Rubaga North and the larger fraternity of the Uganda Federal Alliance to convey our deep felt sympathies to you at the loss of my friend and our brother, Hon. David Ringe Chan.

I really share your pain and I pray that God will help you to be strong and to face the challenges that await a young widow. My sister, I know that it is not easy to be a widow in a country like this and so many challenges await you, but we have passed some good laws in this country. People will be after you for the property, about your children and about everything; but be strong and use the laws and we are all here to support you. 

Hon. David Ringe Chan has died a young man and has left a young family. We praise God for his short life, but as we all know, death has no respect for age, stature or status. Death happens at will but when a person dies, as hon. Ringe Chan lies before us here, what we talk of them is not what God gave them, not how intelligent they were, not how strong or handsome or rich they were, but the choices that people make with the attributes that God gave them is what makes the difference in this world. 

Uganda is what it is today mainly because of the choices that are made by intelligent, religious, rich, and highly educated people. They are the ones that made the choices that make Uganda what it is today. If you are unhappy with what is happening here, or if you are happy, do not blame it on God; blame it on the choices of intelligent, highly religious people.

Mr Speaker, we have heard that hon. Ringe Chan was highly stressed, as we all are, just like my sister Beatrice Anywar just said. But who is responsible for this chaotic political environment which is highly commercialised? Who is responsible for the commercialised politics; for the overburdened taxpayer where there is no medicine in the hospitals; where roads are death traps and where boda bodas are death-traps? Who is making the choices that overburden the taxpayer and short-changes them for the taxes that they pay? Most of the choices are made right here in this House by us, honourable ladies and gentlemen. Who is responsible for the expensive lifestyles that we enjoy at the cost of other people? 

As we sit here mourning our colleague and celebrating his life, we need to do some serious soul searching as a country and as the representatives of the people of Uganda. We need to ask ourselves: When it is my day to lie there, when people will be talking about me, when people are passing their judgement, will I stand tall and strong even as I lie there because of the choices that I made? Hon. David Ringe Chan was an honourable man because he made honourable choices; as a representative of the people, as an educationist, as an entrepreneur, as a father and as a husband. That is why we are here talking good about him. 

Mr Speaker, I finally want to turn to our children. Some of them are not here. I want to tell them that their father was an honourable man. He was an amiable person. So many good things have been said of their father but their father is gone. Now it is your turn; my children; our children. We pray for you to make good choices with the attributes that you have. Make honourable choices, make Godly choices, make responsible choices, and then you will be honourable people before this country and before your God. May the soul of our brother; our colleague, hon. Ringe Chan, rest in eternal peace! I thank you.

3.59
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to associate myself fully with those who have spoken before me in paying tribute to our fallen brother, the late Hon. David Ringe Chan. Maybe before I go ahead to make my tribute, next time in circumstances like these, we need to get an official report of death from the Ministry of Health. Why am I saying this? For those of us who come from communities where some people still believe in this primitive witchcraft, you will have rumours circulating all over the place saying that somebody has killed him. But if you have an official report by doctors, then it is easier for anybody to explain, especially to the people that actually this was a legitimate death and not this sort of thing which hon. Okello-Okello has talked about.

I know the Hon. Fred Omach has in the passing hinted about it, but my view is that next time, we need a clear official report from the Ministry of Health such that it goes on record and to the people. They should be explained to that actually this was a legitimate death.

Having said that, I have known quite a number of gentlemen from Padyere; around 25 years ago, when I was a state attorney, I came to learn and become friends with one of the most distinguished sons of Padyere who was a Constituent Assembly delegate and my learned senior colleague, the late Chan Ringe, who has since passed on.

I was also to become friends with the predecessor to hon. Ringe Chan and that is hon. Okumu Ringa; quite a gentleman I must say, so is our fallen friend who is lying before us today.

Last year I was been honoured to chair the Local Government Accounts Committee. I worked closely with the late Ringe Chan and some of the successes we are having as a committee have the foundations of the people of the predecessors who sat on this committee and one of them being the hon. Ringe Chan together with his senior colleague then, hon. Ekanya.

Fighting corruption is not an easy job, but they tried to lay the foundation for which this committee is moving and the few innovations we are making are some of the efforts and achievements of that committee at the time.

He was selfless and that incident which hon. Lukwago has been talking about touches some of us. He was the only member of UPC on our committee but when he realised the committee had a problem, he dispatched vehicles far from where the problem was to come and pick his colleagues irrespective of their political affiliations, and that is the gentleman we are looking at today, who in service of the committee and in service of this honourable House, never looked at his political party; he was looking at the bigger picture.

He was humble. Having been a vice chairperson of this committee, he agreed to serve as an ordinary member of the same committee in the second part of this Parliament, which would have been problematic for him if he said, I was the boss of this committee, how do I sit on the same committee as an ordinary member? He agreed to serve and his invaluable experience and expertise in local government has made us to achieve some of these small achievements that we are having as a committee.

It brings me to another point. Sometimes it is better to have people with experience on committees or even in the House because they are value-additions. The experience he had got in local government enriched the committee as we were deliberating on issues affecting local governments. Maybe it is a message to the country that next time you elect, elect people with some experience; with some education; because they bring value- addition to the House and to the committees.

When tragedies like this one come, they make us re-examine ourselves. For example, do we have a functional health system in this country? Is it possible that maybe there was a problem of lack of relevant health personnel in Arua to manage his condition? If the issue is about diabetes, did we have a diabetes specialist in Arua or did we not have one? These are the hard questions that we should be asking as a country so that we invest in areas where lives will be saved.

The problem is that our health system has got big problems and we are not taking it as a priority. Whereas countries like USA are now grappling with healthcare reforms and so on, we are not. I will give you an example. A few weeks ago, our colleague, hon. Bernard Mulengani, lost a wife and you cannot believe what happened. 

One, when they needed the blood, there was no blood in the blood bank. Two, when they eventually got blood from some other place after a long time, there was no technician in the laboratory to cross-match the blood. 

Three, the doctor just looked at a card without cross-matching and infused wrong blood – and all this happened at Mulago Hospital, the national referral hospital. That is what happened to hon. Bernard Mulengani’s wife just two weeks ago. 

I now ask, “Do we still have a functional health system?” If it can happen to somebody in Mulago Hospital, just imagine what could have happened in Arua. We are not getting our priorities correct and sometimes when it touches us as the big people in the country that is when we start running around. What about the common people?

Diabetes is a manageable disease - I am diabetic myself. It only requires a little bit of discipline and proper management. But if you do not have that discipline and you are not properly managed by a doctor, you will be in big trouble. Is this country investing in training these doctors in cancer, diabetes and cardiology among others? Is it doing it? 

Lastly, we have a problem of remuneration of the health staff. I cannot imagine that you have got doctors who run private clinics and also run public hospitals or institutions. For example, you have one doctor who runs four private clinics but he is also a doctor in a major government hospital. Where does he get all the time to move to all these different clinics and also to attend to patients in the government hospital? What is the government policy? I think some of us are living by accident in this country. You cannot have doctors doing private practice and you expect them to have the time to do public work in public hospitals because there is no time. If he is to move in these small clinics around the trading centre, he has little time to attend to patients in the major hospital. Government should be looking at some of these issues – of course the major problem is remuneration. The government should address the problems of doctors such that those who are employed by Government should not indulge themselves in private practice. Like lawyers, it would be very bad if you had state attorneys running private law firms - it cannot work! But within the health sector, this is happening. I am glad that the Leader of Government Business is here and he should bring this to the attention of Government, assuming they are not aware because it is the duty of some of us to let them know that some of these problems are happening in this country. 

Hon. Ringe Chan, bye and rest in peace! 

4.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Anthony Yiga): I thank you very much. I also stand to support the Motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Ringe Chan. 

First of all, I would like on behalf of the Parliament Committee on Public Service and Local Government, the people of Masaka District and on my own behalf, to extend sincere condolences to the bereaved family. Unfortunately, they have left the Chamber, but the message will be passed on. 

Hon. Ringe Chan has been a member of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government where we have served together for the last four years. I have been privileged to chair this committee for one and a half years now. Hon. Ringe Chan and I have also been members of the Parliament Local Government Accounts Committee. 

I last met hon. Ringe Chan on 11 February 2010 when the Local Government Accounts Committee was going to Gulu District to do parliamentary work. He was supposed to have gone with us in a parliamentary bus led by Hon. Johnson Malinga, but he was indisposed and weak. We were surprised that he managed to find his Toyota Corolla car and bypassed us as we were about to reach Nakasongola and he stopped us. We got out of the bus and greeted him. He looked very weak and yet he was driving himself. I told him, “You man, you look very weak. Why are you driving yourself?” He said, “I will be okay. I have some work to do in Nebbi and I will join you tomorrow in Gulu so that we do parliamentary work.” I then asked him, “Why are you driving yourself because you look very weak and you should be resting now?” He said, “No, I will be okay.” Of course he did not join us the following day because from the way I saw him, he could not manage to come to Gulu. We did our work and we came back to Kampala.

Being a Member of the committee I am chairing, I called him at about 9.30 a.m. on February 17 and he told me, “Honourable chair, I am sorry I cannot attend the committee meeting because I have been hospitalized in Arua Hospital.” So I asked, “What is the problem?” He replied, “My condition has worsened and I have now been hospitalised.”  He reassured me that he would be okay and that by Saturday, he would be discharged. Now what do I get when I come from my constituency on Monday, the man has died! It is indeed sad news. 

Hon. Ringe Chan has been one of the most dedicated members on my committee. He was very jolly and social – the social bit has been expressed by our colleagues when he worked very hard to rescue us when we had problems on the way. He was always laughing. However, many of us had reservations about his health because he was really very heavy. I used to tell him, “You man, what is the problem? Why are you over eating?” He would then say, “No, I am not over eating and I am normal.” Of course he would joke and say, “You know in Nebbi, you have to be very big otherwise your political opponents will under-rate you and come and disturb you.” But of course we knew there was a problem because his weight was increasing and the other surprise is that he had those problems of diabetes and hypertension.

But, above all, hon. Ringe Chan was very resourceful. He brought his good background as somebody who had worked in local government to the committee. He was a former speaker of Nebbi District Council and a councillor; so all that experience was brought to the committee. That enabled us to transact our business very well and smoothly with a lot of expert knowledge from many of our colleagues who have worked in local governments.

So, as a committee, we are missing him greatly; the nation is also missing him and his family is also missing him.

I would like to comment on the issue of stress. I do not know what we shall do – and now this is a bad season for us politicians. But please honourable colleagues, reserve some time and rest. 

On 11th February when I saw Ringe Chan driving his vehicle; he was so weak. You could see him; even breathing was a problem, but the man was rushing to Nebbi because of pressure from the constituency. I do not wish to see another Member of Parliament going through such an experience. Please, get some time and rest -(Interjections)- you will not finish all the work on this Earth. You will not solve all the problems in the constituencies and above all, your health is very important. This is because once you pass away, your dear ones are going to miss you forever and they may never recover from that. 

So, can we get some time and rest? Can we also create time to go for medical check-ups so that we know our medical conditions and manage them? May the Almighty God grant his soul eternal rest!

4.19
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I stand here to support the Motion that this Parliament pays tribute to the late Hon. David Ringe Chan for his selfless and dedicated service to this Parliament, to his people of Padyere Constituency, and to Uganda at large.

Allow me, on behalf of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum and on my behalf, to convey our sympathy and condolences to the family and relatives of our friend, our colleague, the late David Ringe Chan -(Interjections)- we convey our condolences to his family, the constituency, to this Parliament and the country at large.

Ringe David Chan was a very committed member of our forum. He would attend almost all our meetings and he is a paid-up member of our forum.

I interacted with the late colleague; he has been a good person. He had love for this country and for his people, especially our people from the Greater North. He was concerned about the situation in our place; the security of our people; the high level of poverty among our people. Also, the rate at which our women are dying was his concern.

The late honourable Member of Parliament – I interacted with him – he was a very good man; humble, honest, simple and a man of high integrity. I want to implore our members of parliament here that these are some of the attributes we need to consider. This is because among many leaders in this country, honesty is a problem. People are now joining politics for personal gains. That is why members of parliament are under a lot of pressure in their constituencies because people think it is only through Parliament that you can become rich. 

Also, some of our Members here are trying to work so hard beyond their means to sustain their constituencies -(Laughter)- I think this is a big problem. 

I was elected as a young man in 1996 and I am still very young. I have won three elections and I know, God willing, whenever I stand, I will win. But I want to advise you that you should play politics simply. It should not be a matter of life and death. (Applause) There is life after Parliament; actually better life. Plan your life. The problem we have in this country is that people do not plan for their lives. It is only through planning - I have to be a Member of Parliament at 30 years; I am going to build at 30 years; I will go maybe after the next – you plan your life. By the time you die, you will know that your Will is ready and it can sustain your family. 

The problem we have today – I want to implore you my dear colleagues that never at one time take politics as a matter of life and death; whereby you can kill to become a Member of Parliament; you can steal to become a Member of Parliament; you spend beyond your means to become a Member of Parliament. That is going to destroy this country.

Our late friend was a committed Member. He was a true Ugandan. I belong to the Movement and he was red, UPC; but we would interact freely irrespective of our political inclination. I think that is what we need in this country. Let us build bridges and make friends not enemies. Politics should not destroy us; it should only work for our country. If you are in politics to destroy yourself and fellow Ugandans, then that is not politics. That is witchcraft. (Laughter)  

In our meetings, Ringe Chan would contribute freely and generously in terms of ideas. We are going to miss him, but I want us to remember him for what he stood for, especially now as we go for elections. We should not rig elections. Even in your constituencies, my dear members of parliament, you should do everything not to rig elections. Let them be free and fair because once we believe in a free and fair election, then there will not be chaos in this country -(Interjections)- stand for peace and democracy and that is what he stood for. 

Let us work for humanity. I know many people work for themselves, but our friend worked for humanity. And when you are working for humanity, you work beyond yourself. That is what he was doing. He opened a school and was supporting 200 people. People should not think it was bad or that it stressed him. No! His glory was already there. As a Member of Parliament, if you are serving humanity, once you do something for the people, that is your happiness and that is what you gain from. 

Therefore, ladies and gentlemen, my dear colleagues, we shall miss our dear friend and our brother. As the Greater North, we shall do everything to remember him. We shall do everything that he stood for. 

I would like to inform Members, especially those from West Nile and Nebbi, that we had a meeting there two weeks ago and he participated and raised many issues about implementation of government programmes in his district. I know there are Members from his district here; please follow it up because it seems things are not going very well in that district. Take it up from there. I thank you very much. May his soul rest in peace!

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Simon Ejua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to express my condolences to the demise of our great colleague. Hon. Ringe Chan has been a very great friend and a good neighbour. We have been interacting a lot with hon. Ringe Chan on various functions and one thing I must say is that hon. Ringe Chan was never confrontational and, therefore, to some people like me, he was a great friend.

It is unfortunate that when hon. Ringe Chan was in Arua Hospital, I was in Arua, but I did not know. Maybe I could have had some better understanding but I think it was the time God had set for him. I met hon. Ringe Chan at the Parliament entry when we started this month and I was actually worried about his size. I hugged him and pointed at his stomach and said, “Honourable, what is happening?” He smiled as usual and said, “There is not that much of a problem; I am going to sort it out.” 

This made me remember when the President was in Arua and I was with the RDC of Arua. He pointed at the stomach of the RDC and said, “RDC, this is very bad. What is happening?” The RDC did not understand but he was talking about the obesity. That thing remained in my mind and so when I met him I told him, “This is very bad.” But I thought it was a joke. I did not know that it would really become like this. 

I must say hon. Ringe Chan was a very great friend because whenever we had public functions in West Nile, in Arua, he would be very jolly. He would welcome us, flash his UPC sign to us freely and we would flash our NRM sign and at the end we would be happy people. So, he was free-minded. He was not practicing politics of intrigue and I think that helped us to work together a lot. And, therefore, I strongly feel that we have really lost a very great colleague. I loved him because he loved education so much just like I have a lot of education programmes in my constituency in the district. That made us to cherish him. We pray that all these foundations he has laid will be sustained. 

Finally, I think hon. Ringe Chan has left a very good legacy. He has shown us how we should behave when we are in different political parties. He never confronted us and, therefore, we never confronted him, unlike many of his colleagues who have been trying to step here and there and clash. But we would laugh later. He was perfect and may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the Motion before the House to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, the late Hon. David Ringe Chan. The late, like his name states in Luo, truly epitomised the meaning of his name, that is, he tried his level best to fight poverty. I was getting concerned when hon. Okot Ogong was finding difficulties pronouncing this Luo name and I felt I could even go ahead and mention the meaning of this name.

The late, from what colleagues have contributed, worked very diligently to fight poverty not only in his constituency, but in the country as a whole, by focusing on one major thing, namely, education; education for the under-privileged orphans and the poor children. For this we shall remember him and we shall miss him.

I would like to add my voice also and talk about what we as individuals can do to address some of the diseases that we call diseases of lifestyle. Hon. Katuntu did talk about what Government should do and indeed as it was previously elaborated by the hon. Prime Minister, Government has established a Wellness Clinic at Mulago Hospital. By our age we should be going twice a year as a matter of routine to check for each and every index that we normally check for to see if our bodies are working well –

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, but you have repeated what the hon. Prime Minister said in his statement, but as a lay man, what do you mean by that clinic?

DR OTAALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A wellness clinic is a clinic which you go to when you are not sick and you go to that clinic to check whether your body is working normally. Some of these diseases are silent killers. Diabetes, for example, will normally be discovered when you have gone for something else then the doctor, upon checking your blood, can find that your blood sugar is high. Hypertension may also be discovered when a person has gone for something else, and the doctor routinely takes the blood pressure and realises that it is above the normal. 

So, I encourage honourable colleagues to always attend this Wellness Clinic at Mulago; the doctors are there ready to take the tests to find out if your body is working well. 

As we work towards socio-economic transformation of our country, we are also beginning to realise that we are developing more of those diseases that used to be called diseases of the affluent world. We are beginning to see many cases of obesity, many cases of Diabetes, and heart diseases, including coronary heart – those are diseases of the blood vessels. All these diseases can kill instantly.

Hon. Okello-Okello did talk quite elaborately on how we can manage these diseases. First of all, we have to be very careful, because as we Members of Parliament have access to resources, including food, as you are serving yourself, just ask yourself if you are not using the spoon and folk to dig your own grave. 

Eating moderate amounts of food is healthy for us; doing exercises after eating is even healthier. Many of us walk out of our houses and enter our cars in the parking lot and we drive to office. At 6.00 pm, we enter the car and go back home; that is what we call a sedentary lifestyle and it predisposes us to all these diseases of lifestyle. 

There is a small instrument called pedometer; you can buy it in any pharmacy like that in Wandegeya. Hang it on your belt and ensure that you walk at least 2,500 steps in a day in order to be healthy. But how many of us even walk 20 steps in a day? So, we are predisposing ourselves to these diseases.

I want to take this opportunity to educate honourable colleagues. There is a simple experiment you can undertake to find out whether you are already overweight so that you can take the necessary precautions, instead of waiting for what Government can do. Government will not force you to walk daily; Government will not force you to go and play hockey, and Government will not direct you not to eat junk food. So, there is a simple measurement that you can take called the body mass index. Take your weight in kilogrammes and divide that weight by your height squared; squared means that if your height is two meters, you multiply that two by two so that it becomes four. 

The normal indexes are as follows. If your weight in kilogrammes divided by your height squared follows within a range of 19.5 to 25.9, then you are normal. If you divided your weight in kilogrammes by your height in meters squared, and you got any answer between 19.5 and 25.9 then your body is well. If you found something between 26 and 30, then you are overweight. You better begin to do exercises and look into the diet – are you eating more of the refined foods? You begin to take greens and roughages. 

If your body mass index is above 30, then you are what we describe medically as obese and you are suffering from an illness called obesity. This illness predisposes you to high blood pressure or hypertension and cardiac diseases. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Anywar talked about the need to have a gym. But I want to say that gyms are liberalised and colleagues should spare some little bit of time to walk into these gyms and do some exercises. At one time I am on record to propose to this House that as we build our new parliament, there should be provision for a gym, for example. But looking more critically and learning what politics is, I am afraid that so many things can be interpreted. That is why I want to recommend to colleagues that gyms are available; please make sure you utilise them but also make sure you play games. 

Mr Speaker, the late was a very humble person and very objective. It was very difficult to know that he was indeed a Member of the Opposition. In fact, he offered positive criticism where it was necessary and that is truly what the Opposition should do to us who are in Government. 

With these words, I want to pray that May the Almighty God strengthen his family, the widow and the children and may he receive eternal rest. Thank you. 

4.46
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to convey my condolences to the family of my dear brother whom I worked with for two and half years. Hon. David Ringe Chan was my Vice-Chairperson when I was Chairman of the Committee on the Local Government Accounts. 

To the widow, I want to say that your husband has left a serious mark and if books are to be written – it is on the record of this Parliament that the Local Government Accounts Committee, where he was vice and I was the chairperson, performed beyond expectation. It has never been in the history of this Parliament that a committee could clear backlog from 2001 for all municipalities and 80 districts from 2001 to 2005. We did it with him as the vice chair. We sat many times to plan with him and set a duty time table. In fact, we set a record in this Parliament, our record would always start at 9.00 O’clock and indeed we would be there unless when we had pressure from the constituency.

I would like to call upon my dear colleagues that politics is free entry and free exist. The problem is, when we join politics, we do not want opposition to come our way. The voters also do not understand the roles of Members of Parliament. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for you had started a programme of taking the Parliament to the people so that the people can understand the role of the Members. 

I want to challenge our political parties, especially UPC, NRM and FDC that you need to take charge of the constituents. Under the current arrangement, we are the parties in our constituencies. Political parties need to grow strong so that they can take charge of the constituencies so that you can determine who can be a Member of Parliament at any one given time. But in this current arrangement, if Ekanya dies, it becomes a problem to replace him. If - God forbid - maybe engineer dies tomorrow, it becomes a problem to replace him. (Laughter) Maybe, if hon. Kabakumba Masiko passes away, there is a fight – like now, there is a fight in Rukiga.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I suggest, when you make such examples, you say, “I Ssekandi or I Ekanya, if I die tomorrow”. (Laughter) 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But on a very serious note, political parties need to take charge. You need to build structures and be strong in the grassroots so that Members of Parliament or these councillors do not have to do the work of the political parties at the grassroots.

I want to send a message through the Prime Minister sitting here. The President, on many occasions – and our President nowadays has kind of reduced himself to lamentation. The President has said, day in, day out for the last ten years that scientists must be remunerated well. When are you coming up with a programme to pay doctors well? Really, what is paid to the Auditor-General and URA is much better.

Last week, I took my mother – I was looking for a dermatologist. I met a long queue there, I went to the reception and they told me, “If you want a special appointment, pay Shs 50,000, an ordinarily appointment costs Shs 25,000”. My mother cannot climb stairs. So I said, “Being a Member of Parliament, I should pay for the special appointment,” and immediately had an interaction with the dermatologist. 

He told me, “The problem in this country is that you who have the money can see me quickly. But some people have been here since 10.00 O’clock waiting for me and I have to lecture in Mulago, I have to work in Mulago Hospital and I am the only person remaining in this country. Rwanda had given me US $7,000 to go and work there, but I decided to remain here and serve my country. I have here a scholarship to train dermatologists in Australia – I have advertised four times but I have failed to get people, because you have to train as a doctor for six years, then you have to do a masters for three years, and then internship. Then, when you complete you get a salary of Shs 500,000 – what are we doing for this country!” 

I, therefore, call upon the Prime Minister that in the coming budget let us pay medical personnel what is due to them if we want to live. 

I want to say something on what my colleague, hon. Otaala, said although I do not agree with him on many things. You know my differences with him but there is a machine just across the street for measuring body mass index. My body mass index is 23.5. It costs Shs 500; you just drop there in Quality Supermarket and then you know your body mass index and you know whether your weight corresponds with your height. My weight is 80 kg or 176 pounds. My height is 6 feet 0.6 inches and 18.45 cm. For Shs 500, you stand there and you know everything.
 
As Dr. Otaala said, these machines are available. Let us take time to know what our life is. Whenever you travel there are machines even in Kampala here that can detoxify your body; our bodies have a lot of poison. You just pay little money, you put your feet and hands and your whole body is detoxified of poisons that some of your bodies cannot release -

THE SPEAKER: Where do we find that? (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, at Nkrumah Road there is a massage parlour and a simple machine that can detoxify your body and then EAGEN building and others places. Sometimes, we drink less water and poison contaminates the body and releases so many diseases. If you want I can direct you to some of these places.

My dear brother is lying here and he may not be getting what we are saying but sometimes when we pay condolences, we speak to those who are living so that they do not also fall victim. We need to conduct analysis to find what causes the deaths of Members of Parliament and district councillors. For example, you pay us money, we should have drivers. Let us be honest with ourselves. If we cannot have drivers, make it a policy that every MP will have a driver, and deduct from our salary. Political parties have failed to discipline Members of Parliament, take charge, Mr Speaker. I am saying this with a lot of love for ourselves.

Hon. Ringe Chan lying here has not passed away because he was not responsible for his life. I worked with him for the last two and a half years and I knew a little bit about his health because many times he would not turn up for the meetings. About two and a half years ago, hon. Ringe Chan would have died; he had a very serious attack of TB and he fought it, he took all the necessary precautions and he survived. Therefore, when we are speaking here about ourselves, it should not be heard outside that my brother lying here was not concerned about his health. Every time we could meet and discuss about this matter, I would ask him, “Now you have survived this, what is the doctor saying?” He was always in touch and in consultation with his medical personnel. Therefore, he had a lot of complications some of which I cannot mention here.

Like it has been requested, I want to request hon. Omach to clear some of these issues. We need a clear post mortem report to the family and the constituency because my brother was concerned about his health. He was always visiting doctors and was always checking for himself. Therefore, it should not be insinuated like what has been said here, witchcraft or he was not concerned; he was concerned and I can vouch for that, God knows.  

Finally, I want to thank you very much that you created the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. The family needs to be assured that Parliament will continue to support them to complete their education using that scheme that is in place.

I want to appeal to the Prime Minister that like Government supports the private sector, hon. Ringe Chan had a private project for his constituency; his school he was building and had several structures. I really want to propose that we look for some money to support the completion of these structures because he was using his salary to do this work. Now that he has passed away, Government needs to put some little money aside because the greater percentage of the profit used to go to support the 200 orphans. Now that he is not there, Government needs to give a hand.

My dear brother, you have gone, we shall all join you. Till we meet again, may your soul rest in peace!

4.57
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support the motion moved by hon. D’Ujanga Simon, MP Okoro and supported by hon. Okello-Okello who happens to be my Chairperson of the Acholi Parliamentary Group.

I marry from Nebbi District and the late was my brother-in-law. In fact, the last time we had a family reunion was when one of his brothers, Steven had graduated with a bachelor’s degree from Uganda Christian University, Mukono. We had a party at Luzira where I had some close interaction with my muko. I am so grateful that you have given me an opportunity to talk today because I just want to pay tribute to him and I am very proud of having had a brother-in-law like him.

If it had not been because of the UPC Government, in which hon. Ringe Chan was a member, it would not have been easy for me to swim across River Nile to West Nile to get my wife but because the UPC Government built bridges - a good bridge not these bridges of these days -(Laughter)- I managed to drive to Nebbi and as we are taking the deceased home, we will all witness some of the good work of the political party my late brother-in-law served.

At times you wonder - unfortunately I am not old enough. We wonder why it is the good people that always die first. We need philosophers because if you look at those who have been passing away: hon. Balikoowa, hon. Ringe, Dr Okulo Epak, hon. Byanagwa, hon. Kyaka; if you look at the list, you wonder why it is good people that die and very many bad people -(Laughter) - maybe like some of us are still around. Those who are wanted by the ICC are at large, those who are wanted by the IGG are at large, those who have been given the last chance by the committee -(Laughter)– are at large. So, Mr Speaker, we the young people need the elders to tell us –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, I think with your background as an old seminarian, you should be able to explain why God prefers good people to bad people. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With my seminary background, I know that God wants such good people to leave this world before we spoil them. (Laughter) But I personally still think that it is unfair because what are we going to do about the 200 children that Ringe Chan has been sponsoring in just his period of four years in Parliament? Some of us who have been here for eight years have probably not even sponsored ten people. So, from a philosophical perspective, I still think that it is not fair that we lose such generous people. 

I am so proud of my size, height and weight and I remember two weeks ago in the constituency, someone was commenting, “Hon. Otto, you have been in Parliament for the last eight years, can’t your body also improve?” (Laughter) I still think that it takes a lot of discipline to maintain your weight. I personally have a gym in my house. I have a weighing scale in my toilet. (Laughter) It is personal discipline that everyday after a shower, I weigh myself to find out how many kilogrammes I weigh. I am now 80.5 kg; if we are to use the body mass index of the minister, I should have been 90 kg, but I am 10 kg less. The moment I clock around 82, 83, I take a lot of effort in the gym. 

Hon. Otada and hon. Okupa are here; we at times call ourselves to go to the gym and work out. So, I still think that MPs should really do a lot as a matter of personal discipline. We have the Parliamentary Football Club under which we do football training beginning at 6.00 a.m. everyday but very few Members come unless when we have a match abroad when we are overwhelmed by Members; you can have 60 MPs. (Laughter) But during the actual training, we have five, six , seven MPs! 

Interestingly, hon. Joseph Balikuddembe is our No. 5, our defender; he is the healthiest Member in the Parliamentary Football Club. Even in Arusha he was given an award for being the best player of the entire league in spite of his weight. If he walks here, you may think that he cannot walk up to Baumann House. (Laughter) But he is a man who can trot in the field for two hours. So, as a team captain of the Parliamentary Football Club, I would like to appeal to Members to join some of these activities and ensure that we live as a community. 

Lastly, I think we Africans should change our wild view on the issue of the cause of death. Since we are here to console the bereaved family, I personally believe that we cannot do much by trying to find out why someone died. For example, in the constituency a while ago, I found a man rolling a child on a bicycle along a village road. I did not know that it was a corpse because it was wrapped up in a white bed sheet. When I asked him what had happened he said, “The spirit has been disturbing this child for the last three days and he unfortunately conceded this morning.” I just turned on that village road in Opolachen and decided to get back. But the impression I got is that we seem to put a lot of efforts in explaining the cause of someone’s death than looking for factors that can mitigate in order to avoid other people dying in the same way. 

So, I would like to appeal to our Members that as we are going to let hon. Ringe Chan rest in his final resting place in Nebbi, you will join us on Thursday at 6.00 a.m. We thank the Speaker and the Clerk for making it possible for MPs to travel together as we go to give our friend a decent send off. To the family, I want to say in the local language, Mungu tye. God is there, He has played His role; there is nothing we can do as human beings. 

Where there are 500 human beings, you should just know that in this world there are 500 potential dead bodies. So, where you see many human beings like this, we are all destined for the same direction. In fact, in this world it is like the letter U; we come from up, kiss the ground a little bit and get back up, whether you like it or not. So, it is a matter of time; thank God that your father, your husband has got a decent send off where MPs can sit and talk a lot of good things about him because there are so many people out there who miss that opportunity. Just take heart and the Lord will take charge of all these situations. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.   

5.07
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to convey my condolences and those of the people of Gulu to the bereaved family. 

I got to interact very deeply with hon. Ringe during the time that they needed an office from me; I actually took over his office. I had a very big office, which they wanted because he was the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Local Governments Accounts. But the way we dialogued in the process of him getting the office from me showed that he was a very humble and kind person. I think even God needs such kind people. 

I would like to differ a little bit about weight; you know what we have heard has focused so much on weight. It is true that there are several people who are overweight because of their lifestyle but there are those that are also overweight because of their genes. There are people who are genetically fat and cannot decrease to that size that we are talking of. 

If hon. Ringe was discharged from Arua Hospital and died hardly after a week, then he just met his end. This shows very clearly that we have a lot to play in the health sector. Diabetes and Hypertension are common. It is not because of weight because we have even young children in Gulu suffering from Diabetes. This shows clearly that the death of hon. Ringe has to open our eyes; we have not taken this problem very seriously. If it were taken seriously by the medical personnel who handled him, maybe he would have been helped. 

There are very many people who die - I talk for Gulu about this problem - because we do not have proper facilities and advice to the people. So, it is important that we take our health seriously other than thinking that it was due to stress or his lifestyle that he died yet all of us are stressed. 

My biggest problem is the health facilities we have. I was in Gulu Hospital early January and asked them why they allow people to buy everything including aspirins from outside. They told me that there was nothing in the Hospital. Even the water, you have to go and buy it from the clinics in order for you to be helped. This is a problem. Maybe we need to allocate more resources to health. This is a big person we are discussing and we could take this as an eye opener to all of us here. There are very many people who die of Diabetes because we are not handling them the way they should be handled.  

In the interest of time, I would like to say that Ringe Chan was a very humble person and humility is what should be displayed by most of us leaders. We hope to emulate what he has done here and we pray that God rests his soul in eternal peace.

To the widow, please take heart and pray very hard. It is God who should give you the strength to handle the eight children. Much as he has left a lot of property, that property may not be able to help these children in the way he would have loved. Take heart, work very hard and make sure that the children do not miss a lot. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.07
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. David Chan was a good man, as they said, and that is why I bring the sympathies and condolences from Bugisu Co-operative Union here, as I am the chairman. 

Nebbi has been annexed to Bugisu as far as the issue of growing Arabica coffee is concerned. We have been in serious touch with them about how to improve their quality and how to market it through Bugisu Cooperative Union. I had been talking to David about it, and I want to tell hon. Fred Omach that the door is still open. As chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union, I have lost a farmer. It is unfortunate that we have lost a productive person. 

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health talked about either an awareness or wellness clinic in Mulago. I do not know if he computed the distance from Tororo, where he comes from, to Mulago. Also, I do not know whether he has computed the distance from Arua to that clinic of his wellness or awareness clinic. (Laughter)

This government does not take health as a serious issue. I come from a rural area - a village - and there are what we call health centre IVs or health centre IIs. When you go there, the first question they ask you is, “Have you come with an exercise book?” You have to buy an exercise book. Having bought the exercise book, they give some prescriptions, which you need to go and purchase at a nearby hospital. What you get there is Panadol and sometimes Kamaquine. If you went there for an operation of hernia, you would need to sell your land and have about Shs 100,000 in order to be operated upon. Now this one comes and says he is a minister of health; health of what? (Laughter)

I have just come from Mbale –(Interruption)  

DR OTAALA: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. The holder of the Floor is referring to me as a minister of health when he knows very well that His Excellency the President, while executing his prerogative of appointment and deployment, transferred me to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development as the Minister of State for Labour, Employment and Industrial Relations. Is it in order for the holder of the Floor to try to give wrong information to this august House when we are mourning our very diligent and humble colleague who has passed away? Is he in order to give wrong information that I am the Minister of Health, portraying ignorance of the changes in the Cabinet for over one full year since these changes were made? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Apparently, I think the member is not up to date with the current position, but you have informed him.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. First and foremost, these ministers are very many. If I as an MP cannot know them, what about the villager? (Laughter)

Secondly, he was a minister of health so if he was transferred, maybe it was due to incompetence that he was transferred.

Having said that, health is very important and we need the government to take it seriously. If you have left as you claim to have done, talk about it in Cabinet. 

We are talking about our brother David who is lying here, but there are villagers who are dying day in, day out without accessing the basic medical facilities you are talking about. His death was due to Diabetes but he is not the only one who was sick. There are many more people that are diabetic and we need to find a solution for all Ugandans. We all pay taxes and thus need to benefit from them.

We have talked about health workers. My colleague, hon. Abdu Katuntu, said we need to maintain them. It is important that health workers should be paid very well. It is because we have focused our interests differently that health workers are not being paid well. I will give you an example. Mr Speaker, as you are aware, we have just come from a by-election in Mbale where the Government of Uganda sent over 20 ministers with government facilities - cars, drivers, bodyguards and escorts – and with cash and allowances in their pockets. Even the President himself had to come with a helicopter and everything. There were over 40 RDCs and there were all the DISOs on earth, and all of them using government resources. 

On average, in the Mbale by-elections alone, Government must have spent over Shs 5 billion. If you divided Shs 5 billion by 1,000 people you would know that every medical officer would get Shs 5 million, and paying 1,000 people is a very big number. If you, for example, decide to pay two million people, they would get Shs 2,500. If you say that you want to pay one million people, they would get over Shs 5,000. 

Misplacing government resources is a very dangerous thing. I want us all to understand that today it is me and tomorrow it is you. If you are across on that side, you can lose your beloved one because of lack of medical facilities. As MPs, we must make laws and we must make the budget for our people irrespective of where they come from. Even if they are villagers, we should take care of them. For us to be taken on a plane when we have flu to be treated in South Africa or in the UK using the taxpayers’ money is very dangerous. 

Our brother has died and it is a very big lesson. It is good my brother, hon. Otto, said he has come and this is an opportunity to come here. This is an opportunity to come here to do what? To be talked about? It is not necessary. It is very important that as a country we have better planning for our lives. Everybody has said that he has left property but property is not everything. 

What is the government going to do? These are eight children and they are going to school. That property may not even bring income to educate them. If the government were serious with such a person, all Ugandans would have been provided with education irrespective of what they need. We can get food but education is very expensive. Many people have gone to universities and dropped out. 

Makerere University is called a public university but it has ceased to be a public university because you can only go there when you pay. Those who do not pay are those who sit on that front bench because their kids go to the best schools and then they go to Makerere University on government sponsorship. Those children of the villagers who have toiled and even sold their land have to continue to sell themselves off to be able to take their children to school. 

We want to tell you again that the people are cross, and that it is important that education should be for everybody and not for a few. If education were for everybody, I would not be worried about these eight kids but I am worried. Property will not have value tomorrow. 

Mr Speaker, it is important that we walk the talk and not this business of saying that we are fighting poverty. One woman MP from my area said that the NRM has done so well and then she concluded that, “Poverty is killing us.” I then wondered what they had done well. It is important that we aim at making sure that poverty does not only affect the Opposition. Poverty affects everybody, so we must make sure that we set up programmes which will eliminate it. I am so unhappy with how you operate. Each of us pays taxes and it is very dangerous! 

Finally, I want to ask God who brought my brother David to earth to receive him. We shall miss him. We love him and we shall get to him; it is one-way traffic. May his soul rest in eternal peace! 

THE SPEAKER: Let us give the honourable congressman a chance to say a final word and then we shall have hon. Butime. 

5.23 
MR SIMON ROSS EUKU (UPC, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It would be unfortunate for only hon. Okello-Okello to speak when we are burying a congressman. 

It is a very sad moment for this Parliament. It is a very sad moment for the bereaved family. It is also a very sad moment for the country. I think this is the eighth time –(Interjections)– I am being corrected that it is the ninth time that we are burying a Member of Parliament. It is really very unfortunate. 

I have not come here to only pay last respects to my fallen brother but also to pay tribute to him. We have lost him. It is very unfortunate that we have lost a colleague at a time that we needed him most and particularly the people of Padyere whom he represented. 

Hon. Ringe Chan used to share with me a lot. I came to know him when he was at the Uganda College of Commerce, Aduku. He was a very strong political animal there and he showed me his political aspirations and agitations when he was in UCC. So, his coming to Parliament was not a surprise to me because he had already shown me that he was moving towards attaining or achieving his aspirations in politics. 

Mr Speaker, we should also not skip mentioning that this gentleman that lies here contributed a lot to this country. When he came to this Parliament in 2006, he joined the Committee on Local Government as Vice-Chairperson and his contribution was fantastic. He played a very big role in trying to see how public finances in the local government are managed. Indeed, he helped Government in screening and trying to see that the public finances in local governments are managed to the best. 

Time and again, we used to discuss with the late hon. Ringe Chan and his dream was how this country could attain the rule of law and constitutionalism. He said that the Government of Uganda or this country can only fight corruption if we adhered to the rule of law and constitutionalism. This was a fighter. He accepted to represent his people according to their will. He gave service that was not questioned. 

We also discussed a lot with the late hon. Ringe Chan on matters relating to the party. He said that one day he had a dream that UPC would come back to power and I believe that one day, our discussion may come true. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, yes, I have friends but David was a friend in time of need. He has parted with me. Parliament and this country will miss him and indeed the people of Padyere County, Nebbi District whom he represented in this august House shall miss him. 

I want to say that I remember the late Ringe mostly because of the common wisdom that we used to share with him in our political discussions and I want to quote something: “Let us honour the vision for freedom, opportunity and justice for all. I remain firm holding these ideals.” We have lost a good man. We have lost a nice person that could have been with us at this time when we are going for the 2011 elections. 

I pray that this Parliament takes seriously what hon. Ekanya nearly touched on, the pension scheme. I propose that in future, Government should do something for Members of Parliament who pass away during their term of office. We have lost so many Members of Parliament but as of now, their families are suffering. They have so many children and nobody is catering for them. What should Government do for these servicemen who dedicated themselves to serve this country? I propose that Government does something and possibly we create a fund to cater for these families in case they lose their members. I believe the pension scheme alone may not help the bereaved families deal with the trauma and the loss.

I conclude my speech by saying, may the Lord rest the soul of my fallen brother in peace. I say this for God and my country.

5.23
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjonjo): I just want to add my voice to all Members of Parliament who have spoken and express my heartfelt condolences upon the untimely death of hon. Ringe Chan. My condolences go to all the people of Parombo whom I know very well, the people of Nebbi town and the whole of Padyere County. As you know, I was in Nebbi from 1986 to 1988.

Nebbi has lost a Member of Parliament midway and this is very unfortunate. Nebbi is not a very large district; it now remains with Jonam and Padyere counties after Okoro becoming Zombo District. 

Every Member of Parliament from Nebbi tries to become an entrepreneur back at home. This was true with Okumu Ringa, Bachu and even the late Ringe Chan had built a large school although 200 scholarships must have also strained him a lot. Having a school with 200 students freely attending classes is a little on the ambitious side. However, you can see what he did at that tender age. In fact, in 1986 he must have been very young when I was the Special District Administrator (SDA). He must have been in primary or something like that. You can see the entrepreneurial spirit of the leaders. Nebbi does not have very many entrepreneurs and therefore anybody with some little income tries to develop that district, family comfort notwithstanding.

Hon. Okello-Okello alluded to something to do with witchcraft. He just talked about it and left it at that. It is called “awola”. When I was there, that was the word. Those who go for the burial, please soothe the hearts of our people in Nebbi that the idea of witchcraft must be completely discouraged.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I was not talking about Awola. Awola is when somebody has given you poison; I was talking about witchcraft where people wrap things and throw them at your school or at your home just to intimidate you politically. I am not saying that somebody gave the late something to poison him physically. I was talking about political intimidation by throwing those things as harassment.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: It is jok (witchcraft) that should be discouraged because it has no effect on the human chemistry unless it is poison. If you swallow poison, it can have an effect but witchcraft is not relevant. Members of Parliament should explain to the people that it is not even witchcraft. All these issues that we read about in the press about human sacrifice, they begin with the question of witchcraft. This society must begin to live beyond witchcraft because we shall not move an inch.

Prof. Mujaju, before he died, said that if Uganda is not careful even the chairman of LC I may fail to do his work fearing witchcraft. That was one of his inaugural lectures that he gave at Makerere University. I urge Members of Parliament to continue explaining and completely discouraging the existence and effect of witchcraft in anybody’s life. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank you, hon. Members, for the contributions that you have made to the motion.  I want to put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I have received a note from hon. Obua Hamson who will be in charge of transport for MPs who will be travelling to Nebbi tomorrow. He says that transport will be available from Parliament on Thursday, 25 February, and departure time is 6.00 am. 

National Anthem (One Verse)

(Exit of the late David Ringe Chan)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you once again for your time and for the contributions you have made as we send off our departed friend. With this, we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to handle a number of items we have on the Order Paper.

(The House rose at 5.43 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 February 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)

